Egypt Says It Foiled Militants' Assassination Plot
The Egyptian Government said today that it had foiled a plot by Muslim militants to kill 12 prominent Government officials and bomb eight Government buildings.
Interior Minister Hassan al-Alfi, who was wounded in an assassination attempt earlier this year, said in an interview with the newspaper Al Ahram that a raid on Wednesday by more than 2,000 police and paramilitary forces on an island in the Nile near the southern city of Asyut had resulted in the arrest of scores of suspects from the militant Islamic Group.


Neediest Cases Helps Abused Woman Rebuild Family
When Kathy R. first learned that there was a part of New York City called Staten Island, her imagination ran wild.
A single mother with two sons and two daughters, Kathy had moved to the United States with her young children from Trinidad in 1988.
"So when I heard 'Staten Island,' the first thing I thought was 'island,' " she said recently.
"And when I thought 'island,' I thought about trees and sun. It sounded as close to home as I was going to get in New York City."


Treasury Rates Largely Unchanged
Treasury securities prices closed narrowly mixed yesterday, with long-term interest rates mostly unchanged and short-term rates fractionally higher.
The trading session closed at 2 P.M., as dealers closed their books early for New Year's Eve.
Over all, the market's tone was bearish, with some traders still cautious about the strength in recent economic data and its implications for inflation.


For Ireland's Book of Kells, History Repeats
The Book of Kells, the illuminated manuscript of the Latin Gospels that is one of Ireland's national treasures, has survived 1,000 years, give or take a century or two, and is priceless.
Now a group of poets and artists have created "The Great Book of Ireland," which they bill as a modern-day Book of Kells and fervently hope will also last 1,000 years.
It's for sale, with an asking price of $1.5 million.
The 144-page "Great Book," a one-of-a-kind collaboration of 140 poets, 120 artists, 9 composers and a single calligrapher, was completed in October after Allen Ginsberg became the last poet to pen his contribution onto a natural vellum page. (The second-to-last was Bono of the rock group U2.)


America West Ousts President
The president and chief executive of America West Airlines, Michael J. Conway, was ousted yesterday, ending a long-simmering personality conflict with the chairman that apparently intensified over the bankrupt airline's most recent plan to right itself.
Mr.
Conway was replaced as president by A. Maurice Myers, president and chief executive of Aloha Airlines.
Mr.
Myers was also named chief operating officer.


A Grant to Aid in Salvation of 27 Church Structures
Worshipers picked their way with care past the scaffolding that enveloped the crumbling brownstone facade of Brooklyn's First Unitarian Church.
Indoors, the church was splendidly decorated with branches of fir and illuminated by tall wax candles and gas-lighted tapers.
Best of all, there was the music from the organ.
For a time, it was doubtful that the ailing pipe organ could be coaxed into performing but Larry Trupiano, one of the few remaining pipe organ builders in the city, had made a house call and put his skills to work.
This was his gift to the church: music for the holidays.


Review/Operetta; Slightly Italianate British Goings-On
A half-century of operas in the Sir Walter Scott mode of melodrama are mocked in Gilbert and Sullivan's "Ruddigore." To the ancestral ghosts, innocent maids, evil baronets, disputes over inheritance and rejected maidens driven to madness, the score adds hints of Weber, Donizetti, Rossini and lesser figures, amid a swirl of English ballads, folk dances, patter songs derived from Italian opera, and a hint of Protestant piety.
Modern interpretations also have to contend with more than a hundred years of performance tradition, largely drawn from the now-extinct D'Oyly Carte productions.
On Thursday night, the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players gave this mixture a weightless, sure-footed treatment that was thoroughly fresh, turning melodrama into froth without veering into camp.
Their performance was also thoroughly traditional in character, down to the mugging and dancing.
The success was due largely to Albert Bergeret's accomplished direction and conducting -- this production is surely one of his company's crispest -- and to the accomplished singing of the cast, most of whom are familiar members of Nygasp (which is the acronym the company prefers).


Alomar Breaks His Leg In Winter League Game
ROBERTO ALOMAR does not need surgery to fix a broken right leg, and might be ready for the start of spring training, Toronto Blue Jays officials said yesterday.
Alomar broke his fibula, the thin bone between the knee and the ankle, during a winter league baseball game in Puerto Rico on Wednesday.
He will be re-examined by team doctors on Monday to be sure the fracture does not still require an operation.
With no surgery, the All-Star second baseman should be ready to start the 1994 season with the rest of the Blue Jays in late February.


No. 1 Notre Dame Goal Is to Somehow Get No. 1
The weeklong dog-napping drama ended at 1 P.M. today when Reveille VI, the collie puppy who is the mascot of the Texas A&amp;M football team, was found unharmed near Lake Travis, a body of water near Austin, which is nowhere near Lake Dawson, a senior who catches passes for Notre Dame.
The mascot's whereabouts became known through an anonymous telephone tip to KLBJ radio in Austin.
A group of students called "the Rustlers" took credit for the abduction.
They said they were from the nearby University of Texas, an Aggie rival.


Irving (Swifty) Lazar, 86, Dies; Dynamic Agent and a Star Himself
Irving Paul Lazar, the agent for scores of literary and entertainment luminaries, who was variously described as a brilliant wheeler-dealer, a lone-wolf dynamo and a manic egotist, died early Thursday night at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 86.
The cause was kidney failure, said Teresa Sohn, Mr. Lazar's social secretary.


Nigeria Still Reels From the Last Dictator
To the Editor:
As an independent and pro-democratic Nigerian, I felt insulted by your publication of "Nigerians Prefer Military Rule to Chaos" (letter, Dec. 18) by Zubair Mahmud Kazaure, the so-called Ambassador of Nigeria to the United States.


Irving (Swifty) Lazar, 86, Dies; Dynamic Agent and a Star Himself
Irving Paul Lazar, the agent for scores of literary and entertainment luminaries, who was variously described as a brilliant wheeler-dealer, a lone-wolf dynamo and a manic egotist, died early Thursday night at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 86.
The cause was kidney failure, said Teresa Sohn, Mr. Lazar's social secretary.


Taking Oath, Giuliani Urges 'Courage'
Rudolph W. Giuliani became the 107th Mayor of New York today, capping a five-year quest to be the first Republican to lead the nation's largest city in a generation.
To mark the occasion he took an oath of office, for the second time, last night in the East Side apartment of Judge Michael B. Mukasey, the Federal District Court judge who is presiding over one of the cases that grew out of the World Trade Center bombing.


Blackman Steps Up After He Sits Out
Since replacing Hubert Davis in the Knicks' rotation two games ago, Rolando Blackman has averaged 13.5 points while shooting 50 percent from the field.
That production may surprise some people, but it does not surprise Blackman.
Despite his age (34), Blackman thinks he has plenty of quality basketball left in him.
And with Davis expected to miss six weeks with a fractured right hand, Blackman plans to seize the opportunity.
He never complained when he rarely played earlier in the season, but he never lost confidence.


Lighting Up 1994


A New Look at Crown Heights
Police identification of a new suspect in the 1991 murder of Yankel Rosenbaum raises some hope of solving the case.
It also raises troubling questions -- about the strength of the new evidence, the earlier prosecution of another man for the Rosenbaum murder, and the handling of the case by U.S.
Attorney General Janet Reno.
Authorities now say that Lemrick Nelson Jr. -- acquitted in 1992 for the Rosenbaum murder -- did stab Mr.
Rosenbaum during the Crown Heights riots, but that another member of the same mob actually administered the fatal stab wounds.
He is identified as Ernesto Edwards, now in prison for attempted robbery and drug dealing.


Corrections
A front-page chart on Thursday, with an article about a surge in housing sales, mislabeled the 1993 figure for sales of existing single-family homes.
It represented the annualized rate of home sales for the month of November, not for the year through November.


Doctors Behind Bars Balance Safety and Care
The isolated community of 14,000 that Dr.
Yvette Walker serves is a sinkhole of medical problems: When she gets her patients, 25 percent have syphilis, 25 percent are mentally ill and more than 75 percent are drug users.
Of the women, 27 percent are H.I.V.-positive, 30 percent have sexually transmitted diseases and 10 percent are pregnant.
Each day, she and her staff accept more than 300 new patients to their practice and up to 10 percent of the population turns up at the doctor's office with complaints that range from depression to sore throats to stab wounds.


Promises, Promises
Somewhere in America this morning, just before the crack of noon, a husband and wife stir in bed.
"I've got to promise to get up earlier this year," the man sighs, rising with a groan.
He looks over at his wife, still half-asleep from last night's revelry.
She says nothing.


Mack David, 81, a Composer and Lyricist
Mack David, a composer and lyricist best known for his songs "La Vie en Rose" and "Cherry Pink and Apple Blossom White," died on Thursday in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 81 and lived in Palm Springs, Calif.
Mr.
David had a heart attack on Tuesday and had suffered from a weak heart for years, his family said.


Ex-Prosecutor Is Named Investigation Dept. Chief
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday appointed Howard M. Wilson, a former Federal prosecutor, to head the city's Department of Investigation, and said the department's responsibilities would be expanded to wrest greater efficiency and savings from the sprawling municipal bureaucracy.
Mr.
Giuliani also said he was considering giving the department the role of overseeing the Police Department's internal efforts to fight corruption.
A commission appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins proposed this week that such a role be given to a separate, independent panel.


Seminoles and Huskers: One Game Away, Again
When Bobby Bowden had something to say, the ears of his players suddenly opened wide.
At the end of practice on Thursday, the last day of serious work before his Florida State Seminoles meet the Nebraska Cornhuskers in the 60th Orange Bowl on Saturday night, the head coach of a school still in search of its first national championship made a brief but dramatic change in the routine.
Rather than calling upon an assistant to review the schedule for the players, Bowden offered some questions.
"He had a different look about him," said Ken Alexander, the perceptive senior linebacker.
"He said, 'Are you really ready? Do you know what it's going to take to play in this game? We need to win this game. Not just for me, not for you. For everybody.' "


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.82
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.97
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.20
3.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.33
5.34
6.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.34
6.34
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.32
7.32
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.52
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Rights in China Improve, Envoy Says
Despite what he calls continuing abuses of human rights in China, the United States Ambassador here argues that Beijing has made "dramatic" progress in improving the lives of its citizens and that this record should be taken into account when policy toward China is reviewed early in the new year.
In an interview this week, Ambassador J. Stapleton Roy said that the setbacks in human rights represented by the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989 and the wave of repression that followed were being steadily reversed, and that the Communist Party had loosened its control over many aspects of Chinese life.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FOR GIULIANI, CEREMONY MARKS GOAL  In an intimate ceremony in the East Side apartment of a Federal judge, Rudolph W. Giuliani took the oath of office as New York's 107th mayor, becoming the first Republican to lead the nation's largest city in a generation.
Page 1.
The Mayor-elect was New Year's Eve host in a long night of political partying. Page 29.


F.A.A. Finds More Errors By Air Traffic Controllers
An increasing number of aircraft are flying too close to other planes because of errors made by air traffic controllers, the Federal Aviation Administration has reported.
The required distances of separation were breached 757 times in the 12-month period that ended last October, the agency found.
That was a 5 percent increase in the number of such incidents, called "operational errors," compared with the preceding 12 months, when 720 were reported.
"Operational errors" is the F.A.A.'s term for mistakes made by air traffic controllers who fail to keep aircraft separated by the required distance, which is, on average, three miles laterally or 1,000 feet vertically; sometimes both buffers are required and sometimes the distances are larger.


THE WHITE HOUSE IS MOVING TO EASE EMBARGO ON HANOI
Citing progress on Vietnam's efforts to determine the fate of missing Americans, the Clinton Administration is moving toward easing the economic embargo against Hanoi and plans to consult Congress about it early in the new year, Administration officials said today.
A senior Administration official said that President Clinton's top foreign policy advisers would meet "very soon" to decide whether to recommend the lifting of the embargo, which was imposed after the end of the Vietnam War in 1975.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the advisers were "clearly moving toward an easing of the embargo."


Baseball Adds New Candidate
Major league baseball, closing in on a self-imposed deadline to name a commissioner by mid-January, has included a leading economist and university president on its list of candidates, an executive familiar with the search said yesterday.
The economist, Arnold R. Weber, is the president of Northwestern University.
Weber announced in October his intention to retire at the end of the school year, ending a nine-year association with the university.


About New York; Ode to Those Whose Bad News Made the News
THE time has come to send best wishes,
warm sentiments and festive dishes.
The list is set, there is no doubt
who we'll include and who's left out.
It being now a time of pardon,
a season when our hearts unharden,
we offer toasts to celebrate
some folks whose luck has not been great.
To those who had a bad hair year
we offer huzzahs, hugs and cheer.
John Gotti, the Medellin Cartel -
Hope they reform, we wish them well.
We also send felicitations
to the squeegee guys and the United Nations,
and definitely we'd be remiss
to skip Abe Hirschfeld and his sloppy kiss.
To the other owners of The New York Post,
as to every tasteless talk show host,
we wish what we ourselves expect,
much joy and grace and self-respect.
Let others scoff, we'll throw no stones
at Marla Maples or Chuck Jones.
And speaking here of throwing stuff,
Vince Coleman surely's heard enough.
What can one say to Andrew Dice Clay
but "have yourself a very nice day"?
Woody vs. Mia, the Donald and Ivana,
We could smirk but we don't wanna.
Instead we'll shout hip, hip, hooray!
Who needs glad tidings more than they?
Well, perhaps it's the politicos
still smarting from electoral woes.
Like Liz Holtzman, the ex-Comptroller.
We've got a strange urge to extol her.
Dave Dinkins, Bob Abrams and Andy Stein
"take a salute at the end of the line."
While for New Jersey's Jim Florio,
here's some warm milk and an Oreo.
We do not want the vanquished dissed;
all such temptations we will resist.
But what of triumphs; can we laugh
at Ed Rollins and his boastful gaffe?
Snatching shame from victory's jaws
is surely worth a few guffaws.
Still, after so much has been said,
we'll just send our best to Ed.
Sol Wachtler, who once had it all,
reminds us how the mighty fall.
In jail, life's worse than on St. Croix;
we wish him comfort, if not Joy.
It's time to turn our contemplation
to the case that thrilled the nation.
We mean of course the suburban saga
of Amy and Joey going gaga.
Prurient interest, yes, indeed,
but lust excites much more than greed.
And while so many claim disgust,
We all read on because we must.
Hence we express our gratitude
To teen-age temptress and body shop dude.
No, we're not forgetting Mary Jo;
here's a hey nonny, nonny, and a ho ho ho.
In the world of arts and letters
We have seen some real go-getters.
Among the pros, not the beginners,
We have to mention Joe McGinniss.
Truth to tell, we've never met,
But if we should, it's safe to bet
He would so brilliantly infer
our plan to send him frankincense and myrrh.
Then Janet Malcolm, equally able,
for her, of course, a separate table.
Remember how she long insisted
that journalism's often twisted.
A counterpart of Heisenberg,
she'd have us doubt what we aver.
Indeterminacy she has reached,
In practice of what she has preached.
There is no lack of who to summon,
Howard Stern will keep things humming.
Rush Limbaugh will fuss and fume
As Leonard Jeffries works the room.
Leona Helmsley, once so lofty,
reveals herself a reborn softy.
And in the corner sits a loner,
the man who's been called George the Owner.
Pardoned by a President,
Has he some new cause to repent?
The muse is fleeting, it's busy season,
thus we're losing rhyme and reason.
Quick, cold champagne and eggs of sturgeon
For all who've offered us diversion.


What New York City Has Done to Attract Biotechnology Labs
To the Editor:
An article on the biotechnology industry in New York City (Dec. 15) leaves the impression that the city's efforts to nurture this growing sector of the economy have sprung into being overnight.
This is not the case.
For example, in 1990, during the first six months of the Dinkins administration, we moved the long-delayed Audubon Biotechnology Research Center through the public approval process.
Construction on this 100,000 square-foot biotechnology facility began last winter.


CHRONICLE
The new year began especially well in London for the 970 men and women who were on the new year's honors list of QUEEN ELIZABETH II.
They won knighthoods or membership in lesser orders.
Among those honored with knighthood was DEREK JACOBI, the actor who won acclaim for his performance as the stammering Roman emperor in the television series "I, Claudius."


Sports of The Times; Second Thoughts On Bowls
FOR most of us, Jan. 1 marks a new beginning; for West Virginia fans, today is merely an extension of the same old story.
Despite going undefeated this year, the 11-0 Mountaineers have been put off by those who vote in the polls: Unranked at the very beginning, they were only grudgingly moved up in the polls after impressive victories over Miami and Boston College.
Instead of playing undefeated Nebraska in the Orange Bowl for national championship, the Mountaineers are playing Florida in the Sugar Bowl with a chance of earning only a share of the No. 1 spot at best.


All Kinds of People Arrive Bearing Guns; Swap Draws a Child and a Minister
Among the men and women gathered at the 34th Precinct, swapping rifles for Reeboks, pistols for toys, was a 13-year-old boy, come to hand in his .32-caliber revolver for a pair of Timberland boots.
"I would've gotten more on the street," said the youngster, who would give only his nickname, Bam.
"But if I had, somebody could've killed somebody with it, and I would've felt guilty. So rather than see somebody die, I figured I could use it to get me a pair of boots for the winter."


Amelia Opdyke Jones, Artist, 80
Amelia Opdyke Jones, an artist who made the "Subway Sun" posters for the New York City Transit Authority for 20 years, died on Thursday at her home in Sea Girt, N.J.
She was 80.
The cause was respiratory complications, said her son, William.


U.A.W. Wants Trade Payoff in Jobs
Looming over the Edsel Ford Freeway near the General Motors Corporation headquarters here, a billboard recently proclaimed one of the many benefits vaunted by supporters of the North American Free Trade Agreement: 15,000 new auto-related jobs in the United States in the first year.
The billboard is gone now, but the promise is far from forgotten by one group defeated in the free-trade battle: the United Automobile Workers union.


Safety in Taxis
To the Editor:
I understand the concern for the welfare and safety of New York City taxi drivers and the debate about a mandatory divider between the front and back seats.
As a passenger, I am also concerned with my welfare and safety.
Therefore, why not make seat belts mandatory?
GIBBY COHEN  New York, Dec. 23, 1993


Uncertainty On Next Step In Crown Hts.
The emergence of a new suspect in the 1991 killing of a Hasidic student in Crown Heights has left United States Attorney General Janet Reno and Brooklyn District Attorney Charles J. Hynes each hoping the other will prosecute the case, according to Federal and local-law enforcement officials.
The suspect, identified by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly as Ernesto Edwards, a young black man from Crown Heights, has not been charged either by Mr.
Hynes's office, which could seek a murder indictment, or by the Justice Department, which could press a civil-rights case.


Driver Charged in Fatal Dragging
An exchange of angry words on a Lower East Side street corner minutes past midnight yesterday led to the death of a man whose body was dragged under a truck for half a mile onto the Williamsburg Bridge, the police said.
The driver was charged with murder.
Two hours after the incident, the driver, a Brooklyn man, turned himself in at a station house in Queens, telling officers there that he had been in an accident and might have killed someone, said Sgt.
Richard Klev, commander of the Seventh Precinct Detective Squad on the Lower East Side.


Robbers Steal Diamonds
Masked thieves held up a mid-Manhattan jeweler yesterday and escaped with what the victim said was $3.4 million in diamonds, the police said.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, said two men wearing Halloween masks came through an unlocked rear door of Goldenrod Jewelers on the 17th floor of 42 West 48th Street at 2 P.M.
After handcuffing three employees to a steampipe, she said, the thieves took the diamonds from an open safe and escaped.
A person who answered the Goldenrod telephone declined any comment.


Family Tale Of a Legacy: 2 Centuries Of Setbacks
Cleoma R. Foore says there was never enough money when she was growing up in a coal miner's family of 17 children here in the Appalachians.
But there was plenty to dream about.
"Dad always said, 'You're a poor little rich girl,' " said Mrs.
Foore, recalling how her father had told her that she could be a millionaire many times over if she ever got her rightful inheritance.


Other Cities Trying Gun Exchange
Inspired by the response to the gun-exchange program in Washington Heights, other cities in the New York City region have started similar programs.
In Norwalk, Conn., Jerry Klein, the owner of the Kiddytown toy store, began providing $100 gift certificates on Thursday for each handgun turned in to the police.
"Enough is enough," Mr.
Klein said.
"It's very important to get these guns off the street." The Norwalk police said that 19 guns had been brought in by 5 P.M. yesterday.


All Eyes Are on Blanchard's Right Foot
Brad Baxter was shadowboxing with some of his teammates.
Ronnie Lott and Brian Washington were joking about the freezing conditions.
And as practice wound down at the Jets' camp today, some of the other players began to head for the warmth of the locker room.
But just before practice officially ended, Coach Bruce Coslet had Cary Blanchard line up for a field goal attempt of about 45 yards.


Family Troubles Erupt Over Use of Gift Account
THE teen-age daughter of a New York couple recently sent her parents a certified letter from a commune in California.
She was about to turn 18, and the commune's leader had persuaded her to exercise her legal right to $50,000 in a custodial account.
Established under New York State's Uniform Gifts to Minors Act (sometimes called the Uniform Transfers to Minors Act), the account had been painstakingly built by her parents to cover college tuition costs.


Pride and Some Regret On Holtzman's Last Day
The movers were stacking the boxes, the bookshelves in her office were bare and City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman was blowing her nose and muttering about a vacation.
It was a whisper of an ending.
Bright sunlight swam on the mounds of snow outside and poured into her office.
Ms.
Holtzman, with her trademark cup of coffee, was coy about the Big Question: What will she do now that she has been voted out of office?


Look for Union Label: Vikings Triumph
The Minnesota Vikings were gunning for the playoffs.
The Washington Redskins were lucky to simply be playing.
The Redskins were in Robert F. Kennedy Stadium this afternoon with a full roster because they won a court ruling late Thursday that prohibited the possible suspension of at least 30 players by the players' union for failure to pay $5,000 each in union dues.


Q &amp; A
Sidestepping Estate Taxes
Can you avoid estate taxes on the transfer of your home?
MARILYN ADAMS, Flushing, Queens
If your estate is worth $600,000 or less, none of it will be subject to Federal estate taxes.
If it is valued at more than that, the excess can be left to your spouse without the fear of incurring any estate taxes.
If a married couple has an estate valued at more than $1.2 million, they may wish to reduce their estate to limit the taxes that will be paid by their heirs.
They can do so by making annual gifts of up to $10,000, or $20,000 a couple, to family members or others.
They can even give away a percentage of the house as an annual gift, as long as they obey the rule that limits them to $10,000 annually.
"If the estate is large enough, then you can use a qualified personal residence trust, one of the last remaining home runs in estate planning," said Martin M. Shenkman, an estate lawyer in Teaneck, N.J.
"This trust uses a present-value calculation as a technique for reducing the current value of a gift of your home," he said, "because the heirs will not receive it until some specified future date."
Bypass Trusts as Shelters
What is a capital gains bypass trust? FRED MARTIN, Menlo Park, Calif.
A bypass trust, also known as a credit shelter trust, lets parents pass assets to their children to reduce estate taxes.
Such trusts, however, are irrevocable.
The assets placed in the trust usually exceed the $600,000 that children can receive free from taxes upon the death of a parent.
Parents can get income from these assets during their lives and may be able to tap the principal in case of dire need.
"There is no formal capital gains bypass trust," said Ralph M. Brozan, a lawyer in New York.
"But essentially, almost any living or testamentary trust could be said to create a bypass on capital gains, even if the principal does not consist of highly appreciated assets." On Instructing Heirs
What should be included in a letter of instruction to your heirs?
JIM MARCH, Whitestone, Queens
If done properly, a letter of instruction can simplify matters for your heirs and the executors of your estate.
First and foremost, state the location of your original will and all the sources of immediate cash.
Also, provide an complete inventory of your investments, along with the mode of ownership for each -- sole or joint.
List the locations of all legal documents, insurance policies and financial records, like brokerage, mutual fund and bank statements, insurance policies or business agreements.
Include the names and addresses of your professional advisers.
"Write the instructions as if something were going to happen to you tomorrow and review them annually," said Madeline I. Noveck, president of Novos Planning Associates, a financial planning firm in New York.
"Explain how you have arranged things and how assets can be used for the greatest long-term benefit of the heirs," she added.


Housing a Family on $286 a Month
It's tough enough to pay rent in New York.
It's particularly tough if you're on welfare and haven't had a housing allowance increase in five years.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo ought to change that by enlarging the allowance in the next budget.
Families on welfare receive an additional allotment for rent.
For a family of three in New York City, the maximum amount is $286 a month.
But in 1991, the median rent in the city was $475.


New Year's Day
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES State offices and courts in New York State and City are closed.
Government offices in Nassau and Rockland Counties are closed.
Offices in Suffolk, Westchester and Putnam and Federal offices are closed.
POST OFFICE There is no mail delivery today .
Post offices are closed, except for the General Post Office, at Eighth Avenue and 33d Street, and the Morgan General Mail Facility, at 341 Ninth Avenue.
BANKS Banks have the option to close today.
PARKING Alternate-side-of-the-street parking regulations are suspended today because of snow and Sunday parking rules are in effect.
There is no garbage collection or street cleaning today.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleaning today.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses and the Staten Island Rapid Transit Operating Authority will operate on a Saturday schedule today.
The Long Island Rail Road will operate on a regular weekend schedule.
There will be no Westchester County buses today.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES State and Federal offices and courts are closed today.
POST OFFICES There is no mail delivery today except for special delivery and Express Mail.
Post offices are closed.
BANKS Banks have the option to close today.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit will run extra trains today.
Buses will be on a regular weekday schedule.
Today, New Jersey Transit will operate on a Sunday schedule.
There will be no rail service on the Pascack Valley and Port Jervis Lines.
PATH trains will operate on a on a Sunday schedule today.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES State and Federal offices and courts are closed today.
POST OFFICES There is no mail delivery today except for special delivery and Express Mail.
Post offices are closed.
BANKS Option to close today.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North will be on a holiday schedule today.


INSIDE
U.S. Aide Is Upbeat on China
The U.S.
Ambassador to China said that improvements it has made in the lives of its citizens should be considered when making policy.
Page 5.
Israeli Settlers Want to Go
Many Israeli settlers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip want compensation from the Government so that they can relocate to Israel.
Page 3.
Lasting Lure of a Fortune
Hoping to inherit a fortune, people who say they descended from an 18th-century pirate are claiming ownership of 77 acres of Manhattan.
Page 6.
2 Arts


New Mayor Exhorts, Old One Leaves
He was still two ceremonial oaths short of the City Hall starting line, but Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani finished his old year of non-incumbency last night with four years' worth of grim concern and resolution for his stewardship of "this astonishing miracle" -- this city now in his hands.
In a long night of music, prayerful ceremony and political partying, Mr.
Giuliani gathered his burgeoning official family and was host of a New Year's Eve that offered a few early glimpses of himself to a city electorate still not sure about the man they narrowly chose as Mayor.


The Sanctions Weapon, Blunted
Under the Trading With the Enemy Act, it has been illegal since 1963 for any U.S. company to do business with Cuba.
Yet Cargill Inc., a giant agricultural trader, is accused of arranging for the sale of Cuban sugar to Venezuela in 1988 through its Swiss subsidiary, Cargill International.
But, as The Times's Dean Baquet reports, at only one point is Cargill vulnerable to U.S. laws -- the Swiss subsidiary obtained its dollar-denominated financing from the Atlanta branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, presumptively violating embargo laws.
This is the same Atlanta bank whose chief officer, Christopher Drogoul, was indicted in 1991 on charges of granting multi-billion dollar loans to Saddam Hussein's Iraq.
The Cuban sugar sale was cited in the Justice Department charges, and Cargill executives in Minnesota and Switzerland were named as co-conspirators but not indicted.


Irving (Swifty) Lazar, 86, Dies; Dynamic Agent and a Star Himself
Irving Paul Lazar, the agent for scores of literary and entertainment luminaries, who was variously described as a brilliant wheeler-dealer, a lone-wolf dynamo and a manic egotist, died early Thursday night at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 86.
The cause was kidney failure, said Teresa Sohn, Mr. Lazar's social secretary.


In Januarys Past, Small Stocks Reigned
For years, investors in small companies have comforted themselves with a market phenomenon as predictable as overindulging at New Year's celebrations: the January effect.
In roughly four of five years, small stocks have outperformed the rest of the market in January, usually by five to seven percentage points.
Some of their gain comes from new money, often Christmas bonuses.
Some is recycled; investors sell their losers in December for tax purposes and resolve to buy stocks that have more zip in the new year.


Some Israeli West Bank Settlers Seek a Way Out
When he left a Tel Aviv suburb to move into this Jewish settlement nine years ago, Aryeh Skorka had no visions of becoming a pioneer or of fulfilling a God-given destiny to populate the biblical land of Israel.
"I came here for the quality of life," said Mr.
Skorka, a bus driver and sometime real-estate agent.
"In Givatayim, I lived in an apartment, and I wanted a house with a yard. I wanted a quiet life."


Late Selling Hits Dow, But Nasdaq Stocks Rise
Blue-chip stocks dropped in the last half-hour of trading yesterday, pushing the Dow Jones industrial average sharply lower and bringing an indecisive end to a solid year on Wall Street.
Analysts said the Dow, which was up about 16 points earlier in the day, was affected by a flurry of sell orders tied to stock-index contracts.
With many investors away for the New Year's holiday and not participating in the market, there were not enough buyers available to balance these computer-driven sell orders for about 350 large stocks that poured in at the close.


At Last, Reckoning Day Is Here For W. Va.
For nearly three weeks, West Virginia players and coaches have talked about receiving no respect, about wanting respect, about lacking respect.
The day has finally arrived for the Mountaineers to demonstrate that they have earned respect.
To do that, undefeated West Virginia will have to hurdle its toughest obstacle of the season when it faces Florida (10-2) on Saturday night in the Sugar Bowl.


Hidden Costs in Buying a Home Abroad
AH, winter in the Northeast -- wind-chill factors, flu bouts, snow-encrusted cars.
Any wonder that visions of a home abroad, in a warmer clime, drift through many heads?
Thousands of intrepid Americans have brought such dreams to life in the last year by buying residential property in Europe, Latin America or the Caribbean, sometimes braving Byzantine bureaucracies and unusual restrictions.


Critic's Notebook; Sinatra's 'Duets' Album: Is It a Music Recording Or Technical Wizardry?
Frank Sinatra's latest album, "Duets," on which he is paired through technological wizardry with singers like Bono of U2, Barbra Streisand and others, many of whom made their vocal contributions by special telephone, has been riding high on the charts for more than two months and is still the best-selling disk at major record outlets in New York City and elsewhere.
Indeed, a second album is well under way.
"Duets" may prove to be Mr.
Sinatra's most successful effort.
Yet the new disk is stirring controversy about the aims and methods of musical recording.
The way in which "Duets" was made confronts musicians and engineers with a basic question: Should a disk be a true "record" of an actual performance, or should it, with technical tricks, conjure an idealized performance that never took place?


Mixing Bonds and Stocks; High Minimums
The Evergreen Tax Strategic Foundation Fund aims to maximize the after-tax total returns for its investors by combining equities and insured municipal bonds.
The bond portion will constitute at least half the fund, and its maturity is about 21 years.
The equity part is modeled after the Evergreen Foundation Fund, a balanced fund investing in dividend-paying common stocks, convertible securities and similar shares.
The fund's targeted yield is 5 percent tax free, plus 3.5 percent on the equity portion.
The Heartland Value and Income Fund buys bonds and value stocks of companies with $300 million to $1 billion in market capitalization.
The stock-bond split will be about even in 1994.
Banks and savings institutions account for roughly 15 percent of the portfolio.
The first year's maintenance fee will be waived for investors who open individual retirement accounts by April 15.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Gertrude Blom summarized her career incompletely.
In addition to being a journalist, photographer and anthropologist, she was also a horticulturist.
The obituary also misspelled the name of one of the Mayan jungles in which she worked.
It was the Lacandon jungle.
The article also referred incorrectly to the circumstances of her marriage.
She and her husband married in 1943 after meeting on an expedition in Mexico.


Giving Denny's a Menu for Change
The Rev.
John Shepherd wouldn't have been caught dead in a Denny's restaurant a few months ago.
The mundane menu wasn't exactly drawing him in, and charges that Denny's around the country either refused to serve blacks or required them to pay in advance made him too angry to even walk through the door.
But the Denny's restaurant in the predominantly black Watts-Willowbrook section here has wooed back Mr.
Shepherd and many other blacks with something as simple as a change of menu: it serves soul food.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the inauguration of Rudolph W. Giuliani misstated his margin of victory over David N. Dinkins in the mayoral election.
The margin was 53,340 votes, not "fewer than 50,000 votes."


A Special Kind of Loss for Dinkins's Young Aides
Herbert Block was a 12-year-old student when he first met David N. Dinkins, the man who would become his mentor, his friend, and the first black Mayor of New York City.
He recalls how the Mayor, then City Clerk running for borough president, bought him a soda in a hospital cafeteria and, without a trace of impatience, let him do a 45-minute interview for his junior high school paper.
That was in 1977, and the bond formed between the Harlem politician and the son of a Conservative rabbi never loosened.
Mr.
Block spent his adolescence and adult life laboring for Mr.
Dinkins as the Mayor made his slow climb to Gracie Mansion.
He served at Mr.
Dinkins's side in two campaigns for Borough President, then in the Borough President's office, and finally at City Hall as the Mayor's top aide for Jewish affairs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  U.S. MAY EASE VIETNAM EMBARGO
The Clinton Administration is moving toward ending the economic embargo against Vietnam because of its cooperation in helping determine the fate of missing Americans. 1


I.B.M.'s Computing Pioneer, Thomas Watson Jr., Dies at 79
Thomas J. Watson Jr., who led I.B.M. and America into the computer age, prompting Fortune magazine to call him "the greatest capitalist who ever lived," died yesterday morning at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 79.
The cause was complications from a stroke he suffered earlier in December, Daniel Mosley, Mr.
Watson's lawyer, said.


In Debate on Radiation Tests, Rush to Judgment Is Resisted
The disclosures this month that Federal researchers deliberately exposed some 800 human subjects to radiation experiments during the cold war has provoked debate among scientists.
Although some are expressing shock at the experiments, others are calling for a suspension of judgment until more is known about the context of the experiments, given the ethical standards and scientific knowledge prevailing at the time.
Doctors and radiation specialists point out that the full dangers of radiation, especially the long-term effects, were not as well understood then as now.
Also, ethicists say, the acceptable standards for using humans as experimental subjects have grown considerably more stringent and specific.


Sanders Restless Again
The Atlanta Falcons' disappointing season has DEION SANDERS thinking about giving up football for a while.
Sanders, a cornerback with the Falcons and outfielder with the Atlanta Braves, said that it might be baseball only next season.
"Maybe it's time to put all my focus on baseball and give that everything I've got so I really have a great season," Sanders said.


RESULTS PLUS
SPEED SKATING More Records for Blair Bonnie Blair of Champaign, Ill., set track records in the 500-meter and 1,500-meter races yesterday in Milwaukee to highlight the first of six days of trials to select the United States teams for the Winter Olympics.
Blair, who earned two gold medals in the 1992 Olympics and one in 1988, won the first of four scheduled 500-meter races for women with a time of 39.92 seconds, breaking her track record of 40.45.
Peggy Clasen of Roseville, Minn., was second in 41.52.
In the 1,500, Blair breezed to a track record of 2 minutes 6.50 seconds, smashing her Pettit National Ice Center mark of 2:09.10.
Chantal Bailey, also of Champaign, was second in 2:09.73.
Dan Jansen of West Allis, Wis., won the men's 500 with a time of 36.42, which matched his track record.
In the men's 1,500, Brian Wanek of Mequon, Wis., won with a time of 1:57.28. (AP) HORSE RACING Smith Adds to Record  Mike Smith, who established a record for stakes winners ridden in one year a day earlier, added to his total yesterday, riding Bit of Puddin to a 2 1/2-length victory in Aqueduct's year-end feature, the $85,650 Bertram F. Bongard Stakes for 2-year-olds.
The stakes winner was Smith's 62d of the year.
Bit of Puddin went the mile and a sixteenth in 1:464/5 and earned $51,390 for his owner, James F. Edwards, with his second straight victory and his third in 10 starts this year. (AP)


Goalie Granted Bail
Colombian goalkeeper RENE HIGUITA, imprisoned since June 2 on charges of attempting to negotiate the release of a hostage, was granted bail Thursday in Bogota, Colombia, and will be released on $10,000 bond.


Don't Cut Off All Debate About the Holocaust
To the Editor:
Re "Holocaust Deniers Got More Than Visibility" (letters, Dec. 23), on the publishing of a Holocaust denier's ad in the Brandeis University paper:
As the debate develops on whether or not the Holocaust should be debated, let us recall that the word "holocaust" was first used in World War II on Christmas Eve 51 years ago.


Eisner Says Euro Disney May Close
In the strongest indication yet that Euro Disney is in danger of closing, Michael D. Eisner, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company, has told a news magazine in France that the struggling French theme park could shut down if he failed to reach an agreement with its creditor banks on a financial rescue.
An article published today in the French news magazine Le Point quoted Mr.
Eisner as saying that Euro Disney must reach an agreement by March 31 with its banks and investors on a solution to the park's financial crisis.


Review/Pop; Full-Tilt Rock With Only Bass and Drums
Who needs guitars?
Certainly not Ruins, the two-man Japanese band that turned the Knitting Factory into a mosh pit on Wednesday night.
With only bass, drums and voices, Ruins played full-throttle rock songs, embracing styles both assaultive and, now and then, melodic.
Ruins' songs are patchworks, with one crisp, brawny riff after another.
The band opened its late set with quick songs, barely a minute each, that cobbled together four or five different riffs: stop-start hard-core rock, slow-rolling heavy metal and something like a pile-driver jig.
Odd meters were interspersed with conventional ones; the music kept jumping forward in ever-changing fits and starts that pushed more and more listeners into motion.


Fate of Trapped Dolphins Is Now Thought to Be Death
They have been around since August, a glistening, playful pod of dolphins that frolicked and fed in the shallow waters of the Shrewsbury River until it was too late: too late in the season for them to swim back to freedom in the Atlantic and too late for all of the bickering humans on the shore to agree on how, or even whether, to save them.
Now the three remaining bottlenose dolphins, unsighted since Wednesday and presumed by many to have perished under the river ice, have been transmuted into a story from which a variety of morals can be drawn about good intentions, human failings and proper priorities.


Don't Cut Off All Debate About the Holocaust; Resurgence of Nazism
To the Editor:
Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky's visit to German and Austrian right-wing extremists points up the international links of these persistent spear carriers of xenophobia, anti-Semitism and, in some cases, outright Nazism (news article, Dec. 23).


Cornwall Journal; In Dodge City East, Cigarette Wars and Shootouts
Before the cigarette smugglers arrived, Cornwall, across the St.
Lawrence from New York State, was known as the "friendly seaway city."
"Today," said Mayor Ron Martelle, who wears a flak vest, keeps an alarm buzzer under his desk and carries a portable phone and pager, "we're more like Dodge City."


Executive Changes
NORTHERN TRUST CORP., Chicago, promoted William A. Osborn to president and chief operating officer, and Barry G. Hastings and John S. Sutfin to vice chairmen of the Northern Trust Corporation and the Northern Trust Company, the banking subsidiary.
All three had been senior executive vice presidents.
PEOPLES BANK, Newton, N.C., promoted its senior vice president of lending, Tony W. Wolfe, to president and chief executive.
He succeeds David A. Hunsucker, who will become president emeritus and special assistant to the chief executive.


Pain Can Wait Until Monday For Brooks And Elliott
The pressure of a big game like this one New York vs.
Dallas for home-field advantage throughout the playoffs -- can manifest itself in many ways.
For two key Giants players, linebacker Michael Brooks and offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott, that pressure means dragging yourself onto the field despite intense pain.
Coach Dan Reeves said today that both players would start in Sunday's game at the Meadowlands.
But right now they are in that fuzzy area of balancing the team's needs against the possibility of further injury.
Brooks has a sprained right foot that is still extremely painful, and there is a chance he could go out on the field on Sunday against the Cowboys and further aggravate it.
Brooks, some Giants players say, is in much more pain than he's saying publicly.


Tougher Regulators Police Emerging Argentine Market
When securities regulators announced recently that they had opened an investigation into Acindar Industries S.A., a large steelmaker and one of the most heavily traded issues on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange, it was as if there had been a small explosion on the exchange floor.
The regulators charged that Acindar had skimmed $3.5 million in profits over the previous two years and diverted it to a company owned by several members of the Acevedo family, which has the controlling interest in Acindar.
At the time, the company had just reported a big quarterly loss.


No Headline
These kids were motivated only by hate.
If we were able to take away their hatred, they would no longer be motivated toward a crime.
You extinguish the flame and it's gone. -- MARC R. GREENBERG, a California prosecutor fighting the prejudices of a group of skinheads.  [ 7:2. ]


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Trade barriers on thousands of products shipped among Mexico, the United States and Canada fell or disappeared at midnight as the North American Free Trade Agreement took effect.
But economists say the pact's most important benefits -- more jobs and higher wages for Mexican workers, hungry new markets for American goods and a waning of illegal Mexican immigration -- are not likely to be felt for years.  [ Page 1. ]
Promises that Nafta would create thousands of jobs for American auto workers have not been forgotten by the United Automobile Workers union, which was defeated in its attempt to block approval of the accord by Congress.  [ 43. ]
Argentina's securities regulators are gaining respect for beginning to root out fraud and market manipulation, aware that such activities deter foreign investment.
Yet companies, especially those that are family-owned, have been slow in learning that lesson.  [ 43. ]
Lloyd's of London said it had raised about $1.3 billion from 21 corporate investors to back insurance policies.
The move, forced by high losses, was a departure from a 305-year-old policy of relying on individuals alone for financing.  [ 45. ] Companies
Thomas J. Watson Jr., who led I.B.M. and America into the computer age, died at 79.
Mr.
Watson took over the company from his father and transformed it from a medium-size concern making punch-card tabulating machinery to a worldwide giant respected for management excellence and technological prowess.
He retired as chairman in 1971, before I.B.M.'s troubles with losses and layoffs caused by the decline in mainframe computer sales.  [ 1. ]
America West Airlines ousted its president and chief executive, Michael J. Conway, ending a long-simmering conflict with the chairman, William A. Franke.
A.
Maurice Myers, president and chief executive of Aloha Airlines, was named president and chief operating officer.
Tensions heightened recently as the airline sought investors to help it emerge from bankruptcy.  [ 43. ]
One Denny's restaurant successfully wooed black customers with a change of menu: it served soul food.
Now the entire Denny's chain has decided to use a regionalized menu concept at its 1,504 restaurants as a way of increasing sagging sales.  [ 43. ]
Disney's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, told a French news magazine that Euro Disneyland, the struggling theme park outside Paris, could shut down if he was unable to reach an agreement with creditor banks on a financial rescue.  [ 43. ]
Zeos International's president and chief operating officer, Martyn Ratcliffe, stepped down.
The troubled mail-order computer maker said he was joining another company it did not identify.  [ 45. ] Markets
Blue-chip stocks plunged in the last half-hour of trading, pushing the Dow Jones industrial average sharply lower and bringing an indecisive end to a solid year on Wall Street.  [ 44. ]
Treasury securities prices closed narrowly mixed, with long-term interest rates mostly unchanged.
For the year, the 30-year Treasury bond yield fell more than one percentage point.  [ 52. ]
The dollar finished mixed against other currencies in quiet New Year's Eve trading that lasted only a few hours.  [ 51. ]
Cattle futures prices rose on expectations of heightened demand for beef after the holidays.
Some markets were closed.  [ 51. ] Your Money
Finding the right discount broker can be complicated and is likely to become more so as others enter the business.
There are three types of discounters, and commissions vary widely.  [ 40. ]
Americans considering homes abroad should be aware of high sales taxes and a sluggish resale market in many countries.  [ 40. ]
In January, small stocks usually outgain the rest of the market by five to seven percentage points.  [ 40. ]
Conflicts can arise between parents and children over control of savings accounts established to pay for college tuition.  [ 41. ]


3 Hurt After Gunmen Take Hostages at Store
Four would-be robbers took several people hostage for about two hours last night inside a mid-Manhattan clothing store before surrendering, to the police, officers said.
The four men entered City Lite, a menswear store at 575 Eighth Avenue, near 38th Street, about 6:45 P.M.  and announced a robbery, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti.
One of the hostages managed to trigger an alarm and several plainclothes police officers who were nearby responded to the call.
The sergeant said the police officers and the robbers exchanged gun shots.
One of the suspects was shot in the shin and another fled on foot and was arrested on a side street.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 21 about the credit markets misstated the periods involved in the Public Securities Association's forecast for the issuing of municipal bonds for new projects.
The association forecast of a decline of 13.6 percent, to $96.6 billion, was for 1993, not 1994.
The association's estimate of $111.8 billion was for 1992, not 1993.
For 1994, the association forecasts an increase of 13.6 percent, to $109.7 billion, in these new issues.


Bridge
A great figure in the early days of the game was Sidney Lenz, who was not only an expert player but also an expert card magician.
Understandably, he refused to play bridge for money, fearing somebody would think he was using his special skills.
Some professional magic, including cards, will be on view at midnight tonight after play at the Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regional Championships at the Sheraton New York Hotel, Seventh Avenue at 53d Street in Manhattan.
But do not expect to see the bridge magic that was called for on the diagramed deal.


Don't Cut Off All Debate About the Holocaust; Italian Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
"Italian Fascism Didn't Practice Anti-Semitism" (letter, Dec. 22) by Louis Jay Herman provides a new twist to Holocaust denial, in which the Italian fascists were somehow victims, not perpetrators of anti-Semitism.
Yet the so-called "Jewish question" in Italy arose before the 1938 racial laws.
Mussolini's rape of Ethiopia three years earlier was more influential in unleashing Fascist anti-Semitism than German "pressure."


This New Year's Is Not the Same Song and Dance


For Paterno, Next Year Is Here and Now
The CompUSA Florida Citrus Bowl against Tennessee Saturday will be Joe Paterno's 24th bowl as Penn State's head coach.
Several were memorable, but the one that has made the 66-year-old Paterno into something of a taskmaster this time was last year's bowl game.
At the Blockbuster Bowl in Miami, Penn State lost to Stanford, 24-3, and disgraced itself, according to the coach.
"Never again," said Paterno.
So this year the coach swept up his players and took them to Melbourne, Fla., for a week, where he put them through an August-style regimen, even two a day practices, for three days.
Prepare in Melbourne, play in Orlando.
The Citrus, with Disney World nearby, is renowned for its ambitious social events for the athletes, what coaches call distractions.
Paterno even whined on Wednesday about the players having to stand around too long in the sun at one event.
Laying Blame
Distractions were partly to blame, he said, the last time Penn State played in the Citrus Bowl, on Jan. 1, 1988.
Clemson won, 35-10.
Then there is Tennessee.
On Christmas Day, Paterno spent seven hours in his hotel studying tapes of the Vols.
His suspicions were clarified.
"They have more speed and quickness than we do," Paterno said today.
"On defense too, even though everyone talks about their offense. It is going to be very difficult for us."
Paterno drew a confirmation from Craig Faulkner, the Volunteers' wide receiver, who will be catching passes thrown by Heath Shuler, the celebrated quarterback.
Said Faulkner of the Nittany Lions' defenders, "They don't have a lot of speed, so we have to be ready to use ours."
Paterno dismisses the Fiesta Bowl contest of two seasons ago in which Penn State defeated Tennessee, 42-17, thanks to a flurry of turnovers by the Vols after they had built a 17-7 lead.
Shuler was a freshman backup to Andy Kelly and went into the game late, completing one pass.
He emerged as a force last season and helped destroy Boston College in the Hall of Fame Bowl at Tampa, Fla., 38-23.
Shuler, who is from Bryson City, N.C., will announce on Jan. 9 if he will return to Tennessee for his senior season or enter the National Football League draft.
Pro scouts say he could be a first-round selection, the first college quarterback picked over all.
His counterpart here, Kerry Collins, the Nittany Lions' quarterback, who is even bigger than Shuler -- 6 feet 5 inches and 235 pounds to 6-3, 212 -- has considered the prospect of Penn State having to play catch-up.
"We have to be effective throwing the ball," Collins said, "or we're in for a long day. They have one of the best defenses we've seen this season."
Collins approved of the Melbourne drill camp.
"It helped us a lot," he said.
"It gave us a foundation. Down here, we've been going everywhere."
Party time, distraction time. Now it's game time. EXTRA POINTS
All 72,000 seats have been sold, at $40 a ticket.
Penn State fans bought more than 10,000. . . .
Either TERRY KILLENS or WILLIE SMITH will start at inside linebacker for the Nittany Lions, replacing BRIAN MONAGHAN, who did not make the trip after being charged with public intoxication by campus security personnel. . . .
The backup to KERRY COLLINS at quarterback is CRAIG FAYAK , the place-kicker, and after him it would be the punter, V. J. MUSCILLO .
Why?
Because Coach JOE PATERNO chose in November to save a season of eligibility for the quarterback of the future, WALLY RICHARDSON, who had not played and who was redshirted. . . .
PHIL FULMER, the Tennessee head coach, played for the Vols in a game against Penn State at Knoxville in 1971.
Paterno was then in his 22d season as a Nittany Lions coach and his team was a 31-11 loser.


After a Layoff, a Pilot Focuses on a Light With Potential
Paul R. Manley had 17 years as a military and commercial pilot under his belt when he was laid off from Eastern Airlines in 1989.
At 38 years old, with a wife and four children, his choice was a $1,000-a-month entry-level pilot's job with another airline or a change of careers.
With business advice from his father, a seasoned salesman, and his father's associate, Mr.
Manley began selling lights for exit signs, While making a sales call, he came across a poorly made Taiwanese product with potential; an 18-inch light rope.
The flexible, clear plastic tube encased a series of tiny incandescent lightbulbs.
If improved, Mr.
Manly reasoned, the product could become a low-cost, low-energy replacement for the large incandescent bulbs used in exit signs.


Religion Notes
Keeping 'He' in God
The latest battle over how much traditional religious language should change to accommodate modern sensibilities has been fought before the nation's Roman Catholic bishops.
Tradition won.


Don't Cut Off All Debate About the Holocaust; Horthy and Hitler
To the Editor:
"Rehabilitating Horthy" (letter, Dec. 20), Bela Liptak's absolution of the Hungarian head of state Miklos Horthy, overlooks inconvenient facts.
Horthy's Hungary was the first European "fascist" state, whatever that word means, preceding Mussolini and Hitler.
In 1920 he terminated the civil rights Hungary's Jews had achieved in 1867 and instituted such anti-Semitic measures as university quotas.


Legislators Rebuff O'Rourke, Overturning 7 Budget Vetoes
The Board of Legislators had the final word today in its struggle with County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke over the 1994 budget, overriding seven of his eight vetoes and adding $6.155 million to the $948.6 million spending plan.
And it warned Mr.
O'Rourke that it would not back down in asserting its authority over the budget, accusing him of adopting an attitude that bordered "dangerously close to being contemptuous" of the County Charter.


Will Year of Balladur Lead to Elysee Palace?
With heavy rains flooding northern France, a cartoon in L'Express this week shows Jacques Chirac, the Gaullist leader, trapped on a rooftop waiting to be rescued as Prime Minister Edouard Balladur nonchalantly walks away across the water.
Implicit in the cartoon, of course, is that Mr.
Balladur is heading for Elysee Palace, while Mr.
Chirac, who has failed in two previous bids for the presidency, is about to be frustrated again in 1995, this time by the very man he nominated to be Prime Minister just nine months ago.


Sorting Out Discount Brokers And Their Puzzling Prices
LAST week the Federal Reserve Board gave the nod to First Union Corporation, the nation's ninth-largest bank, to offer its bank customers special deals at its discount brokerage.
The Fed will probably soon permit all banks to use such pricing tactics.
Time will tell what this means for consumers.
First Union plans a 5 percent broker discount, but has not set the bank balances required for eligibility.
And other banks' plans must await the Fed go-ahead.


CHRONICLE
The birth of ELENA DAWES 15 years ago is a quintessential New York story.
And a happy postscript was added on Thursday night.
Her parents, GERRY DAWES and DIANA DAWES, were not expecting Elena's arrival early on the morning of Feb. 27, 1978.
But when it became clear that the birth was imminent, Mr.
Dawes rang 911 and Police Officers GEORGE REPETTI and MARIO RUSSO of the 30th Precinct went to the Dawes apartment in Washington Heights.
They delivered the baby with the father's help and then took mother and child to the hospital.


Outgunned Guard Foils Robbery in Queens
A retired corrections officer working as a security guard fought a blazing gun battle yesterday with five to eight holdup men who invaded a crowded Queens clothing store and shot its owner.
But the guard killed one gunman, drove off the others and foiled the robbery before collapsing with six bullet wounds, the authorities said.
The police captured two suspects, recovered four guns and said two to five robbers escaped after the gunfight, which occurred about 1:30 P.M. at Montego Bay, at 89-74 165th Street, in Jamaica, part of a large shopping center crowded with shoppers on the last day of the year.


Mother Fights a Son's Adoption by Homosexuals
Rarely a day goes by, Megan Lucas says, that she does not regret giving up parental rights to her son, Gailen, in August 1992, when he was 2.
But she says she was 21 years old then and at a low point in her life, abusing drugs and alcohol.
She had a history of trouble with the law and had abandoned the boy when he was 5 months old.
It seemed like the right decision at the time.


Trading Limited
The stock market was open in the United States yesterday, but some overseas stock markets were closed in observance of New Year's Eve.
The bond and currency markets were open, but trading ended early.
And the Chicago Mercantile Exchange was open, but most other commodities markets in the United States were closed.


Don't Cut Off All Debate About the Holocaust; Hungary and the Serbs
To the Editor:
I do not wish to argue the credits and sins of Miklos Horthy and Josef Antall, the Hungarian Prime Minister who died Dec. 12, but I object to Bela Liptak's misrepresentation of one of the most shameful episodes of Hungarian history (letter, Dec. 20).


President Steps Down at Zeos International
Zeos International Inc., a troubled mail-order personal computer maker, said yesterday that Martyn Ratcliffe had stepped down as president and chief operating officer.
Gregory E. Herrick, Zeos's chairman and chief executive, will take over as president, a position he held until Mr.
Ratcliffe joined Zeos in November 1992.
Zeos, which is based in Minneapolis, appointed Ronald M. Meyers, a management consultant, as acting chief operating officer.


Review/Pop; The Turtles' Quirky Spirit Survives
Since 1981, the reconstituted Turtles have seen in the new year at the Bottom Line with songs and shtick.
In the 1960's, Mark Volman and Howard Kaylan, also known as Flo and Eddie, sang the Turtles' string of cleverly made hits ("Happy Together," "Elenore," "You Showed Me"); then they went on to join Frank Zappa's Mothers of Invention for raunchy early-1970's albums.
Years later, they both cherish the packaged innocence of 1960's pop-rock and mock the artifices of the entertainment business.
On Wednesday night, the early show began with a wordless tribute to turtles' fellow reptiles, the 1993 successes of "Jurassic Park" and Barney.
The shows are reunions for Turtles cultists, allowing Mr.
Kaylan and Mr.
Volman to dip into the more obscure parts of the band's catalogue.
The Turtles weren't innovators; they were gifted trend-surfers who picked up ideas from folk-rock, the Beach Boys and the Beatles.


Pacer Pleads Innocent
A March 7 trial date has been set for Indiana Pacers forward KENNY WILLIAMS, who has pleaded innocent to drunken driving charges in Carmel, Ind.
He was charged with driving while intoxicated, driving with a suspended license and operating a vehicle without auto insurance. (AP)


Name of the Game: Dominik Hasek
Mike Keenan coached Dominik Hasek in Chicago.
He knows that the young goaltender has incredible athletic ability.
He knows that Hasek has the potential to be one of the better goalies in the National Hockey League.
Keenan would have preferred, though, that Hasek wait until after the Rangers left town before he decided to display his talents.


Tariffs Drop as Trade Agreement Kicks In With New Year's Arrival
Trade barriers to thousands of products shipped between Mexico, the United States and Canada drop or disappear with the arrival of the New Year, as the North American Free Trade Agreement takes effect.
In the first hours of 1994, the Mexican beer that Canadians drink, the Mexican garlic that Americans eat, the American computers on which Mexicans type and the Canadian Christmas trees that strike Mexicans as remarkably sturdy and green could all become slightly cheaper as tariffs on most goods come down by at least half.


Rose Sues Financier
PETE ROSE, the career hits leader, has joined a Virginia Beach millionaire in a lawsuit contending that they were denied the money needed to keep their powerboat on the national racing circuit.
Rose and ALAN R. FUENTES formed a team that won a national racing title in 1992 but has since run aground.
Rose and Fuentes charged that a Cincinnati financier failed to deliver the cash to keep them operating.
In a lawsuit filed last month in Virginia Beach Circuit Court, the Hit King Racing Team Inc. charged that JAMES R. TUTTLE SR.  and his Ingelheim Financial Group reneged on a promise to give the team $65,000.
Without the money, the boat's engines were repossessed and the team couldn't race this year, the lawsuit said. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Kelly Blackwell, tight end.
Placed Keith Loneker, guard, on injured reserve.
Hockey National Hockey League  TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Recalled Patrik Augusta, right wing, and Alexei Kudashov, center, from St.
John's of the American Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League  UTICA BULLDOGS -- Waived Michel Couvrett, forward.
Activated Angelo Russo, forward.
East Coast Hockey League  DAYTON BOMBERS -- Signed Adam Young, defenseman.
GREENSBORO MONARCHS -- Announced that Dan Gravelle, center, was returned by Indianapolis of the International Hockey League and Brendan Creagh, defenseman, was recalled by Cornwall of the American Hockey League.


Victims of Bias Try to Steer Skinheads Off Road to Hate
As far as the authorities could tell, some of the younger members of the Fourth Reich Skinheads of Orange County had been hating Jews, blacks and other ethnic minorities for only less than a year.
So maybe there was still time to reach them, offer alternatives and save them from the fate of their leaders, who faced years in Federal prison after trying to start a race war with homemade bombs.
At least, they thought, it was at least worth a try.


About New York; Ode to Those Whose Bad News Made the News
THE time has come to send best wishes,
warm sentiments and festive dishes.
The list is set, there is no doubt
who we'll include and who's left out.
It being now a time of pardon,
a season when our hearts unharden,
we offer toasts to celebrate
some folks whose luck has not been great.
To those who had a bad hair year
we offer huzzahs, hugs and cheer.
John Gotti, the Medellin Cartel -
Hope they reform, we wish them well.
We also send felicitations
to the squeegee guys and the United Nations,
and definitely we'd be remiss
to skip Abe Hirschfeld and his sloppy kiss.
To the other owners of The New York Post,
as to every tasteless talk show host,
we wish what we ourselves expect,
much joy and grace and self-respect.
Let others scoff, we'll throw no stones
at Marla Maples or Chuck Jones.
And speaking here of throwing stuff,
Vince Coleman surely's heard enough.
What can one say to Andrew Dice Clay
but "have yourself a very nice day"?
Woody vs. Mia, the Donald and Ivana,
We could smirk but we don't wanna.
Instead we'll shout hip, hip, hooray!
Who needs glad tidings more than they?
Well, perhaps it's the politicos
still smarting from electoral woes.
Like Liz Holtzman, the ex-Comptroller.
We've got a strange urge to extol her.
Dave Dinkins, Bob Abrams and Andy Stein
"take a salute at the end of the line."
While for New Jersey's Jim Florio,
here's some warm milk and an Oreo.
We do not want the vanquished dissed;
all such temptations we will resist.
But what of triumphs; can we laugh
at Ed Rollins and his boastful gaffe?
Snatching shame from victory's jaws
is surely worth a few guffaws.
Still, after so much has been said,
we'll just send our best to Ed.
Sol Wachtler, who once had it all,
reminds us how the mighty fall.
In jail, life's worse than on St. Croix;
we wish him comfort, if not Joy.
It's time to turn our contemplation
to the case that thrilled the nation.
We mean of course the suburban saga
of Amy and Joey going gaga.
Prurient interest, yes, indeed,
but lust excites much more than greed.
And while so many claim disgust,
We all read on because we must.
Hence we express our gratitude
To teen-age temptress and body shop dude.
No, we're not forgetting Mary Jo;
here's a hey nonny, nonny, and a ho ho ho.
In the world of arts and letters
We have seen some real go-getters.
Among the pros, not the beginners,
We have to mention Joe McGinniss.
Truth to tell, we've never met,
But if we should, it's safe to bet
He would so brilliantly infer
our plan to send him frankincense and myrrh.
Then Janet Malcolm, equally able,
for her, of course, a separate table.
Remember how she long insisted
that journalism's often twisted.
A counterpart of Heisenberg,
she'd have us doubt what we aver.
Indeterminacy she has reached,
In practice of what she has preached.
There is no lack of who to summon,
Howard Stern will keep things humming.
Rush Limbaugh will fuss and fume
As Leonard Jeffries works the room.
Leona Helmsley, once so lofty,
reveals herself a reborn softy.
And in the corner sits a loner,
the man who's been called George the Owner.
Pardoned by a President,
Has he some new cause to repent?
The muse is fleeting, it's busy season,
thus we're losing rhyme and reason.
Quick, cold champagne and eggs of sturgeon
For all who've offered us diversion.


The County's New Year Wish
AS the new year approached, instead of being asked to predict the future, six business leaders were given the question: "From your vantage point, what should be done to improve the economy in Westchester during 1994?" Here are their answers.
Harold E. Vogt, president and chief executive officer of the county's Chamber of Commerce:


Entry to Harrods
To the Editor: In June, my two teen-age daughters, aged 14 and 15, and I visited the Harrods department store in London.
We were refused entry because one of my daughters was wearing jeans with one knee slit horizontally.
When the three of us stepped into the store from the Underground, a man in a blue uniform told me curtly that there was a dress code at the store and that that sort of attire was not allowed.


Is China Taking a Great Leap Backward?
To the Editor:
"Economic Focus in Shanghai: Catching Up," (front page, Dec. 22) states that "this Chinese city is racing to recapture the glory of capitalism that flourished here 60 years ago and crumbled under the scorn and persecution of Communism."


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Administrations come and go.
But politics aside, the faces of City Hall remain the same.
A photo essay.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Thousands of manufacturers have fled, but Seymour Siegel has stayed home.


Traditional Powwow, Emphasizing Sobriety
The powwow began early in the afternoon with a grand entry procession of Indian dancers dressed in their best traditional finery: the men in buckskins, some with spectacular arrays of feathers on their backs, and the women in colorful dresses and shawls.
Throughout the day and evening, there were the traditional dances to the beat of drums, some intertribal dances open to everyone and some separate dances for men and women.
In other words, the powwow at Northern Kentucky University, which attracted American Indians from 25 tribes, was much like powwows held through the ages.
But there was one difference: this one was billed as a sobriety powwow for New Year's Eve.


Sports of The Times; Two Aging Warriors Meet in the Storied Pit
THE funky old Orange Bowl took on the fiendish trappings of a much older building, the Colosseum in Rome.
Two coaches with unfulfilled careers were set loose last night, with no prospect the judges would rule thumbs-up for both Bobby Bowden of Florida State and Tom Osborne of Nebraska, as their teams played for the national college football championship.
There was even the cruel and unusual possibility that these two old contenders could hack each other up in some ghastly tie while undefeated West Virginia or once-beaten Notre Dame roared right past them from other bowl games.
However, that paranoid specter faded somewhat when Notre Dame barely survived Texas A&amp;M, 24-21, earlier in the evening.


At Four High Schools in the County the Fourth R Is Reform
TONY ARANELLA, director of the Scarsdale Alternative School, a division of Scarsdale High School, said he was thrilled to see so many familiar faces at the televised White House ceremony at which the publisher and philanthropist Walter H. Annenberg recently announced his $500 million contribution to education groups involved in school reform.
Many at the ceremony were Mr.
Aranella's colleagues in the Coalition for Essential Schools at Brown University, which will receive $50 millionof Mr.
Annenberg's grant.
In Westchester, the Alternative School, Bronxville High School, Croton-Harmon High and Fox Lane High in Bedford are members of the coalition, a nationwide network of more than 500 secondary schools that have adopted school restructuring principles developed by Theodore R. Sizer, founder of the coalition and an education professor at Brown.


New Medical Center Planned for Towers
Beth Israel Medical Center has bought 300,000 square feet of office space at the Zeckendorf Towers -- the four pyramid-topped towers on the east side of Union Square -- to create a new medical center offering a broad range of services.
The hospital paid $34 million for the space, which will be used for doctors' offices as well as Beth Israel services that do not require overnight stays.
Primary care, diagnostic and treatment services, for instance, will be transferred from the medical center at 16th Street and First Avenue to the Zeckendorf complex, between 14th and 15th Streets.
Administrative offices and the physician billing department will also be moved.


Doubt Cast on Crown Heights Account
Days after law-enforcement officials identified a man they said was a second suspect in the 1991 killing of a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, doubts have arisen about the reliability of a witness who provided detectives with a new account of the killing that implicated the second suspect.
The witness, John Anderson, was quoted yesterday in an article in New York Newsday as saying that he had not seen the second suspect, Ernesto Edwards, stab the scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, during the disturbances in Crown Heights.


The Enormity of It All
DOWNTOWN -- On Monday in her small dressing room at the Charles Ludlam Theater in Greenwich Village, Katy Dierlam, the 500-pound actress who plays a singing maid in "How to Write a Play," was taking off her makeup.
She looked far more graceful seated than she'd looked lumbering around onstage earlier.
The satiny fringed burlesque costume she wore in Act I, which revealed a stunning amount of flesh, was hanging on the wall behind her.
"My character likes lots of big hair and makeup," she said as she removed her fake eyelashes and a wig as flamboyant as the cast of characters in the play.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BALLET FOR BOYS
"If my friends called and I wasn't home, whoever answered the phone might tell them that I'm at ballet class and I'd never be able to show my face in school again!" This is the complaint of boys aged 8 to 10 who are interested in taking up ballet but fear their classmates' ridicule.


Conversations/Ken Hamblin; In Denver, the Surprising New Face Of Right-Wing Talk Radio
"I'M angry," said Ken Hamblin. "So angry I sometimes feel like I'm going to explode."
Ordering tortellini and a vodka gimlet in an upscale restaurant on a sun-splashed Colorado afternoon, Mr.
Hamblin would seem to have the world by the tail.
He hosts a successful radio talk show and writes a newspaper column.
He has a home in the mountains, a second place in the city, and owns two restaurants.
He is a pilot, photographer, skier, horseman, fly fisherman and scuba-diver.


Why Not Dream Big?
To the Editor:
Walter Hill's rationale for his bizarre rearrangement of the Geronimo story in "Geronimo: An American Legend" is bracing, if totally wrongheaded  [ "Geronimo, Still With a Few Rough Edges," Dec. 5 ] .
Mr.
Hill's view: "The audience doesn't go to a movie for a history lesson; it wants entertainment." Oliver Stone bought that when he foisted "J.F.K." off on us.
So I dare say more of this virulent revisionism can be expected.


Op-Ed Columnists
The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are customarily rotated every six months.
Here is the schedule through July 1:


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
DRIVEN PATRIOT: The Life and Times of James Forrestal By Townsend Hoopes and Douglas Brinkley.
Vintage, $17.
A workaholic striving to overcome his immigrant roots, James Forrestal became Secretary of the Navy under President Franklin D. Roosevelt and then the country's first Secretary of Defense.
His success, however, failed to allay depression and self-doubt; he committed suicide in 1949.
In 1992 our reviewer, David Callahan, called this book "the definitive account of James Forrestal's triumphant yet tragic life."


No Perfection in Charlotte, Either
Obviously, there is more for the Knicks to worry about right now than who their primary challengers will be in the Eastern Conference come playoff time.
But it was just a couple of months ago that the Charlotte Hornets were supposed to represent the only potential obstacle to the Knicks' reaching the finals next June.
Now, based on New York's recent run of bad luck, play and karma, and the Hornets' being in a qualitative holding pattern, it may not be long before the Nets and Philadelphia start fantasizing about a turnpike conference finals.
If November and December proved anything, it's that nothing can be taken for granted when there are no great teams.
It's a long season.
Things change.
Egos wilt.
Others grow.
Units unravel.
Others mesh.
That's what happened to the Hornets, who are at Madison Square Garden tonight to play the Knicks.


Staking a Claim on The Virtual Frontier
FOR the hardy bands of pioneers who staked out the first electronic communities in the early 1970's, the sprawling web of computer networks known as cyberspace had the anarchist, individualist feel of an electronic frontier.
Now the Net, as it is called, is feeling the pressures of suburbanization, as efforts to commercialize it are creating the electronic equivalent of neon signs and endless avenues of strip malls.


Plan for School Vouchers Seems to Pick Up Steam
THE idea of using public money to pay for private school education in the state moved significantly closer to reality recently when Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman named Dr.
Leo Klagholz as her choice for Commissioner of Education.
Mrs.
Whitman's choice of Dr.
Klagholz, a longtime advocate of voucher programs, along with her political debt to another advocate, Jersey City's Mayor, Bret Schundler, may finally be the catalyst that ushers in the state's first pilot school voucher program.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 12 about the actress Julia Roberts misstated the origin of her given name.
At birth she was indeed named Julia Fiona Roberts, not Julie.


Of a Certain Age, and in a Family Way
THERE was a time, not long ago, when mothers over 35 were called old.
Then it was 40.
And now, the announcement that a 59-year-old Englishwoman has given birth to twins has pushed the limits of menopause and sharpened the debate about whether there is an age at which women should stop having children.
Concerns about older parents are not new -- it is just the definition of older that has changed.
Adoption agencies, for example, refused for many years to place children with parents over the age of 40, reasoning that older parents would be less vigorous and more inflexible, according to William Pierce, president of the National Council for Adoption.
Now that age limit is usually set at 45.


ABOUT BOOKS
Justice Brennan's New Jersey Roots
FOR another excavation of historic Newark -- ancient Troy had at least nine layers -- go to "A Justice for All: William J. Brennan, Jr., and the Decisions That Transformed America," by Kim Isaac Eisler.
The author, a national editor of The Washingtonian Magazine, recalled in a recent interview that he traveled to the Vailsburg section of Newark, Justice Brennan's boyhood home, and even to Rumson and "all those Jersey places" to immerse himself in the relevant, though vanished, milieu.


A Timely Look at Mayors Past
With the arrival of a new occupant for Gracie Mansion, the Museum of the City of New York is opening an exhibition called "His Honor, The Mayor." It draws on its collection of paintings, photographs, manuscripts, costumes and objects to examine the city's political history.
New York's last British mayor, shown in an oil by John Singleton Copley, was Whitehead Hicks; appointed by the English governor in 1766, he retired and moved to Flushing when the Revolutionary War broke out.
The dress coat worn by DeWitt Clinton, a three-time mayor, at the opening of the Erie Canal is on display, as is the oxblood silk smoking jacket of Fiorello LaGuardia.
Not to mention the six-inch-high iron bank made in the shape of Tammany Hall's Boss Tweed, who is shown seated in a chair; when a penny is placed in his hand, it drops into a pocket and his head nods in thanks.


BEST SELLERS: January 2, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
73
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
4
19
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
4
3
12
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
5
6
42
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
6
8
38
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
9
14
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
8
5
4
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
9
7
3
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
10
10
8
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
11
2
A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) Verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.
12
11
11
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
13
12
5
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
14
14
16
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
15*
45
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
11
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
3
17
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals.
4
4
19
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
5
13
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
9
4
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs.
7
8
13
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
8
6
5
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
7
34
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
10
13
2
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
11
2
I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $19.) The humorist describes his near-death experience following heart surgery.
12
10
5
THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) Feline trials and tribulations.
13
11
13
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
14
15
8
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) Memoir.
15
14
73
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
16*
12
11
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
23
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
2
7
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
3
3
56
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
4
32
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editor's choices of books of particular interest) THE COLUMBIA HISTORY OF AMERICAN POETRY, edited by Jay Parini. (Columbia University, $59.95.) Essays by 31 scholars, many of them quirky, opinionated and authoritative; revaluations and reverberations abound.
THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.) More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing, intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one minute without humming.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
GARBAGE, by A.R.
Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of this year's National Book Award.
IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent, by Timothy Garton Ash. (Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the collapse of Communism?
A hard question, approached with respect for its ambiguity.
JAMES BEARD: A Biography, by Robert Clark. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) A painstaking, admirably unvarnished life of the great cooking teacher and food writer whose career, occasionally embarrassed by tinges of greed and cynicism, spanned the postwar era of American infatuation with food as an art form.
MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B.
Breslin. (University of Chicago, $39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English, is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.
SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.
SISTERS OF FORTUNE, by Nancy Coffey Heffernan and Ann Page Stecker. (University Press of New England, cloth, $40; paper, $15.95.) The letters of three New Hampshire girls over 11 years to their father, who left them for the gold of California in 1850, testify to the status of women and the dominance of hope over experience.
SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES: A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell, by Sarah Bradford. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) Ms.
Bradford, an expert biographer, illuminates the Sitwell era and the remarkable success of Osbert, Edith and Sachie at being taken at their own valuation.
W.E.B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.


Sarah Jackson, Edward M. Han
Sarah M. Jackson, a daughter of Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson of Washington and Jean Jackson Seglie of Annandale, Va., was married on Friday to Edward M. Han, a son of Edward H. Y. Han of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and the late Margaret K. Han.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in Washington.
Ms.
Jackson-Han, 26, is a journalist and a marketing manager for Agence France-Presse in Washington.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in English literature from Cambridge University.
Her father is a judge of the District Court for the District of Columbia.
Her mother is a managing editor in the publications department at the Institute for Defense Analysis in Alexandria, Va.


The B. Altman Building Goes Bookish
"IT was to be a store of infinite resources," declared a commemorative booklet published 80 years ago, when B. Altman &amp; Company expanded its Fifth Avenue dry-goods palace all the way to Madison Avenue, to cover a whole city block.
Substitute "library" for "store" and you get the idea behind the Science, Business and Industry Library, now being built by the New York Public Library within the vast limestone-clad shell that was Altman's flagship until it went out of business in 1989.


Celebrating New Flowers in a New Year
A FEW outstanding flowers have been announced for the New Year.
They will be worth watching for as the seed and nursery catalogues start arriving in the next few weeks.
The newcomers that every gardener usually watches for are the All-America Selections.
These prize winners are the grow-from-seed plants that have gone through two years of testing nationwide.
Judges compare them with flowers already in commerce to see if they are better.
Only the finest grow-from-seed plants make the awards list.


A New Year of Bird-Watching


Kimball Atypical
To the Sports Editor:
Charlie Nobles's article on Bruce Kimball ("Young Divers Wish Kimball Well as He Starts New Life," The Times, Nov. 24), the diver who killed two people while driving drunk is, to me, quite frightening.
The tenor is that, now that Bruce learned his lesson, it's O.K.


SUNDAY, January 2, 1994; Superconducting Supercollider, Handyman Special, Many Items Like New
Poor Coyote.
After watching Defense Department contractors play the old game of lowball estimate and inexplicable rising costs, physicists must have unconsciously figured they could do it too.
In true Wile E. Coyote style, supporters of the Superconducting Supercollider pitched it as a $4.5 billion project and then ran right off the end of the cliff with plans and construction.
When the price reached $11 billion and after $2 billion had been spent, the boosters of this immense particle physics project found themselves hanging in the air, with no Congress to support them.


Plans for New Courthouse Stalled, Again, as Contractors Challenge Bid Process
In October, when work crews demolished a vacant building on Sutphin Boulevard, it seemed that the new Civil Courthouse that Queens has planned for two decades was about to be built.
But the project has stalled yet again, this time amid legal challenges over the city's selection of contractors for the project.
In separate lawsuits filed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, two companies recently secured restraining orders to halt the project, challenging the basis on which the city's Department of General Services rejected their bids.


Data Bank/January 2, 1994
Data Bank/January 2, 1994
Index of Leading Indicators
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.5
0.2
New Home Sales
Monthly percent change
11.3
-2.2
15.4
Consumer Confidence
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
1985=100
80.2
71.9
60.5
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 24
Dec. 17
Dec. 10
In thousands
291
332
328
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Dec. 31
Dec. 24
Dec. 17
Friday spot price, per barrel
$14.17
$14.48
$14.23
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
2.97
3.04
3.02
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.20
3.18
3.20
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
6.34
6.21
6.27


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
WHEN WILL THE SNOW TREES GROW?
Written and illustrated by Ben Shecter.
Unpaged.
New York: A Charlotte Zolotow Book/ HarperCollins Publishers.


Changing Storage Policies
THE free use of a communal storage room in the basement of a New York City apartment house has long been viewed as an entitlement in places where it is available.
Indeed, it is such an important perk that it is frequently used as a marketing point when an apartment is rented or sold.
So entrenched in apartment house lore is the free storage space that there are still hundreds of buildings in the city -- rental, co-op and condominium -- that have been unwilling to change to rented storage bins, despite advantages.


Celebrating New Flowers in a New Year
A FEW outstanding flowers have been announced for the New Year.
They will be worth watching for as the seed and nursery catalogues start arriving in the next few weeks.
The newcomers that every gardener usually watches for are the All-America Selections.
These prize winners are the grow-from-seed plants that have gone through two years of testing nationwide.
Judges compare them with flowers already in commerce to see if they are better.
Only the finest grow-from-seed plants make the awards list.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
JAMAICA  Artists and Photographers In an All-Woman Show
Photographs, paintings and sculptures, all created by women, are featured in three separate shows at the Jamaica Arts Center starting this week.
The Gorilla Girls would be pleased.
But Robert Craddock, the curator, said the event was not intended to be "a women's show," adding, "It's a coincidence."


With a 5-Borough Tour, Giuliani Starts His Term
On his first day in office Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani swept around New York City yesterday in a tour that seemed part victory lap and part opening of business, dropping in at Gracie Mansion, handing out cookies to civil servants and vowing to turn a candidate's promises into a mayor's actions.
Only hours after becoming the city's 107th mayor, Mr.
Giuliani went to the 44th Precinct in the High Bridge section of the Bronx and announced that the police would set up the first of what he calls "safety zones" that he pledged to create around each of the city's schools.
On Monday, he said, officers from the precinct will begin special patrols in the blocks around William H. Taft High School, one of the city's most violent schools.


Sawdust and Machismo
WITH a new year ahead, it seems a good day to look backward and forward.
In short, to open the mail.
Dear Sir,
Have you ever heard of the "sawdust tire"?
In the 1950's and 60's, in Iowa and Nebraska, they used to mix sawdust with tire-rubber compound to make a retread similar in result to what you describe -- and decades sooner.


Manager's Profile
Christopher H. Wiles
Fund: Fortress Utility Fund; $1 billion in assets; 1 percent sales load.
Manager since 1990. (Sponsor: Federated Investors, Pittsburgh, Pa.)


Theft in 'Presumption'
To the Editor:
Robert Grudin, in his review of "Presumption," a sequel to Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice" (Dec. 12), describes the arrest and imprisonment of Elizabeth's Aunt Phillips for stealing a card of lace from a haberdasher's shop as part of a plot line that "lacks both probability and Austenian decorum."


The Arts Hurtle (Limp?) Toward the Millennium
Feeling a little anxious lately?
In the mood for a bombastic action film or a rock band that sounds like a lawn mower with a beat?
Buying "abject" art, and you don't know why?
Maybe it's your nerves -- or maybe it has something to do with the end of the world.
You remember the end of the world, don't you?
In six years we will enter the mystical year 2000, which marks the end of the second millennium and the beginning of the third. (Hardcore millennial scholars and the British Government believe the new century actually begins on Jan. 1, 2001, but most others opt for the more dramatic 2000.)


Death of a Store: A Retailing Tragedy
WORD had not gotten around, and so nothing had changed so far as the crackle of commerce.
Here was the man in search of the right bowling ball for his girlfriend of limber build, averaging 120.
Next through the door, the winsome woman requiring a 25-pound weight: will this cause her car to scrape the ground?
And now here came the chirrupy regular, homing in on an exercise machine ("It's time; I haven't exercised since Coolidge").
Hour after hour, the terse antiphon of the customers went on.
Everything seemed so normal.
That was what was so eerie to those who knew.
The shelves were full.
Clamorous delivery trucks were bumping up to the back door.
Ogling customers were engaged in the lulling rituals of trade.


Justices and Clerks
To the Editor:
Nathan Lewin, in his review of "Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes" (Nov. 21), makes the curious assertion that historians will be unable to analyze current Supreme Court Justices as G. Edward White has done in his biography of Holmes because, as Mr.
Lewin puts it, the current use of law clerks makes it impossible to know "what, if anything, the Justices themselves have written."


THIS WEEK


Want to Help? Where to Call.
There are thousands of places to volunteer in New York.
What follows is a very limited listing.
More possibilities are available through the Mayor's Voluntary Action Center, (212) -788-7550; the Volunteer Referral Center, (212) 889-4805; New York Cares, (212) 228-5000, or the Retired and Senior Volunteer Program (for people 55 and over), (212) 674-7787.
SOUP KITCHENS  CATHOLIC CENTER SOUP KITCHEN at N.Y.U., 58 Washington Square South, Manhattan, (212) 674-7236.
Volunteers staff a soup kitchen on Mondays from 11:30 A.M. to 2 P.M.
CENTRAL SYNAGOGUE , 128 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 838-5122.
Volunteers staff a breakfast kitchen on Thursdays and Fridays.


Martin Rubenstein, 58, Broadcast Executive
Martin Rubenstein, a former business executive of three major broadcasting networks, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 58.
The cause was heart disease, said his daughter, Deborah Rubenstein.


Rocks of Ages
Joshua Tree National Monument looks like "The Land That Time Forgot." They should have shot the new Flintstones movie here.
Yet tell almost anyone in Los Angeles that you're making the nearly three-hour drive east to Joshua Tree and they burst into rhapsodies of such Fatiman fervor that a skeptical New Yorker can't help but have second thoughts.
Was I really ready for "cosmic renewal," as promised?
If the architect Josh Schweitzer of Los Angeles had never erected his coarse Cubist retreat less than a mile from the park's west entrance, I might have held on to my sarcasm.
But this was too good a photo opportunity to pass up.
The home is as fascinating for what it is -- three asymmetrical, boldly colored plaster blocks rising from the rocky landscape as if the gods had willed shelter -- as for what it lacks, almost all creature comforts: television, VCR, pool, telephone, proximity to a multiplex.
"People don't pay attention to their natural environments," said Schweitzer.
"Most people don't even realize when they first come here that the bright colors I've painted the house are all taken from the desert."


New Orleans
With only six weeks to Mardi Gras, New Orleans is anticipating the usual dozens of parades, hundreds of parties and hundreds of thousands of visitors.
Traces of Carnival can be found year-round in museums, souvenir shops and stores that sell ball gowns, scepters, tiaras and such, but the pace picks up Jan. 6, Twelfth Night, when the masked balls begin.
Events escalate through Fat Tuesday, Feb. 15, the day before Ash Wednesday, the beginning of Lent, when hedonism takes a short break.
The main season of 60 parades begins Feb. 4 and ends on Mardi Gras, though in New Orleans there is never any real end to parades, with their trailing second lines, the jumbles of strutters who follow bands, waving umbrellas.


When Worthy Appeals Turn Into Junk Mail
To the Editor:
Year-end appeals from worthy causes nicely match the motivation to make tax-deductible contributions at the end of the year.
But this year I've retained, and finally counted, all the appeals I've received since January from organizations I contributed to this year or in a previous year.


It Was a Good Year for Partying
Memorable events ranged from the inaugural festivities and a grand penthouse benefit to celebrations of cultural institutions and a reception for an African king.


More Consolidators Honor Advertised Fares
The Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York has revisited the topic of air ticket consolidators, which it first researched in the summer of 1992, and found fewer bargains, though the companies appear to be honoring their advertised prices more often.
Consolidators buy batches of tickets from the airlines for less than the airlines' advertised fares and resell them to the public.


Carnival in Europe: Lucerne and Venice
Everyone knows about Carnival in Rio de Janeiro and Mardi Gras in New Orleans, but other pre-Lenten celebrations -- in Lucerne and Venice, for example -- also attract their share of travelers.
In Lucerne, the tradition of Carnival harks back to medieval times, and the costumes, especially the masks, tend toward the hideous to frighten away the devil.
Festivities begin about a week before Ash Wednesday, which this year is Feb. 16.


THE REGRET BUSINESS: MARKETERS TOOL PRODUCTS TO ASSUAGE FEELINGS
As psychologists begin to explore the boundaries of regret, marketers have already begun to exploit the emotion in promotions of products ranging from greeting cards to flowers to automobiles.
Take flowers, for example.
In 1992, the American Floral Marketing Council, a trade group in Alexandria, Va., produced a 15-second television commercial that showed a woman pacing back and forth in her studio, too distracted to work.


Harriet Madoff, Kent Oswald
Harriet Madoff, a daughter of Dr.
Irving and Janice Madoff of Newton, Mass., was married last evening to Gregory Kent Oswald, the son of Marilyn and Peter Oswald of New York.
Rabbi Carl Perkins performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Boston.
The bride graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in Russian studies from Yale University and an M.B.A. from Boston University.
She works in the international institutional sales department of Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross, a New York investment bank.
Her father, a cardiothoracic surgeon in Boston, is an associate clinical professor of surgery at Boston University.


A Flawed Study
To the Sports Editor:
In "Girls' Cross-Country Taking a Heavy Toll, Study Shows," (The Times, Dec. 4), it is a fallacy to rely on the statistical compilations of Dr.
Stephen G. Rice to conclude cross-country "takes a heavy toll."


2 Officers Wounded as Snipers Ring In '94 With 100 Rounds
Two housing police officers were grazed by ricocheting bullet fragments and other officers were exposed to sniper and random gunfire early yesterday as phantom gunmen rang in the New Year with more than 100 shots from the rooftops, windows and grounds of a Bronx housing project.
The gunfire -- from an array of automatic pistols and high-powered rifles and handguns -- began a few minutes after midnight and sprayed the area around the Edenwald Houses on East 229th Street in Eastchester for nearly 30 minutes, said a Housing Authority spokeswoman, Amanita Duga-Carroll.


Amanda Connell, Lars C. Krog
Amanda Maude Connell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Connell of Stamford, Conn., was married on Friday to Lars Christopher Krog, a son of Louis Krog of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Julia Krog.
The Rev.
Michael Moynihan performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Krog, 28, is a receptionist and secretary at Odin Marine Inc., a ship brokerage in Stamford.
She graduated from Marymount College.
Her father, an architect, is a principal in Swanke Hayden Connell Architects in New York.


Norrington's Historical Trek Gathers Fresh Momentum
After decades of apprenticeship with orchestras, opera companies and his own Schutz Choir, the conductor Roger Norrington emerged into the early-music big time in the mid-1980's.
His vehicle was the Experience, a weekend-long immersion in a particular composer or work, consisting of concerts, lectures, chamber music, panel discussions and exhibitions.
These affairs proved enormously popular, but what really propelled Mr.
Norrington to fame was his personality -- alert, intelligent, funny, inquisitive -- and the way those traits came through in his performances.
He certainly represents the post-Toscanini manner in conducting that has defined the late-century early-music movement: he makes music fleetly, dramatically and intensely, with more attention to structural definition than to sensuous subtleties of phrasing.
What separates him from his peers -- Christopher Hogwood, Trevor Pinnock, John Eliot Gardiner -- is his vivacity and charm.


Enter Curtsyin
The International Debutante Ball, the Plaza, Dec. 29.


REALITY LAND
I believe that the Walt Disney Company has a good idea in taking on American history, but not on sacred ground (Sunday: "Reality Land," Dec. 5).
Isn't it disrespectful, intrusive and redundant to build a battlefield on top of a real battlefield that is already a place of awful beauty?
STEVEN HALL Ovid, N.Y.


In My Father's House
Whenever I visit my father in Florida I surprise him.
It means one less flight for him to worry about, and it also gives him a pure rush of joy that he rarely feels in days that can be filled with weather-channel reports, clipping coupons and driving to the convenience store for lottery tickets.
I am always near giddy with the anticipation of his surprise and often have to fight the impulse to let him know in advance that I am coming.
This last trip I could hardly wait to drive up to the small town house he has shared for many years with his girlfriend (something of a ludicrous term, since they are both over 70) in a typical Florida development.
I called him from the airport when I landed, having practiced my lines.
As soon as he picked up the phone I asked, "So what do you want to do today -- do we go to the beach or miniature golfing?"


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen111.80
110.60
123.90
per Dollar
German Mark1.7382
1.6950
1.5997
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3251
1.3255
1.5240
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4760
1.5040
1.2613
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$390.50
$386.00
$333.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Janice H. Alger, W. Mark Linnan
Janice Helen Alger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harrison Alger of Plattsburgh, N.Y., was married Friday to W. Mark Linnan, the son of William M. Linnan Jr. of Albany and Sherry R. Linnan of Latham, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Hardiman performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Albany.


A Bit of France
PIERRE'S * (212) 929-7194; 170 Waverly Place, at Christopher Street; $$; no credit cards


New Titles, New Casts And New Dates
WHEN will the American Shakespeare Theater light up Stratford once more?
Is the Palace in New Haven to be taken over by the Shubert across the street?
Will the dinner theater in Darien -- Club Carousel, it is still being called -- ever put on another show, what with the New Year's Eve Sock Hop out of the way?
These are the unanswered questions -- for now.
The easier ones answered: Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam will open the new season with "Kiss Me, Kate" in April and end it with "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes" in December.
The musical in between -- "1776"? -- remains to be announced.


Crostini With Cheese and Olive Paste for Tasty Party Snacks
WHEN friends drop by over the New Year it would be great to offer them a pound of Beluga caviar with their drinks.
Whole black truffles would be nice, too, wrapped in bacon and aluminum foil and baked in the ashes of an open fire, just as they do in the south of France.
Most of us, alas! don't have quite such a well-stocked larder or the time to prepare platters of elaborate hors d'oeuvres.
I find that hot crostini always go down well with guests, whether they are drinking Cristal rose or a glass of beer.
Crostini (little toasts) are popular in Italy, where stale bread does not automatically find its way into the bird feeder, or worse still, out with the trash.
Instead, day-old bread is often toasted and used as a base for snacks made with various toppings.
I like to combine goat cheese with sun-dried tomatoes and black-olive paste for an easy, last-minute hors d'oeuvre, which is put under the broiler and served hot.
A good Vermont or English cheddar cheese also makes excellent crostini, combined with a dash of mustard.
The clean, tart flavor of green-olive paste (available at specialty stores) complements prosciutto and mozzarella to make crostini that go well with wine.


Chamber Music Group Presents 'Appassionata'
This is the 14th year that Chamber Music Plus has given a Sunday After New Year's Concert, and founders and directors Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann will present works for cello and piano by Strauss and Tchaikovsky starting at 3 P.M. today at the Bushnell Seaverns Room in Hartford.
The plus is the appearance of Mark Lamos, artistic director of the Hartford Stage since 1980, who will serve as narrator in the world premiere of "Appassionata." "Appassionata" is the nickname applied to one of Beethoven's most popular Piano Sonatas, but here it serves to identify Nathan Teitel's dramatic collation of letters between Tchaikovsky, his brother Modeste and his patroness, Madame von Meck.


Melancholy Baby: The Failed 'Red Shoes'
No one was much surprised by the fast fade of "The Red Shoes," Jule Styne's big, beautiful, aimless musical adaptation of the 1948 English film that is considered a classic by some.
Weeks before the Broadway show's delayed opening, the distress signals had gone up.
The original director was replaced, then the leading man.
An additional lyricist came aboard.
As the collaborators worked, the previews threatened to go on forever.
In spite of all the warnings, the speed with which the show folded last month (after 5 performances and 51 previews) left some of us feeling melancholy, maybe a bit guilty.
Almost anything by Mr.
Styne, 88, deserves a less precipitous fate.
America has been dancing, eating, drinking and making love to his music since the dawn of recorded time.
Well, since 1926, when his first hit, "Sunday," was published.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a counseling program in Los Angeles for members of the Fourth Reich Skinheads of Orange County misstated the location of Dachau, one of the concentration camps whose survivors spoke to the young people.
The camp was in Germany, not Poland.


After 31 Years of Failure, Badgers Find the Time Is Right
Here for the first time in 31 years and wondering whether it will take another 31 to get back, the Wisconsin Badgers took their own sweet time to win today.
Ahead by 11 points early in the fourth quarter, they came within 14 yards of losing.
But with 15 seconds left, they treated U.C.L.A quarterback Wayne Cook like a rag doll one more time, and the clock ran out with Cook hollering for his center to snap the ball.
Then, almost every Badger rubbed the bald head of Coach Barry Alvarez, because Wisconsin had its first Rose Bowl victory in school history, 21-16.


Clear Today; Tomorrow, Who Knows?; Congressional Crowd-Pleasers
IT'S a new year and therefore -- admit it and face it bravely -- time to look ahead.
The good news (or maybe not) is that the future may not be quite the yawning void of which Marcus Aurelius wrote.
That's only if the past is indeed prologue.
But it may not be.
It does, however, allow some educated guesses at what's coming.
Herewith a handful:


A la Carte; A '93 Selection of Good Food at Reasonable Prices
LUXURIOUS dining is not difficult to find on Long Island.
Virtually every town in Nassau and Suffolk has its share of upscale special-occasion restaurants that offer elegant surroundings and excellent food at substantial prices.
But frugal diners seeking exceptional food face a more difficult task.
The increasingly high cost of living on the Island makes low-cost high-quality eating places with gifted chefs a rarity.
Yet, a few new bargain spots open every year, and a smattering of others continue to persevere.


INSIDE
Doubts in Crown Hts. Case
After a second suspect was identified in the 1991 killing of a Hasidic scholar in Brooklyn, doubts have arisen about the reliability of a witness who gave a new account of the killing.
Page 21.
Florida State, Just Barely
The Seminoles edged Nebraska, 18-16, in the Orange Bowl battle for No. 1.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the game ended.
Clinton's Persistent Critic
While claiming he is Bill Clinton's friend, Cliff Jackson keeps spreading damaging stories about him.
Page 16.


Batting Cleanup Against the Owners for the 19th Time: Salary Arbitration
Look out, here it comes again.
Even as the baseball owners were welcoming in the new year, the drinks in their hands were losing their taste and the owners themselves were losing their appetites.
For how can they even think about having a happy new year when they know that a few days after the new year begins, players can begin filing for salary arbitration.


Hey, Rusty Wallace and Roger Penske, Have You Driven a Ford Lately?
If you want to pinpoint the allegiance of stock-car fans, the standards of longitude and latitude are easy.
First, ask whether they love or hate Dale Earnhardt.
Then, determine whether they are Ford or Chevy fans.
The Earnhardt polarity is understandable.
His intimidating driving style has been compared to the Oakland version of Raider football.


IN SHORT: FICTION
GROWING UP IN TRINIDAD SECRETS By Kelvin Christopher James. Villard, $20.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: G. Michael Brown; Planning Ahead at the Foxwoods Casino
INDIAN gaming enterprises started 14 years ago with a bingo hall on a Florida reservation and have expanded to 68 casinos and 170 high-stakes bingo games in 24 states today, with more in the planning stages.
About half of the nation's 318 federally recognized tribes are attempting to open gaming halls.
The most successful Indian casino in the nation is Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo &amp; Casino on the Mashantucket Pequot Indian reservation off Route 2 in Ledyard, with an estimated net operating profit of more than $20 million a month.
G.
Michael Brown, 51, is the chief executive officer of Foxwoods.
Mr.
Brown, a graduate of Seton Hall Law School, was an assistant prosecutor in Essex County, N.J., worked in the New Jersey Attorney General's office and in 1979, when New Jersey legalized casinos, he was appointed the director of gaming enforcement.
He started an Atlantic City law firm in 1982, Brown and Michael, which specializes in gambling regulation.


U.S. OPPOSES MOVE TO RAPIDLY EXPAND NATO MEMBERSHIP
The Clinton Administration plans to stick to a go-slow approach on expanding NATO membership to Eastern European countries despite sharp divisions among American officials and mounting protests from Eastern European leaders, Administration officials say.
Less than two weeks before a NATO summit meeting in Brussels, all sides acknowledge that the decision on whether to let nations like Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary into NATO is one of the most important in the history of the alliance.


Anne Berman, Alan Schnitzer
Anne Rose Berman, the daughter of Martha Lasky Berman of New York and the late Philip Berman, was married last evening to Alan David Schnitzer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ben Schnitzer of Dallas.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Schnitzer, 27, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband.
She is a candidate for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University, where her husband received a law degree.


Pamela Tanager, Timothy Barton
Pamela Elisa Tanager, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Shiff of New York, was married on Monday to Timothy Kevin Barton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Barton of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph H. Gilmore performed the ceremony at the South Presbyterian Church in Dobbs Ferry.
The bride is a second-year medical student at New York Medical College.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is the president of the Limited Editions Club, a publishing company in New York.


School Faction Seeks to Oust Supervisor
A local school board recently invigorated by three new members is trying for something of a clean sweep in the district that covers parts of Bensonhurst, voting to seek a replacement for its popular veteran superintendent, Ralph A. Fabrizio.
At a tumultuous Dec. 20 meeting, the board voted 4 to 1, with three absences and one abstention, to spend $6,000 to advertise for a replacement for Mr.
Fabrizio, who has held the job for seven years.
The board also voted to allow Mr.
Fabrizio, whose contract expires on June 30, to reapply for the $110,000-a-year job.


The Holiday Is a Working Day for the New Mayor


Dec. 26-31: New Blood Test; Another Weapon Against Colon Cancer
Colon cancer is the second most common fatal malignancy, after lung cancer, but if a recent series of discoveries is any indication, it may be the first tumor to bow before the much-vaunted might of the biomedical revolution.
Last week, in the New England Journal of Medicine, scientists from the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine announced a new blood test to detect those at risk for one unusual type of colon cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis.
The test will allow those in high-risk families to know whether they carry the gene for the disease, allowing them to heighten their vigilance against the appearance of polyps, the precursors of cancer.


You Saw the Premier. Now Catch the Obituary
SO WHAT DID YOU THINK OF "South of Sunset"?
How did you like the Faye Dunaway sitcom?
How many new series came and went this fall without your getting even a glimpse?
And according to Variety, this began as a particularly stable season.
Networks were supposedly being more patient, giving new shows time to build an audience, as other slow starters did before them ("Cheers," which had miserable ratings for its first two years, is the favored example).
In 1992, at least nine new series had been shut down when the November sweeps period began; at the same point in 1993, only CBS had canceled any new shows at all.


TODAY IN The City
GIVING TIME AND TALENT  Out of anger, loneliness, gratitude or guilt, a growing number of New Yorkers are becoming volunteers.
Five stories.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT  Remembering the Coach House, a Village landmark; the economic ecology of Jamaica.
Pages 5 to 7.


Clear Today; Tomorrow, Who Knows?; Hollywood, the Sequel
IT'S a new year and therefore -- admit it and face it bravely -- time to look ahead.
The good news (or maybe not) is that the future may not be quite the yawning void of which Marcus Aurelius wrote.
That's only if the past is indeed prologue.
But it may not be.
It does, however, allow some educated guesses at what's coming.
Herewith a handful:


Corrections
A profile of Anthony Hopkins on Dec. 19 misstated the date of his latest acting appearance in New York.
He starred in the Roundabout Theater Company's production of "Old Times" by Harold Pinter in 1984.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Friendly Poet 'Slams'
IMAGINE Robert Frost and Walt Whitman'scompeting on "The Gong Show." That's kind of what's happening in Huntington.
Poetry slams have reached Long Island.
"They pit you against the other guy," a poet, John Heaviside, said.
"It's like the W.W.F. of poetry."


Michael S. Davis, Barbara L. Myers
Barbara Lynn Myers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sumner Myers of Washington, was married on Friday to Michael Sean Davis, a son of Drs.
Harold and Eleanor Davis of New York.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Ms.
Myers, 29, is a Ph.D. candidate in art history at Princeton University, where she is a Jacob Javits Fellow.
She graduated from Brown University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in art history from Williams College.
Her father is a telecommunications consultant in Washington.
Her mother, Phyllis Myers, is an environmental policy adviser for State Resource Strategies, a consulting company in Washington.


Rachel Peterson, Daniel E. Wolf
Rachel Lynn Peterson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Peterson of Colorado Springs, was married there last evening to Daniel Elias Wolf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Wolf of Trumbull, Conn.
The Rev.
Dayle Casey, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Gerald Kaplan officiated at the Broadmoor Hotel.


Fiscal Weapon To Fight Decay
White Plains Road in Pelham Parkway has changed very little in a generation, a modest cluster of pizza parlors, boutiques, a kosher deli and newsstands that has retained its neighborly character even as other sections of the borough have declined.
In an effort to retain that flavor, a group of landlords and merchants are seeking to establish a business improvement district -- one of those tools of self-reliance that neighborhoods throughout New York City have used to insure, among other things, safer and cleaner streets.


'Eat, Drink and Be Merry' May Be the Next Trend
There is a distinct possibility that this weekend's renditions of "Auld Lang Syne" evoked old acquaintances like cigarettes, caffeine and fatty foods for revelers across the land.
Rather than pledging to be perfect and subjecting themselves to an abstemious, healthful, aerobicized life in 1994, more people seem to be indulging in the sybaritic, choosing the massage table over the Stairmaster.
This "pleasure revenge," as one trend-watcher calls it, has been making a slight but steady gain in the last several months, as noted by everyone from pollsters and marketers to nutrition experts and health-club executives.
Moreover, this gain is most apparent among the affluent, well-educated population that has been at the core of the health and fitness craze.


Lawyers, Class Actions and Fees
To the Editor:
I do not know Mr.
Beigel, and accordingly I do not comment on his methods or results or your characterizations of them.
There is, however, another side to the class-action debate.


'Reducing Nuclear Danger'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Reducing Nuclear Danger," by McGeorge Bundy, William J. Crowe Jr. and me (Nov. 28), Len Ackland incorrectly stated that I have retreated from an earlier position on continuing underground nuclear tests.
This issue and his comment highlight a problem faced by scientific advisers to the Government.


WNCN Met The Enemy. Guess Who?
"We play the music you don't mind hearing" is the slogan Peter Schickele (a k a P. D. Q. Bach) dreamed up for his imaginary classical radio station, WTWP (Wall to Wall Pachelbel).
No selection could be more than 11 minutes long.
No vocal music during office hours.
No music composed after 1912 except for works like "Bolero." And every composition played before 11 P.M. had to be in a major key.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Schickele's manifesto was pretty close to the policy of WNCN in New York before the plug was pulled on its "classical" format two weeks ago.


Giving Gifts Of Talent And Time
PAT TATE, stately and steady as a ship, is a marketing specialist at a midtown Manhattan corporate giant; Nicole Gaffney is a top-knotted sixth-grader who bounces back and forth and up and down like a Super Ball, from chair to table to floor and back again.
Once a week their orbits cross over Nicole's homework in the lunchroom of Public School 198 on the Upper East Side.
Richard Milewski, a son of middle-class Queens who lost his home to heroin, toils six or seven hours a day, serving lunch and washing dishes at a soup kitchen in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.


Alexander H. Girard Dies at 86; Architect and Interior Designer
Alexander H. Girard, an architect, interior designer and authority on folk art, died on Friday at his home in Santa Fe, N.M.
He was 86.
The cause was the complications of Alzheimer's disease, said his son, Marshall C. Girard.


SUNDAY, January 2, 1994; Catch-23
The question of insanity and the military is a tricky one.
Theoretically, if you're nuts, the armed forces won't let you in.
On the other hand writers and film makers and mothers and physicians and other fringe groups have always tried to make out that war itself is insane, along with more than a few of its practitioners.
It all depends on your point of view.
Witness the recent case of Charles Harrison, a patient in a psychiatric hospital who published an article in Military Review warning of the dangers of hand-held nuclear weapons. (Harrison was placed in the hospital after he shot and killed his mother in 1984 and was found not guilty by reason of insanity.)


Housing Plan For Homeless Drawing Fire
Some residents of Red Hook, Cobble Hill and Carroll Gardens are trying to prevent the construction of 56 units of permanent housing for mentally ill homeless people, saying they were misled about the size of the project.
The plan, submitted to Community Board 6 in 1991, was expanded from 21 units without notification, said Joel Breitkopf, president of Tiffany Place Association, which led a successful fight last month to delay the transformation of a luxury condominium complex into low- and moderate-income housing.


Recompense Being Sought For Massacre
Seventy-one years ago, a white mob went on a weeklong rampage in the mostly black town of Rosewood, Fla., killing at least eight people and burning down every church, business and black-inhabited home.
Local officials looked the other way, and the surviving residents scattered, keeping silent about the massacre for fear that they, too, would be killed.
The destruction of Rosewood, once a town of several hundred people in Levy County near the Gulf Coast, faded from public memory, gaining barely a mention in textbooks of state history.
But now two state legislators say it is time for Florida to compensate the survivors.


After a Boring 1993, Let's Hope For a Repeat
THIS bull market is the dullest in a generation.
While major stock indexes were setting records as 1993 ended, the really amazing fact was just how little action there had been.
Had you bought the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 at its lowest close of last year, and sold it at the high reached last week, you would have made a profit of 9.8 percent.
Never in the previous six decades of the S.&amp;P. had the swing from annual bottom to top been so flat.
But that low volatility should not have come as a shock.
The old record for smallest annual swing was set in 1992, at 11.9 percent.


Sound Bytes; Bringing the 'How To' Book Into the Interactive Age
Stuart Gannes covered Silicon Valley for Fortune magazine, and served as a strategic analyst for MIPS Computer Systems before succumbing to the entrepreneurial bug in 1992.
That's when, with Dan Levin, another ex-MIPSer, he co-founded the Books That Work Corporation.
The company publishes interactive multimedia software that brings the power of the personal computer to the evergreen genre of "how to" books.
Books That Work, based in Palo Alto, Calif., drew critical acclaim last April when it released "Design &amp; Build Your Deck," the first title in its home-improvement series, which runs on personal computers using the Microsoft Windows operating system.
The deck program allows a user to design a deck on screen and then print out detailed drawings, complete with all the necessary underpinnings and support, and a shopping list of necessary tools and supplies.
With 15 employees and investments from the venture-capital firms Hummer Winblad, Accel Partners and Mohr, Davidow, Mr.
Gannes's company plans a series of titles for the techno-literate do-it-yourselfer.


Exceptional Warfare
To the Editor:
In his insightful review of John Keegan's "History of Warfare" (Nov. 14), Sir Michael Howard makes a point that is subject to at least one significant exception.


The Old Arabia
To the Editor: I read with great delight your article on Yemen, "A Narrow Road to the Old Arabia" (Nov. 7).
While you made mention of the Yemenis on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, you did not mention the huge Jewish Yemeni community in Borough Park.
Jewish and Muslim Yemenis have excellent relations, and Jewish Yemenis go back and forth to Yemen.


After 44 Years and 4 Proud Stars, Dinner Is Over at the Coach House
When the 44-year-old Coach House, at 110 Waverly Place, closed officially just before Christmas, the Village, indeed the city, lost a culinary icon.
From the early 1950's to the early 1970's, those gastronomically ingenuous days when goat cheese was unheard of and radicchio could have been mistaken for a virulent form of crab grass, the Coach House epitomized the pinnacle of sophisticated dining.
Housed in a 19th-century coach house just off Washington Square, on what was once the estate of the Wanamaker family, the restaurant was created in 1949 by Leon Lianides, a meticulous and genteel man who had a hand in every aspect of the business, from menu planning to wine selection and decor.
The 76-year-old Mr.
Lianides, who has been in failing health in recent years, never reopened the restaurant after closing for vacation last summer.


World Markets; A New Leaf for Japan's Mutual Funds?
MUTUAL funds are supposed to take some of the hard work and anxiety -- out of stock purchases.
But consider the plight of the Japanese investor.
Japanese funds, which are known as investment trusts, generally do not state clearly their investment philosophies, and they do not provide breakdowns of their investments or the specific securities owned.
They rarely identify fund managers.
If that seems odd, consider this: the investment trusts do not even permit investors shopping for the right fund to compare past performances.


Bookshelf
THE ACCIDENTAL ZUCCHINI.
An Unexpected Alphabet.
Written and illustrated by Max Grover.
Browndeer Press/Harcourt Brace. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 8) There are apple autos, letter ladders, octopus overalls and of course that zucchini in this exuberant, lushly illustrated compilation.
RHINO.
By Sheila Solomon Klass.
Scholastic. $13.95. (Ages 10 and up) The subject of the novel isn't really rhinoplasty -- it's about how Annie Trevor feels about herself.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Newtown; Big Town With a Small-Town Ambiance
FROM its incorporation in 1711 until the 1930's, Newtown's population, mostly farmers and artisans, never went past 3,000.
Cotton mill and Goodyear rubber factory workers swelled the ranks in the 19th century and a trickle of commuters and affluent professionals followed in the 1900's.
During the postwar exodus to the suburbs Newtown remained a quiet outpost on the northeastern border of Fairfield County, too remote for the hordes of city folk who settled into southern Fairfield's bountiful array of new subdivisions.
But that was before the cost of living in lower Fairfield County zoomed and traveling a bit farther to work became less onerous if the right house could be found at the right price.


Celebrating New Flowers in a New Year
A FEW outstanding flowers have been announced for the New Year.
They will be worth watching for as the seed and nursery catalogues start arriving in the next few weeks.
The newcomers that every gardener usually watches for are the All-America Selections.
These prize winners are the grow-from-seed plants that have gone through two years of testing nationwide.
Judges compare them with flowers already in commerce to see if they are better.
Only the finest grow-from-seed plants make the awards list.


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Dec. 5, about London, misstated the average cost of a meal for two with house wine at the Neal Street Restaurant.
It is $135 to $150, not $82, calculated at $1.50 to the pound.


County Is Pursuing Airport Access Plans
In a letter to the editor  [ "Why Can't Buses Serve County Airport?" Nov. 21 ] , several issues were raised regarding mass transit service to the Westchester County Airport.
The writer pointed out that Bee-Line route No. 12 serves the airport but does not go to the terminal.
This is due to roadway conditions, which make it impossible to operate a 35- or 40-foot bus on the interior roadways.
New terminal roadways under construction have been designed to accommodate large buses and will have a special bus lane.


Acquaintances Draw Complex Portrait of Family in Fatal Bombings
Bob Cooper vividly remembers how pictures "flew off the wall" when six sticks of shrapnel-enshrouded dynamite exploded on Tuesday afternoon two doors away in his apartment complex, how debris was scattered into the courtyard and how plaster dust hung thick in the air when he and a neighbor shouldered through the ruined door at No. 55 Snug Harbor Court.
What Mr.
Cooper is beginning to glimpse only now are the largely unknown lives of the people who had lived behind those walls at No. 55, Pamela Lazore Lanza and Richard Urban.
Ms.
Lanza, 32, and Mr.
Urban, 42, were among the five people -- mostly members of her family -- killed on Tuesday by a series of powerful package bombs.


Wall Street; A Tangled Web Called Box Energy
IF politics makes strange bedfellows, then investing in oil and gas companies can't be far behind.
Consider this grouping: a First Lady, an Idaho billionaire, two Heisman Trophy winners and a former beauty queen, all connected to a small Texas oil and gas company founded by a former professional football player.
The company is the Box Energy Corporation, founded by Cloyce K. Box, who played for the Detroit Lions.
Because of a decision in December in a lawsuit filed six years ago by dissident shareholders led by J. R. Simplot, the Idaho billionaire, and Mr.
Box's unexpected death in October at age 70, some analysts speculate that the company may be ripe for a takeover.
In fact, in the final 75 minutes of trading Friday, Box Energy's thinly traded -- and super-voting -- class A shares jumped $5.50 each, to a new high of $26, almost three times the year's low of $9.


SUNDAY, January 2, 1994; World's Dumbest Dog?
"The Intelligence of Dogs," by Stanley Coren, due out this spring from the Free Press, ranks 79 breeds in terms of their working intelligence.
Coming in dead last, but with great hair: the Afghan hound.


Among the Dying Species Are Lost Tribes of Mankind
NINETEEN NINETY-THREE was supposed to be the International Year of the World's Indigenous People.
But as it drew to a close, the vulnerabilities of aboriginal people remained as serious as ever.
They hold on desperately to ancestral lands now coveted by others.
They do not fit in, as the dominant others would say, and see no reason why they should, for which they are paying a dreadful price.
Some are being massacred and terrorized.
Many are being forced off their lands, scattered into cities and to economically and culturally impoverished lives for which they have little taste and no preparation.
These people are the endangered of the human species, survivors whose continued survival is very much in doubt.


The Talents of Southern 'Outsiders'
THE man on the stairs in the Hunterdon Art Center here is actually a herm -- that is, the bust of a man on a pillar, like those used by the Greeks as milestones.
Then again, the image, which is reproduced on this page, is not really a herm either, for it is made of wood rather than stone, and instead of a mile it stands for a deeply qualified superlative.
As defined in its news release, the show "Outsider Art by Southern Folks," of which he is a part, is New Jersey's first comprehensive review of contemporary outsider (a k a folk) art from the South.


Zoroastrians Celebrate Dark Before the Dawn
To the Editor:
Re "The Longest Night" (editorial, Dec. 22): As a Ph.D. student of Near Eastern languages and literature at New York University, and of Afghan origin, I was happy to see that the winter solstice did not pass unnoticed by you.
In Zoroastrian ritual the first night of winter is celebrated as a special occasion.


One From Column A . . .
To the Editor:
I have been watching with interest the arrangement of books on your best-seller list each week, and I have arrived at the conclusion that the lists are based not on sales but on a whimsical alignment of fiction and nonfiction titles, the No. 1 nonfiction title serving as a subtitle for the No. 1 fiction book, and so on.
See, for example, some of the pairings below from the Dec. 5 issue:


The Mantra on the Pro Links Is Scores, Sponsors and Dollars
After a year in which scores were lower and stakes higher than any season in history, the major question for professional golf in 1994 is twofold: Can scores continue to drop and purses continue to rise?
The answer just might be yes, on both counts.


In Defense of an Old Warrior
RECONCILIATION ROAD A Family Odyssey of War and Honor.
By John Douglas Marshall.
Illustrated. 296 pp.
Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.


A Once-Banner Season for Dolphins Sinks to One Desperate Game
It wasn't that long ago the Miami Dolphins were planning on a Super Bowl appearance to put an exclamation point on a season in which Don Shula became the league's winningest coach.
Now, they're hanging on just to qualify for the playoffs.
Once sporting the National Football League's best record at 9-2, the Dolphins reel into New England on Sunday with a four-game losing streak.
Miami almost certainly needs a victory in Foxboro, Mass., to eke into the playoffs as a wild-card entry.
A loss -- and the Patriots have won three in a row and allowed only 21 points over their last four home games -- opens the door for the Jets or the Steelers to qualify.


An Experiment In Housing the Homeless


Hong Kong? Chinatown? A Taste of Both
GOING to the Golden City Chinese restaurant in Selden is like a trip to Chinatown.
Large families of Chinese, from toddlers to grandparents, cluster at round tables, enjoying authentic banquet dishes that arrive one at a time.
On a busy Saturday night, there were just two tables of non-Asians.
The shopping-center storefront shatters the sameness of Long Island Chinese restaurants.
From Smithtown to Cedarhurst menus are practically interchangeable.
Meals begin with bowls of crispy noodles and end with bowls of ice cream.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 5 about the painter Howard Hodgkin misstated his relationship to Thomas Hodgkin, the man who identified Hodgkin's disease.
Thomas Hodgkin was the painter's great-great-great-uncle, not his great-grandfather.
The article also misstated the name of one of Howard Hodgkin's sons.
It is Sam, not Samuel.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
To Lure Regular Patrons, Brewery Offers an M.B.A.
Manhattan Brewing Company is offering an M.B.A. degree, a Master of Beer Appreciation, and 400 people have signed up for the program.
The microbrewery-cum-restaurant in SoHo charges registrants $20, and they must take three of four classes, covering the history of beer and how it is brewed.
One class is a tasting of 15 varieties of the company's beers; it brews and sells 25 to 28 barrels of beer a week.


New Year's Day a Time for Remembering in Sarajevo


Penn State Pulls a Role Reversal
Tennessee had too much speed, too many offensive skills for Penn State.
Almost all the sages said that, including the coach of the Nittany Lions, Joe Paterno.
They were all wrong, including Paterno.
His team ran away from the Volunteers, 31-13, in the Citrus Bowl here today before a record crowd of 72,456.
It was a victory few anticipated, a rout none expected.


The County Airport Needs Mass Transit
I served on the New York Department of Transportation subcommittee that studied the option of a light-rail transit or monorail option to the congestion on the I-287 corridor.
Though the original report recommended high-occupancy-vehicle lanes (for car pooling) as a solution, I filed a minority report recommending a light-rail transit system.
I mention this since one of the options of the light-rail transit system was a branch to Westchester County Airport.
A Westchester County official who evaluated this option said that they didn't want any mass transit system serving the Westchester County Airport.


The Dynamic New China Still Races Against Time
THERE is not an adjective that soars high enough or detonates with enough force to describe China's economic explosion or the promise of its future.
One-fifth of humanity, for decades locked in the dungeon of Mao Zedong's proletarian revolution, where they were whipped and exhausted by meaningless mass movements, are now fully unleashed in an epic pursuit of material wealth.
Coming off two years of 13 percent economic growth, China's is the fastest-growing economy in the world.
And in the last 12 months, capitalists from more than 40 countries have signed contracts worth $100 billion to build new industries and open new markets .


'A Magical Moment'
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay "How to Play Chopin? Cortot Had Answers"  [ Dec. 12 ] , in which he cited Alfred Cortot as one of this century's last Chopinists, brings back a fond memory.


Small Steps to a Greater New York; Awards for Courage
New Yorkers argue about everything.
But as the campaign for City Hall showed, they don't disagree that the quality of life here has declined.
With Rudolph W. Giuliani installed as Mayor, how can the social climate be improved?
The Op-Ed page invited recommendations and proposals.
What this city needs most is freedom from the idea that democracy is nothing more than special-interest groups moving toward positions of power.
Morale is the real medicine -- the spiritual fuel that will enable us to take on challenges together.


Hopes for '94: Faster Rebound Than in '93
REPORTS of renewed vigor in some sectors of Westchester's economy notwithstanding, bottom-line figures showed that the county during 1993 lagged behind other sections of the New York City area in rebounding from the recession.
The slowness in Westchester was due mainly to "the continuing saga of large corporations laying off workers in efforts to downsize," said Noreen L. Preston, an economist with the County Department of Commerce and Economic Development.
The corporate restructurings -- by I.B.M., Nynex and Reader's Digest, among others -- counteracted job gains realized by other small and medium-size companies, she said.
Weaker Labor Force Participation


Kings and Emperors Passed This Way
MOTORISTS driving on Italy's National Highway 12 near the Austrian border see a big sign on the northern outskirts of Bressanone-Brixen with the outline of an elephant and an arrow.
It points the way to the Elefant Hotel, named after one of the town's most famous visitors.
In December of 1550, an Indian elephant was trudging up to the 4,495-foot-high Brenner Pass, 27 miles to the north.
The animal was a gift from King John III, the Fortunate, of Portugal to Emperor Ferdinand I; it had been shipped from Goa, then a Portuguese colony, to Genoa, and was being driven through the mountains in the same way Hannibal's African elephants crossed another section of the Alps nearly 1,800 years earlier.
In Bressanone-Brixen the pachyderm's handlers let it rest for two weeks in the barn of the High Field Inn, causing a local sensation.
The inn's owner, the postmaster, Andra Posch, at once changed the name of his business to Inn at the Sign of the Elephant and commissioned a local painter, Lenhard Mair, to commemorate the event.
The fresco portraying the animal and its escort of turbaned Indians can still be seen on the street facade of the hotel's old wing. (The stoic elephant did make it to the imperial court in Vienna by late 1551, and would live another few years.)


Exotic Foreign Markets: Try Living With Them
To the Editor:
In "To Markets! To Markets!" on Nov. 28, Constance L. Hays glorifies a number of neighborhoods as wonderfully enriched by the flow of immigrants.
But as a veteran resident of Jackson Heights -- the location of her Little India and Little Colombia segments -- I find the article out of touch with the reality of daily existence.


F.Y.I.
That Subway Sway Q.  Why are the metal "straps" in buses and subways designed to swing?


Hint of Progress, and Warning, From North Korea
North Korea's paramount leader, Kim Il Sung, said today that his country had agreed to a "joint statement" with the United States, paving the way for the nuclear dispute between them to be "settled fairly," but warned that any effort to pressure his country into broader concessions "may invite catastrophe."
Mr.
Kim's declaration came in a lengthy New Year's address that also laid out a radical new strategy for rescuing North Korea's crippled economy.
It did not describe the agreement with the United States in any detail, but a later announcement by North Korea's Foreign Ministry suggested that international inspectors would only be permitted into the country's seven declared nuclear sites for one-time inspections.
The announcement said that North Korea refused to allow the kind of regular visits by the International Atomic Energy Agency that are required under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


In the Other Miami Bowl, The Eagles Break Away
In a football game held on the same day and in the same city as the Orange Bowl, the Carquest Bowl today had the distinct look of an orphan.
Although more than 47,000 tickets were sold for the game at Joe Robbie Stadium, only 38,516 fans showed up to watch 15th-ranked Boston College repel pesky Virginia, 31-13.


Vote Buoys Term-Limit Campaign
SPURRED by the recent success of a referendum in New York City to limit some elected officials' terms in office, former Bronxville Mayor Marcia M. Lee recently initiated a campaign to seek the same for Westchester.
Dr.
Lee, who holds a doctor of philosophy degree in political science and was Bronxville's mayor from 1977-80, has formed a nonprofit corporation called Term Limits for Westchester.
The organization's board of directors is lobbying for a ballot referendum next November to limit the terms of county legislators and the county executive.
The proposal, if passed, would limit the county executive to two four-year terms and the legislators to five two-year terms.


Clear Today; Tomorrow, Who Knows?; International Wish List
IT'S a new year and therefore -- admit it and face it bravely -- time to look ahead.
The good news (or maybe not) is that the future may not be quite the yawning void of which Marcus Aurelius wrote.
That's only if the past is indeed prologue.
But it may not be.
It does, however, allow some educated guesses at what's coming.
Herewith a handful:


Corrections
An article on Dec. 19 about jazz reissues by European record companies omitted the name of the American distributor of the Paris-based Classics label.
It is Qualiton Imports of Long Island City, Queens.


A Lost Weekend Of a Different Nature
THE production of a play and its script should meld together in a seamless unit.
Occasionally, as is the case with "Weekend Comedy," at the Bayway Arts Center in East Islip through Jan. 16, the production and the script are such separate entities that being in the audience is almost like seeing two shows for the price of one.
The production, capably directed by David Dubin, is first rate.
The acting, directing and set and lighting designs are as slick and professional as possible.


Ms. Kenny, Mr. Middlemiss
Lynn Marie Kenny, the daughter of Roger and Carole Kenny of Rye, N.Y., was married Friday to Arthur DeWitt Middlemiss, a son of Louise Middlemiss of Millbrook, N.Y., and the late George Middlemiss.
Msgr.
Thomas Hartman performed the ceremony at the O'Byrne Chapel on the campus of Manhattanville College in Purchase, N.Y.
The Rev.
William Boak, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Middlemiss, 24, is the head of the English department at the Burdett School, a business school in Boston.
She graduated from Lafayette College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in the teaching of English from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in Kenny, Kindler, Hunt &amp; Howe and in Boardroom Consultants, executive-search consulting firms in New York.


Sharon Shafer, Eric A. Spungen
Sharon Lynn Shafer, the daughter of Alan and Marsha Shafer of Wyckoff, N.J., was married last evening to Eric Allen Spungen, the son of Stanley and Tamra Spungen of Grand Rapids, Mich.
Rabbi Nancy H. Wiener performed the ceremony at Le Parker Meridien Hotel in New York.


Recapturing the Elegance of a 19th-Century Park
In 1851, a triangular park with a marble fountain, gardens, graceful lampposts and a broad pedestrian walk was laid out in front of the new Brooklyn Borough Hall, swiftly becoming a favored promenade and meeting place.
Eventually, though, the park lost its shape, its fountain and its elegance.
But now, after several years of construction, the park is to reopen with its past recaptured.


No Headline
"People ate their bran muffins for five years, and nothing changed. They didn't lose weight, they still got fired and they're still unhappy. WENDY KAMINER, author of "I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional."  [ 14:1. ]


Devonee Loretta and Mitchell Banchik
WHEN Mitchell Banchik, 32, was a student at New York University, he was a member of the Psi Upsilon fraternity.
His friends say that he has tried to relive and re-create his fraternity days ever since.
About two years ago, he opened Down the Hatch, a bar that could take anyone back to college days.
In the basement of a historic town house in Greenwich Village, Down the Hatch has inexpensive beer, football games on the television and Christmas lights strung everywhere all year long.
Mr.
Banchik also recently opened Mo's, a Caribbean restaurant on the Upper East Side that has the ambiance of spring break in the islands.


Valerie Schwarz, C. M. Mason
Valerie Ann Schwarz and Christopher May Mason, partners in New York law firms, were married on Friday in New York.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 34, is a partner in Windels, Marx, Davies &amp; Ives.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, and she and her husband received law degrees from Duke University.
She is a daughter of Palma and Charles Schwarz of Astoria, Queens.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Raising a Roof (And Tempers) Along 91st St.
For many years, the squat red-brick building at 314 West 91st Street was home to members of the Sullivan Institute for Research in Psychoanalysis.
The Sullivanians, under the leadership of Saul B. Newton, were regarded by many in the psychoanalytic community and elsewhere as a cult; they separated children from their parents and were accused of pressuring members to have multiple sexual partners.
So when a local Jewish day school bought the building after Mr.
Newton's death in 1991, the school's officials thought they would be welcomed by their neighbors.


Assembling the Team
The Mayor has put together an administration with seasoned hands and friends and allies.
Chart, page 22.


Dec. 26-31: Policing the Police; Report Says Police Tolerate Corruption.
It was a grim group snapshot of the nation's largest municipal police force.
After 18 months of investigations and analysis, a mayoral panel last week portrayed the New York City Police Department as closing its collective eyes to mounting corruption problems.
In a scathing interim report, the panel, called the Mollen Commission, after its chairman, Milton Mollen, said a prevailing "police culture" tolerated and fostered graft, misconduct and brutality.
Although sparse with details, the commission said "a deep-rooted reluctance to uncover corruption" existed at all levels of the 30,000-member force.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MURDER IN MISSISSIPPI WOLF WHISTLE By Lewis Nordan. Algonquin, $16.95.


Campaign in Bahamas Forces Haitians to Flee for the U.S.
Afraid the country will be overwhelmed by a growing population of Haitian immigrants and refugees, the Government of the Bahamas has instituted tough new policies that have led many Haitians to abandon this nation and flee to the United States.
As part of the campaign, the Bahamian military and police have arrested Haitians in raids on their homes, workplaces and churches.
And local governments have demolished homes in some Haitian settlements.
At the same time, the Bahamian Government has made it harder for Haitians to obtain the work permits or permanent residency papers that make their presence here legal, raising fees for the documents to levels few Haitians can afford and thereby making them vulnerable to deportation.


It's Grand Slam Season, So Who's Ready?
The tennis treadmill proved kind to just a few top players in 1993 and horrific for several others, but with 1994's first Grand Slam tournament, the Australian Open, only two weeks away, it's already time to lace up the sneakers and start chasing the record $90 million in prize money the circuits are offering.
Is anybody ready?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CRITICISM  CULTURE OR TRASH?
A Provocative View  of Contemporary Painting, Sculpture,  and Other Costly Commodities.
By James Gardner.
Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $19.95.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Dr.
Alvin A. Rosenfeld of Stamford referred incompletely to his affiliation with the Jewish Child Care Association.
He is head of its psychiatry department.


CLINTON OUTLINES DOMESTIC AGENDA
President Clinton today outlined an ambitious agenda for the new near, saying he and his Administration were determined to take new steps to make Americans more secure.
In his weekly radio address, Mr.
Clinton spoke of his commitment to guaranteed health care, safer streets and a stronger economy.
His list of resolutions was notable for making no mention of foreign policy.


Small Steps to a Greater New York; Relief a Minute Away
New Yorkers argue about everything.
But as the campaign for City Hall showed, they don't disagree that the quality of life here has declined.
With Rudolph W. Giuliani installed as Mayor, how can the social climate be improved?
The Op-Ed page invited recommendations and proposals.
New York needs more public bathrooms.
They don't let you go in restaurants.
You have to hold it in until you almost die.
You're suffering.
You're sweating.
You're thinking about mortality.
All lofty thoughts are gone.
You think, "All I want, God, is . . ."


Legal System and Protection
DAVID THALER, Director of Adult Protective Services in Nassau County, said his agency would be working with the Nassau County Coalition Against Domestic Violence to produce videos, hold seminars and increase publicity about abuse of the elderly.
Doctors and lawyers, too, are being trained.
"We have to educate doctors all the time," said Carol Pichney, supervisor of the guardianship-court liaison unit of the Suffolk County Social Services Department.
"Doctors used to write that a person was incompetent without investigating further. A brand-new guardianship law went into effect in April 1993 which states that no one in New York State can ever be declared incompetent again. Doctors didn't seem to understand the legal implication, because when we take a case to court we have to have a doctor's statement.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-9  U.S.
CAUTIOUS ON NATO GROWTH  The United States will maintain a go-slow approach on whether to expand the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to include Eastern European countries, feeling that the decision may well be a critical one.  1  JAPAN'S COMMUTING CRUNCH  The reality of daily life for Japan's workers is a long and uncomfortable commute, and that has soured the good news of the country's prosperity for many Japanese.  1


As the Boat Show Prepares to Open, the Forecast Calls for Blue Skies and Sunshine
It has been a hard sell the last few years persuading cash-strapped consumers to spend money on boats.
But the recession that struck the marine industry in 1989 appears to be lifting, a long-awaited sign for exhibitors at the annual New York National Boat Show.
In its 84th year this season, the nine-day show is scheduled to begin Saturday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan.
This Friday, a preview is open to anyone willing to spend $20 rather than the usual $8 for a ticket.
More than 850 boats will be on display, from 50-foot motor yachts to small sailing dinghies, as well as electronic gear and boating accessories.


Crostini With Cheese and Olive Paste for Tasty Party Snacks
WHEN friends drop by over the New Year it would be great to offer them a pound of Beluga caviar with their drinks.
Whole black truffles would be nice, too, wrapped in bacon and aluminum foil and baked in the ashes of an open fire, just as they do in the south of France.
Most of us, alas! don't have quite such a well-stocked larder or the time to prepare platters of elaborate hors d'oeuvres.
I find that hot crostini always go down well with guests, whether they are drinking Cristal rose or a glass of beer.
Crostini (little toasts) are popular in Italy, where stale bread does not automatically find its way into the bird feeder, or worse still, out with the trash.
Instead, day-old bread is often toasted and used as a base for snacks made with various toppings.
I like to combine goat cheese with sun-dried tomatoes and black-olive paste for an easy, last-minute hors d'oeuvre, which is put under the broiler and served hot.
A good Vermont or English cheddar cheese also makes excellent crostini, combined with a dash of mustard.
The clean, tart flavor of green-olive paste (available at specialty stores) complements prosciutto and mozzarella to make crostini that go well with wine.


Sherman Residents Aid a Missouri Town
UNTIL last August most people in Sherman, the northernmost town in Fairfield County, had never heard of Hartsburg, Mo.
For that matter, probably no one in Hartsburg, an even smaller dot of a town in the middle of Missouri, had ever heard of Sherman.
But now many residents of one town can talk in detail about the other town some 1,200 miles away and when they do they speak with affection and concern about a place they have never visited and people they have never met.


Egyptian Tourism Faces New Drop Amid Attacks
THE tourism industry in Egypt is bracing itself for another dismal year as attacks by Muslim militants continue to plague Cairo and southern Egypt.
Tour operators said bookings for the winter season were sparse and groups and package tours now hard to attract.


Assembling an Administration: Old Friends, Seasoned Hands
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani took the reins of the city government yesterday with an administration composed of several seasoned hands joined by several old friends and recent political allies who have little or no experience in city government.
In the incoming administration are three former commissioners and four midlevel aides from the Koch administration, three commissioners from the Dinkins team and three experienced commissioners from other cities who will take over agencies much larger than those they leave.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


You Read It Here First
It's that time of year again, the time when newspapers, magazines and television pundits exercise their First Amendment right to hazard semi-informed predictions about the coming 12 months -- just as Thomas Jefferson would have wanted.
This particular column will narrow its focus to a subject of paramount importance to all: the media itself -- ourselves.
Whatever.
Will a supermarket tabloid get its hands on an embarrassing photo of a member of Britain's royal family?
Signs point to yes.
Will the coming premiere of a new Spike Lee movie prompt hand-wringing among editorialists?
It is certain.
Will ABC's White House correspondent, Brit Hume, ever smile on camera?
Reply hazy, try again.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Purchasing managers' index, Dec.
55.7
57.0
Construction spending, Nov., pct. change
2.5
1.3
Wednesday
Factory-goods orders, Nov., pct. change
1.2
1.3
Auto sales, late Dec., millions, annual rate
7.4
7.2
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
291
N.A.
Friday
Non-farm payroll, Dec., change, thous.
208
220
Unemployment rate, December, percent
6.4
6.5
Consumer credit, Nov., change in billions
$8.1
$6.0
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Clinton discusses NATO summit meeting
Thursday
Bundesbank Council meeting


Mia L. Cahill, Matthew Sanidas
Mia Lenaye Cahill, the daughter of Dr.
Teena Long Cahill of Princeton, N.J., and Dr.
James F. Cahill of Richboro, Pa., was married on Friday to Matthew Walter Sanidas, a son of Dr.
John and Frieda Sanidas of Denver.
Mayor Marvin Reed of Princeton performed the ceremony at the Nassau Inn.
Ms.
Cahill, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a fellow at the Institute for Legal Studies at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, where she is studying for a Ph.D. in sociology.
She graduated from the University of Delaware and received a master's degree in sociology and a law degree from the University of Denver.
Her father is the director of biopharmaceutical sciences for Cato Research Ltd. in Richboro, a pharmaceuticals research and development company.
Her mother is a clinical psychologist in Princeton.


Crostini With Cheese and Olive Paste for Tasty Party Snacks
WHEN friends drop by over the New Year it would be great to offer them a pound of Beluga caviar with their drinks.
Whole black truffles would be nice, too, wrapped in bacon and aluminum foil and baked in the ashes of an open fire, just as they do in the south of France.
Most of us, alas! don't have quite such a well-stocked larder or the time to prepare platters of elaborate hors d'oeuvres.
I find that hot crostini always go down well with guests, whether they are drinking Cristal rose or a glass of beer.
Crostini (little toasts) are popular in Italy, where stale bread does not automatically find its way into the bird feeder, or worse still, out with the trash.
Instead, day-old bread is often toasted and used as a base for snacks made with various toppings.
I like to combine goat cheese with sun-dried tomatoes and black-olive paste for an easy, last-minute hors d'oeuvre, which is put under the broiler and served hot.
A good Vermont or English cheddar cheese also makes excellent crostini, combined with a dash of mustard.
The clean, tart flavor of green-olive paste (available at specialty stores) complements prosciutto and mozzarella to make crostini that go well with wine.


State Leads New England in Farming Production
CONNECTICUT has become the leading agricultural state in New England, the New England Agricultural Statistics Service reported recently.
"Agriculture is flourishing in Connecticut," the director of the Bureau of Marketing and Technology of the State Department of Agriculture in Hartford, Robert R. Pellegrino, said.


Japan Faces the Unthinkable: A Shortage of Engineers
SHUTARU SHIRAHATA is in the science and engineering school at Waseda University, but he is studying to be a manager.
"I don't want to be an engineer, actually, because that has a rather dark image," the 19-year-old freshman said.
He said the physics geniuses and computer whizzes at school "look very strange to me. They look like nerds."


On Sunday; An Imagination Breathing Life Into Memory
LISA LIPKIN turns everything into a story, prying open imagination and history and looking forward to this fresh year for all the clues to the past it will inevitably contain.
She makes a living as a 32-year-old folklorist and dramatic monologuist and can dip back into all sorts of timely parallels for New Yorkers.
She conjures John Adams's visit to post-colonial Manhattan when he pronounced it teeming with "the most vulgar group of people ever." Hooray for our side and for consistency.
Imagined detail, not just laborious memory, is what energizes Ms.
Lipkin's stories, like the one about why her mother never discarded the doormat marked "Maloney," the name of the previous homeowner.
What?
And emblazon "Lipkin" at the family threshold for one and all to see in America?


Deborah De Moss, Rene Fonseca
Deborah Lynne De Moss, the director of Latin American affairs for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was married Wednesday to Hector Rene Fonseca, a colonel in the Honduran army.
The Rev.
Steve Brown, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the First Baptist Church of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Keith Thomas, a Baptist minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
De Moss Fonseca graduated from Wheaton (Ill.) College and received a master's degree in Latin American studies from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Nancy Sossomon De Moss of Philadelphia and the late Arthur S. De Moss.


At Sea


Africa, Out in the Cold
In a burst of compassion and amid loud applause, the United States a year ago rushed to the rescue of the sick and starving in Somalia.
But for Africans, this holiday season is even bleaker, and not just for Somalis.
When the humanitarian mission in Somalia went sour, most of Africa below the Sahara also seemed to drop from sight.
Every bit of bad news -- civil wars, military coups, drought and disease -- has sadly reinforced a mood of fatalism or still worse, callous unconcern.
Yet it is one thing to recognize Africa's economic and political ills, and quite another to let them become the pretext for doing little or nothing.
Much that has gone wrong in Africa springs from causes beyond African control; that, too, needs to be recognized.
First and most grievous is the steady drop over a decade in the world prices for African exports, which in turn has shrunk the private investment flow to sub-Saharan states from $10 billion in 1982 to $4.7 billion in 1990.


REALITY LAND
Your article smirks its way through Disney's proposed simulation of key historic events, wondering aloud whether the stench of death will be included as part of the entry fee.


The Empire Is in the Mail
MOST first-time visitors to London delight in recognizing the famous landmarks -- Big Ben, the Houses of Parliament, Buckingham Palace, the Tower.
But those who return to London again and again look upon arrival for their own favorite, reassuringly familiar totems.
Mine is the humble red letter box.
Only it is not really so humble.
Gracefully crowned at the top and ornamented with the insignia of the reigning sovereign, the freestanding pillar-shaped letter box, emblem of Her Majesty's Royal Mail, can impose an almost regal presence on an otherwise dowdy street.
No one would ever refer to such a repository as a mere mail drop.
Although letter boxes can be placed in walls (even, as I once saw in Wales, carved into a rock cliff face), or attached to poles in a form known as a lamp box, the venerable pillar box commands the most attention and respect.


Who's Who Unrelated To American Directory
To the Editor:
"How I Got My Start in Reference Books" (letter, Dec. 20) by Joseph D. Policano describes his unhappy experiences with Who's Who in America.
As publisher of Who's Who (but not Who's Who in America), I would like to clarify the difference between my publication and the one with which Mr.
Policano had difficulties.


Lawyers, Class Actions and Fees
To the Editor:
The placement of the article on Prudential-Bache Energy Income Partnerships ("Try, Try Again") may have been misleading to investors trying to decide whether to participate in the class-action settlement.
Any inference, by way of the accompanying article ("Millions for Us, Pennies for You"), that Energy Income investors are getting only "pennies" is simply wrong.


A New, Improved Home For Finnish Opera
After a century of performing in a 500-seat, Russian-built theater, the Finnish National Opera company has moved into a building designed specifically for opera.
The new Finnish National Opera House, at 58 Helsinginkatu in downtown Helsinki, has a facade of white ceramic tile and brown Finnish granite, checkerboarded by walls of windows.
It seats approximately 1,360 people in the main auditorium, with a second room, designed for rehearsals and experimental performances, accommodating 200 to 500.
Though construction was completed last February, the 1992-93 season was finished in the old house, for which its productions were designed.
The new opera house had its opening gala at the end of November.


Aux Armes! France Rallies To Battle Sly and T. Rex
Marin Karmitz, a leading French movie producer, has a simple theory about how the United States, through Hollywood, wants to fashion the way the world thinks.
"Of course the U.S. movie industry is a big business," he says, "but behind the industrial aspect, there is also an ideological one. Sound and pictures have always been used for propaganda, and the real battle at the moment is over who is going to be allowed to control the world's images, and so sell a certain life style, a certain culture, certain products and certain ideas.


Dead Center: Seminoles Deliver in Final Seconds
Florida State's long and often painful pursuit of a national college football championship -- the first of Bobby Bowden's coaching career -- at last came to an end tonight when Scott Bentley's fourth field goal of the game, a 22-yard kick with 21 seconds to play, gave the Seminoles an 18-16 victory in the 60th Orange Bowl.
But Bowden and the Seminoles were fored to wait for several final agonizing moments after a pass from Nebraska sophomore Tommie Frazier to Trumane Bell was spotted at the Seminole 28-yard line.
Although time had run out on the stadium clock and fans raced on the field, one second was restored, the field was cleared and Nebraska kicker Byron Bennett had the opportunity for a 45-yard championship kick.
But his kick sailed wide to the left.


Kendra Krienke, Allan L. Daniel
Kendra Cliver Krienke and Allan L. Daniel, art dealers in New York, were married yesterday at their home in Park Ridge, N.J.
Judge Burton C. Pariser of the Mendham (N.J.) Municipal Court officiated.


Yesterday's Gone; History's Use As a Guidebook Is Overrated
Clinton's first year: It's a milestone beloved by political commentators and journalists, one of those utterly artificial attempts to quantify the randomness of human experience, to give it order, shape.
Like calendars and charts of historical epochs, the First Year in Office has a pleasing ring to it.
Here is a measurable demarcation in time, something to grab hold of in the terrifying flux of events that dominate the headlines -- carnage on the Long Island Rail Road, chaos in Bosnia, pollution on the high seas.
There is no disputing the fact that President Bill Clinton has been in office for a year, and in the coming weeks we're going to hear a lot about it.


Ms. Winingder, Mr. Peters
Deborah Leigh Winingder, a daughter of Thomas K. Winingder of New Orleans and Dr.
Lesley Ward of Atlanta, was married yesterday to John Baxter Peters 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peters 2d of Sussex, England.
The Rev.
Dr.
William B. Carr performed the ceremony at Trinity Presbyterian Church in Atlanta.
Mrs.
Peters, 26, graduated from Vanderbilt University and is studying for an M.B.A. degree at the University of Texas.
Her father, a commercial real estate developer, is building Jazzland, a theme park in New Orleans.
Her mother is a psychologist in Atlanta.


BENEFITS
A Roosevelt Remembrance  THURSDAY -- Francis Heilbut will perform a piano recital honoring Theodore Roosevelt on the 75th anniversary of his death.
The 6:30 P.M. recital, which will include works by Beethoven and Chopin, will be at the Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace, 28 East 20th Street in Manhattan.
A reception will follow the program.
The evening will benefit the Theodore Roosevelt Association, which maintains the house, and American Landmark Festivals, which sponsors events there.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 288-8574 or (212) 866-2086.
Aiding Moscow Residents  JAN. 9 -- Mike Burstyn, a Broadway actor and singer, will head a performance at 7:30 P.M at Alice Tully Hall to benefit Chamah's Jewish Home and Educational Center in Moscow.
The home has recently added to a soup kitchen and orphanage sponsored by Chamah, the International Society to Provide Jewish Education and Humanitarian Aid.
Tickets, $36 to $250, from (212) 943-9690.
Cystic Fibrosis Benefit  JAN. 10 -- Michael Bolton and Kenny G. will perform at the Hudson Theater in the Hotel Macklowe to benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. at the theater will be followed by the concert at 7:30 P.M. and a supper party afterward at Macy's.
Tickets, $100 for the reception and concert alone or $325 for all events, from (212) 986-8783.
Education Award  JAN. 10 -- The Bank Street College of Education will honor Henry R. Kravis, a founding partner in Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the leveraged-buyout firm, with its President's Medal for his commitment to educational excellence.
The black-tie benefit for the school will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner, dancing and the award ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 838-2660.
A Viewing of the Masters  JAN. 11 -- Old Master paintings and other works of art that belonged to the late Peter Jay Sharp, a Manhattan hotelier and real estate developer, will be on view at Sotheby's during a 6 P.M. cocktail reception for the Sacred Sites and Properties Fund of the New York Landmarks Conservancy.
The collection will be auctioned at Sotheby's on Jan. 13.
Brendan Gill, the New Yorker magazine writer and a founder of the Landmarks Conservancy, will speak on architecture of buildings devoted to religious purposes.
Tickets, $60, or $100 a couple, from (212) 995-5260.


A Biological Treaty to Save Species Becomes Law
An agreement conceived in the spirit of Noah's mission to rescue every beast, every fowl and "whatsoever creepeth upon the earth" became international law this week.
The agreement, the Convention on Biological Diversity, is both a global conservation pact and a guide to help rich and poor nations share in the profits of biotechnology, a fledgling industry that uses organisms with unique genetic characteristics to create new products like cancer-fighting drugs.


The Menu Wars, Continued
The menu wars continue, but Empire Szechuan seems to be picking up the spoils.
The Chinese restaurant chain's flagship, at Broadway and 97th Street, whose flood of takeout menus infuriates neighbors, has recently expanded to take up almost half the block.
A glitzy new sign shines above the windows, and business seems to be bustling.
But there is a cloud looming over the restaurant's sidewalk cafe.
Because of complaints from residents who continually find menus left in their lobbies and foyers, the local community board refused to renew the restaurant's license for the cafe earlier this year.
In November, the restaurant received a citation for continuing to operate the cafe, said Pat Cohen, a spokeswoman for the Consumer Affairs Department.
No one came to a Dec. 14 hearing, where the restaurant was fined $2,300, which has not been paid.


Correction
The At Work column on Dec. 12, about the labor dispute at American Airlines, failed to identify the source of an estimate that Robert Crandall, the chief executive of American Airlines, received total compensation of $4 million in 1992.
The estimate was from Forbes magazine's annual survey of executive compensation.


On to the Millennium


Lawyers, Class Actions and Fees
To the Editor:
Your article points out the inadequacies of the class-action limited-partnership settlements that enrich attorneys and insulate defendants but give little to the investors who have had the losses.


Stepping Out


Take It From One Who Knows: Bugel Analyzes Game
"What's the weather going to be like?"
That's the first thing the Phoenix Cardinals coach, Joe Bugel, wanted to know before assessing this afternoon's Cowboys-Giants clash.
Cold, snowy, windy weather would help the Giants' smash-mouth, run-first attack, Bugel said.
Especially the wind.


Cynthia Mulliken, Anthony Lazzara
Cynthia Mulberry Mulliken, a daughter of Mrs.
Gerald K. Neavolls of Winnetka, Ill., and William D. Mulliken of Chicago, was married on Friday to Anthony Andrew Lazzara, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony F. Lazzara of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
John L. McCausland performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Evanston, Ill.
Mrs.
Lazzara, 31, is a senior physical therapist at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Colby College and received a master's degree in physical therapy from the University of Southern California.


Elise B. Gutman and Victor Micati
Elise Beth Gutman, the daughter of Carol and Steven Gutman of New York, was married yesterday to Victor Micati, the son of Victor J. Micati of Lakewood, N.J., and the late Mildred M. Micati.
Judge Thomas P. Aliotta of Staten Island Civil Court officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Micati, 35, is the manager of marketing development in Brussels for Valleylab Inc., the medical-instruments division of Pfizer Inc.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.
Her father is the president of the New York Jets.


Poor Lands' Success In Cutting Birth Rate Upsets Old Theories
It used to be assumed that economic development was the best way for a poor country to reduce its population growth.
But new studies suggest that a country like Bangladesh can cut its birth rate significantly if it aggressively promotes the adoption of modern contraceptive methods -- without waiting for the reduction that traditionally comes with higher living standards.
In what some experts are calling a reproductive revolution, birth rates are falling in countries presumably too poor for economic development that would stabilize rapid population growth, as it did in Europe and North America early this century.


A Park Sprouts Amid the Sprawl Near the Bridge
After eight years and 109 meetings, multicolored playground equipment is sprouting on a long-neglected triangle of land overlooking the George Washington Bridge.
The park is the brainchild of the 181st Street Beautification Project, a small group of dedicated volunteers who have worked since 1986 to transform their small corner of Washington Heights, fighting for things like curb ramps, traffic lights and small parks for neighborhood children.


Today's Special: Advice for Restaurateurs
THE first days of a new year are often a time of reappraisals and resolutions.
After making our personal list ("more determined calorie watching"), we turned to the subject nearest our professional heart: restaurants.
Having experienced at firsthand the slings and arrows of capricious service and other vagaries of dining out for well-nigh two decades, we offer (unbidden and unsought) the following potential New Year's resolutions for restaurateurs and their staffs:
1.
We will remember not to bring the entrees to a table while the diners are still consuming their appetizers.


Japan's Rat Race -- A special report.; Life in a Box: Japanese Question Fruits of Success
As the jammed 7:38 A.M. express train rolled into the station here on a recent chilly morning, and Hiroyuki Ogata waited to be packed aboard for the toughest leg of his nearly two-hour commute into Tokyo, he admitted that he had things pretty good.
Two years ago he was able to buy a home for his family of four, a 600-square-foot apartment in a bland 50-building housing complex criss-crossed by power lines.
And since he attended one of the nation's top universities, he stands a good chance of becoming director some day at the food and spice company where he has inched up the ranks for 14 years.


Picking Herself Up Off the Ice; Bronze Medalist Kerrigan Seeks Top After Hitting Bottom
There was more crying than kissing in the kiss-and-cry area as Nancy Kerrigan sat waiting, tearfully, for her scores at the 1993 world figure-skating championships in March in Prague.
"I just want to die," the television microphones caught her saying mournfully.
The scores told her what she already knew.
Her long program had been a disaster.
Once the most elegant of skaters, Kerrigan had skidded on the ice, out of control, like a car without snow chains.
In the space of a year, she had tumbled from bronze medalist at the 1992 Winter Olympics to a fifth-place emotional wreck at the 1993 worlds.
Plaintively, Kerrigan turned to her choreographer, Mary Scotvold, and asked of her splintered routine, "Can I do it again?"


Linda C. Webb, Edward Carilli
Linda Christine Webb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Webb of Mount Laurel, N.J., was married on Friday to Edward Michael Carilli, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Carilli.
Robert Callahan, a justice of the peace, officiated at his office in Farmingdale, L.I.


A Faculty Option
To the Sports Editor:
Claire L. Gaudiani says that the challenge facing the new executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, Cedric W. Dempsey, is "to steer college sports toward being part of the educational process instead of an independent promotional circus" ("Lights, Camera, Action on N.C.A.A. Reform, Part II," The Times, Dec. 12).


Roomy Restaurant
It's billed as America's largest restaurant in a decade, and the statistics, at least, are stunning: Nick's Miami Beach, which opened on Dec. 18, covers 27,000 square feet and seats 1,000 people.
The two-tiered, beach-front dining room alone holds 410 people; there's also a sprawling bar and a nightclub featuring local bands, D.J.'s and karaoke (fortunately, the room is large).
The restaurant, owned by the Chicago restaurateur Nick Nickolas, serves seafood, chicken and pasta and is at 300 Alton Road, Miami Beach, Florida 33139; (305) 673-3444.


Painted Desert
Thinking everything hip is always black is like thinking everything in the desert is the color of sand.
Amid limestone walls and an interrupted sky, black is stark, graphic.
But in natural sunlit surroundings, you'd better be in color if you want any attention.
People used to being outside know color invigorates, it freshens, it makes people feel better, as if it were light's emissary.
And these days, who doesn't need more light?


Straight Out of Africa, a Really Tall Story
Charles Gitonga maina had one small problem in his acting debut as an African tribesman who becomes a basketball prodigy in "The Air Up There."
"I would get into a scene, and I would want to laugh because I know it's not true," said Mr.
Maina, a 20-year-old from Nairobi, Kenya.
"I'd say a line like, 'We don't eat chicken,' and I'd be laughing inside, because I'd eaten chicken the night before." The film, directed by Paul M. Glaser and co-starring Winston Ntshona and Kevin Bacon, opens on Friday.


Discounters Bring New Look to Old Urban Stores
FLUX in the world of retailing is producing a new look to major buildings in the New York metropolitan area that have housed department stores that are household names.
In many cases, defunct department stores are being reopened by discount chains like Bradlees and Caldor's, which are eager to serve today's value-conscious consumer and take advantage of the availability of large retailing spaces in Manhattan in beyond.


Corrections
A chart in the Travel Advisory column on Dec. 12 misstated the number of Spanish pesetas received for exchanging $100 in traveler's checks.
It was 13,494 on Nov. 19, 1993, and 11,324 on Nov. 19, 1992.


Stop Picking on 'A Visit From St. Nicholas'
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Roger Ferlo's "Baby Jesus and the Village Gentry" (Dec. 23), on the early-19th-century Greenwich Village of Clement Clark Moore and today's, where Mr.
Ferlo will soon occupy Moore's rectory at St.
Luke in the Fields, is an example of poor scholarship, disregard for facts and history, and a failure to do the briefest research to substantiate a mean-spirited attack on a classic beloved by generations of children.


SUNDAY, January 2, 1994; Still Writing After All These Years
To Cynthia Ozick in The New Yorker he is somehow "a little Israel" and both Dreyfus and Zola.
To the Arab and Muslim intellectuals who contributed to a new book called "For Rushdie," he is a painful cause.
To William Pfaff of The Los Angeles Times, he is "something of a bore" who has "made a career of his victimization." Paul Auster says, "He is carrying the burden for all of us."
He, of course, is Salman Rushdie, back in circulation of a sort, visiting presidents, making speeches, and, whether he chooses or not, serving as a kind of literary Zelig, a vessel for meaning, an occasion for other people's ideas.
As he himself says, his writing is "the last thing people talk about."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 2, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
46
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
2
5
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
3
2
THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her Colorado hometown.
4
7
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
5
6
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
6
90
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
7
1
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
8
11
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The Battle of Gettysburg.
9
53
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
10
3
DESIRE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) The medieval romance of a lady and a knight.
11
6
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
12
94
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
13
10
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
14
17
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
15
4
PRIVATE PLEASURES, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A scientist's discovery results in sex and violence among a group of Floridians.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
9
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
2
530
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
16
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
46
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5
35
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $8.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.
6*
10
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A tour of a nuclear warship.
7
116
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
8
3
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
9
5
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
10
13
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
11
10
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
12
6
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The case of a Southern woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
13
25
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
14*
20
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies.
15
5
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
14
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
8
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of cartoons.
3
5
MTV'S BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, by Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil. (MTV/Callaway/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters.
4
2
THE CHICKENS ARE RESTLESS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A new collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Knicks Ask: What Price A Guard?
The Dallas Mavericks have decided to intensify their effort to trade Derek Harper to the Knicks.
Harper met last week with Don Carter, Dallas's owner, and Norm Sonju, the team's general manager, according to a National Basketball Association executive.
And they agreed it would be best to trade Harper, their starting point guard, as soon as possible.


Tiny Island in Unspoiled Waters
I AM suspended in a dazzling sea garden.
Below me hard and soft corals in muted pink, blue and green, assume the shapes of leafy lettuce and feathery carnations.
Electric-blue parrot fish chomp on the coral, spitting out the waste from their meal in a spray of fine sand.
A school of silvery unicorn fish, their distinctive extensions like accusing fingers, swarm within inches of my snorkel mask, eyeing me suspiciously.
A giant sea turtle gyrates slowly toward me, flapping its front legs to propel its disk-shaped body close enough for me to observe its reptile skin.
This underwater paradise in the Celebes Sea surrounds the tiny island of Sipadan, 35 miles off the coast of the Malaysian state of Sabah (part of what was formerly known as Borneo).
About 30 acres in size, Sipadan is difficult to spot on most maps of the world.
It was formed by an underwater volcano millions of years ago, which created a mushroom-shaped land mass above water, perched on top of an oceanic mountain below.
About 50 feet from the shore is a 2,000-foot underwater drop-off down the mountain wall.
The abundance of marine life along the top and side of the wall is within a three-minute swim of Sipadan's shore.


A Ranger Reminder: No Rest for the Best
Brian Leetch would like everyone to know that the Rangers aren't idiots.
They know what it means to be the No. 1 team in the National Hockey League.
They know that their opponents will work harder, play better and -- if they manage a victory -- celebrate louder when the Rangers come to town.
The Buffalo Sabres gave them a pointed reminder of that on Friday night.
That's when the Sabres, and their red-hot goaltender Dominik Hasek, elevated their level of play and swiped a 4-1 victory from New York in the annual New Year's Eve game at Buffalo's Memorial Auditorium.


W. Va. Bubble Bursts, Loudly
After spending the last few weeks listening but not saying much about West Virginia's campaign for national recognition, Florida taught the Mountaineers a thing or two about respect tonight.
With Errict Rhett running at will and Terry Dean slicing up the Mountaineers' secondary, Florida ended West Virginia's 11-game unbeaten streak with a crushing 41-7 victory in the Sugar Bowl.
The versatile, hard-running Rhett tied a Sugar Bowl scoring record with three touchdowns while Dean completed 22 of 37 passes for 255 yards and 1 touchdown.
Dean completed passes to 8 different Florida receivers.


Camden's Renaissance Is Hailed, and Doubted
In his 37 years living here, Samuel Benson has seen the best and worst of Camden: its lively, industrial past, its bleak, abandoned present; the countless, unfulfilled promises of renewal and rebirth.
While government officials hail the two-year-old New Jersey State Aquarium as proof of Camden's sputtering recovery, and wait in hope for an agreement that could bring the Philadelphia 76ers basketball team to this city of 85,000, Mr.
Benson and others in his North Camden neighborhood remain skeptical.
If the Sixers really come to Camden this time, if the aquarium does spur growth along the waterfront, Mr.
Benson asked, what does that mean for him?


Clear Today; Tomorrow, Who Knows?; Culture Clash
IT'S a new year and therefore -- admit it and face it bravely -- time to look ahead.
The good news (or maybe not) is that the future may not be quite the yawning void of which Marcus Aurelius wrote.
That's only if the past is indeed prologue.
But it may not be.
It does, however, allow some educated guesses at what's coming.
Herewith a handful:


Holy Cow! It's 1994 and Fox Rules. Whoa, Nellie!
JAN. 4 -- Eighteen days after the Fox Network's agreement to pay $395 million a year to broadcast National Football Conference games, CBS Chairman Laurence Tisch calls the N.F.L. to counter: "O.K., I'll go to $400 million." When he's told that he's late, Tisch returns to his bridge game.
JAN. 12 -- The Fox Network announces the hiring of CBS's John Madden as its No. 1 football analyst.
But he refuses to go.
A surprised CBS says Madden will join its golf, college basketball and auto racing crews, and host a hardware show after David Letterman.


Mostly Modernist


Sliding In the New Year


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Hat Trick for Nicholls  Bernie Nicholls scored three goals and Stephane Richer added a goal and an assist to lead the Devils past the Ottawa Senators, 7-1, last night at the Civic Center in Ottawa.
The Devils raced to a 2-0 lead in the first period on goals by Corey Millen and Nicholls, pestering Ottawa goaltender Craig Billington with 16 shots, and never looked back.
David Archibald scored the only goal for the Senators, who fell to 3-16-1 at home, 8-29-3 over all.
The Devils improved to 22-12-4, good for 48 points and second over all in the league behind the Rangers.


A Shared Sense of Pride
To the Editor:
I was reassured by Bernard Weinraub's article "Steven Spielberg Faces the Holocaust"  [ Dec. 12 ]  because it personalized Mr.
Spielberg's life experience and explained how it led to creating "Schindler's List." I have seen the movie; it is a masterpiece.
I think it unfortunate that people speculate about Mr.
Spielberg's real agenda, when the finished product is what matters.


Fewer Killings Tallied in '93 In New York
Even as public outcry over violent crime grew, reported homicides in New York City declined slightly in 1993, continuing a trend, police officials said yesterday.
They attributed the drop to factors including the increase in police officers and efforts at community policing.
While the overall change was slight, there were large variations in the reported homicide rates for individual boroughs.
There was a major drop in Queens and smaller ones in the Bronx and Staten Island, along with a large rise in Brooklyn and a small one in Manhattan.


Allison W. Pease, Lee S. Kempler
Allison Walker Pease, a daughter of Hugh and Patricia Pease of Saratoga, Calif., was married last evening to Lee Steven Kempler, a son of Jerold and Myra Kempler of Baltimore.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman officiated at the Manhattan Penthouse, a catering hall in New York.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of Colorado and received a master's degree from New York University, where she is a doctoral candidate in English literature.
She is an adjunct professor of English at the Rosa Parks Campus in Harlem of the College of New Rochelle.


The Executive Computer; Dear Industry: It's the New Year and Time to Get Resolute
RATHER than storming the podium to tell customers, suppliers and shareholders of their glorious plans for the new year, many computer industry executives seemed content to let 1993 slip away with a whimper.
So please allow a visitor taking up several weeks' residence in this space to offer some thoughts on what the computer industry should resolve to do in the new year.


In Barbados
To the Editor: I read with interest your recommendations for Barbados in "Value, Caribbean Style" (Oct. 31).
My husband and I spent several days at the Peach and Quiet in August.
While that period might have been considered "low season," the rate, $69, was the same as the 1993-94 winter rate.
The owners are kind and very helpful and were doing much of the work themelves at that time of year, including the cooking.
Your readers should not expect a full-service restaurant nor would I call it a resort in the usual sense.
Peach and Quiet is more like an inn, or a bed and breakfast that also serves sandwiches at lunch and a set dinner (no choice in August).


ONE COP, EIGHT SQUARE BLOCKS
We owe a debt of gratitude to officers like Kevin Jett for the many talents -- humanity, courage, integrity, kindness, pride, toughness and humor -- they bring to their thankless job ("One Cop, Eight Square Blocks," by Michael Norman, Dec. 12).
They give new meaning to the expression "the thin blue line." People like Jett are a force for good in a war zone that a responsible America should never have allowed to develop in the first place.
The least we can do is to pay them enough so they don't have to moonlight.
VICTOR W. MASON New York, N.Y.


Profile; Reprogramming the Hacker Elite
"FIRST and only" is a familiar phrase to Donna Auguste.
The first member of her family to graduate from college, she was also the first black woman to enter the Ph.D. program in computer science at Carnegie Mellon University.
And in her chosen field, one dominated by white males, she is a definite rarity.
Until last month, she managed the elite team of programmers who helped create Apple Computer's Newton pen-based computer, and this month she starts work as a researcher at U S West's Boulder, Colo., advanced technology group developing multimedia technology for interactive cable television.


A Fatal Spiral to the Street; For Winter's First Exposure Victim, a Quick, Harsh Decline
The cold was brutal in the early morning of Dec. 27, and because of it Benedict Barnas's strange and sudden slide into a life in the streets ended in tragedy.
Mr.
Barnas was found dead at 6 A.M., face up and frozen on a bench next to Baseball Field 6 in Canarsie Park in Brooklyn.
He gained brief celebrity only as a statistic -- the first person to die of exposure on the streets of New York this winter.
Mr.
Barnas's death concluded a quick spiral into disaster -- a victim of exposure only 19 days after walking out of his father's home.
His troubled life -- including bouts of mental illness and alcoholism -- possessed some of the familiar qualities of homelessness.
But his immediate circumstances -- an available apartment, a network of friends with beds and food -- made him unusual, too.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUMOR YOU OUGHTA BE ME How to Be a Lounge Singer  and Live Like One.
By the Fabulous Bud E. Luv as told to Cort Casady and Ned Claflin.
St.
Martin's, paper, $10.95.


Some Openings To Caribbean
IF you are thinking about spending Presidents' Week in the Caribbean, set aside that new 1994 calendar and start looking at the one in the back, for 1995.
On the other hand, if some other week, maybe even next week, will do, and you do not have your heart set on a particular resort, you are likely to get a flight and a place to soak up some sun.
Of course, the whole outlook can change whenever cold weather seizes the Northeast.
Like many other travel conditions now, these trends spin in opposite directions for reasons both obvious and subtle.
President's Week is fixed there in the calendar, Feb. 20 to 26 this year, unlike school starting and ending dates, which may be altered by emergency closings caused by storms.
People plan trips to the islands for this vacation week as much as a year in advance, although the airlines say five months ahead is now the average, meaning reservations are made and tickets paid for soon after traditional school opening in September.


Cigarette Ignites Explosion In House, Killing 2 Children
Two children were killed on Friday when a cigarette being smoked by their mother's companion touched off a propane-gas explosion in their home, the authorities said.
Clifford Foster, Sharon Wiley and her three sons left their home for 24 hours after they smelled propane on Thursday, an official of the sheriff's department said.
But they were unable to find a gas serviceman and returned on New Year's Eve without the source of the apparent leak being detected or repaired.


POSTINGS: Housing for Low-Income Elderly; 71 Apartments in East Harlem and . . .
A 71-unit housing complex for the low-income elderly will soon be built in East Harlem as part of a special program begun by Mount Sinai Medical Center.
"It's very rare that a hospital builds low-income housing," said Laurie Anderson, a spokeswoman for the medical center.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ON BROADWAY
Charles Fazzino's exuberant collages of city life will be displayed at The Bushnell in Hartford starting Wednesday and continuing through Jan. 30 in the Promenade Gallery.
The exhibition is called "Celebrate Broadway -- 100 Years in Times Square." It was produced by The League of American Theaters and Producers Inc., in Manhattan, and following this premiere showing it will travel across the United States and go on to Japan.


Exploring the Links of Color, Lines and Forms
THE paintings hanging in the Joseloff Gallery at the University of Hartford are as blithe as a flower show and some even include floral shapes.
But most of them are rectilinear, for the artist, Charmion von Wiegand (1896-1983) was one of several Americans magnetized by Mondrian.
She was also a friend, as was the late Harry Holtzman, who was instrumental in bringing the Dutch master to the United States in 1940.
Von Wiegand started her career as a journalist and not until she had completed a tour of duty as Moscow correspondent for the Hearst newspapers did she turn her full attention to art.
She then wrote on the subject for publications like The Partisan Review and The New Masses, which were co-founded by her husband, Joseph Freeman.
It was for The New Masses that she covered the first exhibition staged by the American Abstract Artists, a body that she herself was to join and eventually preside over.


Female Troopers Joining Unit Assigned to Protect Governor
IN a precedent-setting move, Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman has decided to add female state troopers to a unit responsible for her and her family's safety.
Mrs.
Whitman made the request that women be assigned to the State Police's executive protection unit, the force that specializes in providing security for the Governor, the Governor's family and other state officials.
The unit also guards the Governor's official residence in Princeton.


The Machiavellian Mayorality
THE craft of the mayoralty, as Rudolph W. Giuliani will come to know, is often a subtle one, requiring an innate link to the spirit of the times, as well as a sense of the moment and a familiarity with the labyrinthine back alleys of the city.
Sleight of hand helps sometimes, too.
Here are excerpts from the literature of the mayoralty.
THE MAYOR AND THE RADIO  From "Fiorello H. La Guardia and the Making of Modern New York," by Thomas Kessner (Penguin Books)


Music Offers Weekly Respite From the Bustle of Noontime
AT 12:30 on a recent afternoon, the intersection of Main and Church Streets here was bustling.
On one corner, shoppers streamed in and out of Macy's.
Those in the know, or in the mood, strolled across the street to Grace Episcopal Church.
The large "Concert Today" sign hinted at the pleasures to come.
Each Wednesday from September through June since 1988, Grace Church has offered a half-hour of music to the public for a donation of $5 a person.
Performers so far this season -- all professional -- have included an African folk music ensemble, an alphorn trio, a steel band and a guitar duo as well as several organists, violinists, pianists and singers.


Editorial Notebook; The Great Game, Again?
Vladimir Zhirinovsky may prove to be an evanescent blowhard, but the shudder provoked by his unexpectedly strong showing in Russia's parliamentary vote is justified.
He wants to restore the vast empire built by the czars, a Great Russia stretching from Finland to Alaska, and even talks of going to the Dardanelles and the Indian Ocean, the predestined borders of a Fourth Rome.
Recent history amply warns against dismissing such talk as the ravings of a buffoon.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky's rhetorical vodka may be raw, and home-brewed, but it fills a very old bottle.
He is restating the expansionist goals that drove czarist foreign policy, and in doing so, touches deep chords of nostalgia.


Goyas on Display: Paintings and Frescoes
This winter, admirers of Goya's work can enjoy not only a unique collection of paintings put together by the Prado Museum in Madrid but also newly restored frescoes he painted in the San Antonio de la Florida Hermitage, a 15-minute walk from the Royal Palace.
The Prado's "Goya, Caprice and Invention" exhibition displays 98 small-format paintings, from his bright and cheerful early work to the despair of his final period in exile in France, where he died in 1828.


Lawyers, Class Actions and Fees
To the Editor:
Your article understates the damage done to individual investors when a firm such as Beigel &amp; Sandler files class actions on their behalf and then agrees to a pathetically small settlement.


Repairing a Leaky Faucet Can Make a Household Hero
FIXING a kitchen faucet is usually not only easy, but can also make a household hero in moments.
Most faucets are simple to take apart, clean and put back together -- often all that is needed to repair them -- with just a screwdriver and one or two pairs of pliers.
Single-handle faucets with a ball or a cartridge are the two most popular types.
The single handle controls both hot and cold water.
If the flow from a faucet is uneven or seems restricted, remove and clean the aerator, the small screen attached to the end of the faucet.
But before beginning, close the drain or cover it with an inverted saucer to avoid losing small parts.


Pamela Horland, Justin B. Fries
Pamela Sue Horland, the daughter of Marsha Fishkin of Boca Raton, Fla., and James Horland of North Miami Beach, Fla., was married last evening to Justin Bennett Fries, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Fries of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Gary Glickstein performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Fries, 25, is the international distribution assistant at Calvin Klein Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is the stepdaughter of Steven Fishkin of Boca Raton.


Greenwich Village: Basically Bistros
GROVE ++  (212) 675-9463; 314 Bleecker Street, at Grove; $; all major credit cards


Monica M. McNally, Mark Filanowski
Monica Marie McNally, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. McNally of Palmyra, Wis., was married yesterday to Mark Lewis Filanowski, the son of Edward J. Filanowski of Milford, Conn., and the late Elizabeth A. Filanowski.
Bishop Patrick Matolengwe performed the Episcopal ceremony at All Saints Cathedral in Milwaukee.
Ms.
McNally, 32, who will keep her name, is a financial consultant in New Haven at Smith Barney Shearson, the securities brokerage.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
Her father is the president of Mar-Jon Inc., a real estate company in Palmyra.
Her mother, MaryAnn V. McNally, is the executive assistant to the Superintendent of the Palmyra-Eagle School District.


Outward Bound


No Parking, Agency Is Told
The state's Department of Motor Vehicles, with a mission to decentralize its offices to make them more convenient, has a roving eye these days as it sizes up new locations in the Bronx.
But Co-op City, the potential site of a new office, is trying to rebuff the agency's advances.
Officials from the agency recently informed neighborhood representatives, including members of Community Board 10, that they were considering a move to 755 Co-op City Boulevard, a 37,000-square-foot building that once housed a Price King supermarket.


Fewer Killings Tallied in '93 In New York
Even as public outcry over violent crime grew, reported homicides in New York City declined slightly in 1993, continuing a trend, police officials said yesterday.
They attributed the drop to factors including the increase in police officers and efforts at community policing.
While the overall change was slight, there were large variations in the reported homicide rates for individual boroughs.
There was a major drop in Queens and smaller ones in the Bronx and Staten Island, along with a large rise in Brooklyn and a small one in Manhattan.


Missi Tessier, James Kulikowski
Michelle C. Tessier, a daughter of Barbara N. Tessier of Easthampton, Mass., and the late L. Emile Tessier, was married yesterday to James M. Kulikowski, a son of the late Charles and Helen Kulikowski.
The Rev.
James Ford, a Lutheran minister and the chaplain of the United States House of Representatives, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Swann House in Washington.
Ms.
Tessier, who is known as Missi, is keeping her name.
She is the press secretary for United States Representative Robert H. Michel, Republican of Illinois.
She graduated from Georgetown University.


Apartments for Elderly Poor
The Department of City Planning last week certified plans for an apartment building for the low-income elderly in Co-op City, a community with one of the highest concentrations of older people in New York City.
The project now faces a lengthy public review process, including a hearing before Community Board 10 this month.
Proposed by the Metropolitan New York Coordinating Council on Jewish Poverty, the plan calls for constructing a 12-floor building with 123 apartments at 777 Co-op City Boulevard.
It would provide affordable housing to individuals who earn less than $14,600 a year and couples who earn less than $16,700 a year.
The project is financed by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.


DEC. 26-31: Stolen Chagall; An Art Museum And a Collector Reach a Quiet Compromise.
The stars never showed up, and the show closed early.
To anyone who had hoped for a serious struggle between the Guggenheim museum and an elderly woman over a stolen Chagall painting, the trial last week in State Supreme Court in Manhattan was a distinct disappointment.
In its second day, the trial ended in settlement, with none of the promised nasty revelations about museum practices, no grilling of squirming witnesses and no appearances by the elderly collector or the painting itself.


Bypassing Busy Highways Can Ruin Neighborhoods
To the Editor:
What was James Barron thinking about in "The Road Wars" (Dec. 19) when he directed drivers off highways onto the city's residential streets?
Drivers from out of town and the other boroughs are already bypassing highways for residential streets like Central Park West, West End Avenue and Riverside Drive, turning these otherwise quiet streets into a horn-honking, traffic-mired hell.
Many a Thanksgiving dinner on the Upper West Side was a noisy nightmare thanks to drivers who followed a route later recommended in "Bypassing the Henry Hudson Parkway," the map accompanying the article.
TERRY WOLF  Manhattan


Wanted: An Isle One Can Call One's Own
JOHN DONNE was no doubt right when he wrote that no man is an island.
But what works as an existential metaphor is not necessarily valid when it comes to real estate.
No one may be an island, but a lot of people would like to own one.
The news that Robins Island, a 445-acre tract lying between the forks of eastern Long Island, has been bought for $11 million dollars by a rich man named Louis Moore Bacon must have triggered widespread covetousness.
To own an island.
To be master of all you survey.
To be able to banish enemies and bores.
To promote righteous order.
Maybe even to secede and establish a happy realm.
Who cannot identify with such yearnings?


Tech Notes; A Cleaner Motor Scooter
AS General Motors and Ford build a few dozen electric cars and wonder if there is a market for more, a Colorado company says it is ready to make electric vehicles by the tens of thousands, and anticipates a market in the millions within a few years.
But its orientation is a little different: The vehicles are motor scooters and the market is Taiwan.
With strong encouragement from the Taiwanese Government, Unique Mobility Inc., of Golden, Colo., has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Kwang Yang Motor Company under which Kwang Yang, using Unique's technology, would produce a 180-pound vehicle capable of cruising at speeds of up to 35 miles per hour and running 35 or 40 miles in typical urban traffic before needing a recharge.


A Rare Measure Of the Benefits Of Bureaucracy
It is hard to imagine the benefits generated from the daily crush of humanity that for years descended on the Department of Motor Vehicles office in downtown Jamaica.
The jostling was unnerving.
The long lines were infuriating.
And the waits seemed eternal.
But the office at 165th Street evolved into a neighborhood bulwark, drawing hundreds of people from throughout the borough into local restaurants and shops each day on their way to or from renewing their driver's licenses or registering their cars.


By Width Of Upright Irish Make Their Case
After barely beating Texas A&amp;M by 24-21 in a thrilling Cotton Bowl today, Lou Holtz resumed his campaign to get his Notre Dame team voted to a national championship.
Raising his voice for emphasis, Holtz recited his standard stump speech.
If Florida State were to beat Nebraska in the Orange Bowl later tonight and Florida were to beat West Virginia in the Sugar Bowl, Holtz said, the Fighting Irish should move up to No. 1, past Nebraska, past West Virginia and past Florida State.


Tentatively, Carriages Enter Streets Of Midtown
There was no stampede of wild horse carriages south of the Central Park border yesterday, even though the old law and order had broken down.
As the stroke of midnight brought in the New Year, a 4-year-old law that limited the city's 68 horse carriages to Central Park expired.
And, because the outgoing Mayor, David N. Dinkins, vetoed new legislation Thursday that would have eased restrictions on the carriages' use of the streets, a wide open legal space was created.
Some carriages rode in, but not many.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SPORTS BIOGRAPHY SPORTSWRITER The Life and Times of Grantland Rice.
By Charles Fountain.
Oxford University, $25.


ONE COP, EIGHT SQUARE BLOCKS
Some serious reforms need to be made in the salary system for New York City cops.
A man like Kevin Jett, who is such a positive influence on a neighborhood, should be making at least $80,000 a year.
Why should he have to move on (I hesitate to use the the word "up") to a job where he may be less valuable to the community?
Maybe he should be offered a raise as an incentive to stay where he is.
CHARLES FREY Haverstraw, N.Y.


Lincoln, England
To the Editor: Lincoln, England, has been for me like that little restaurant that one hopes, with some guilt, the critics won't discover, so Sue Stiles's piece on its pleasures ("Echoes of the Past in Lincoln," Nov. 7) was a mixed blessing.
Still, I imagine the difficulty in getting to Lincoln, which she describes, will keep it relatively serene.
Travelers tempted by Ms.
Stiles's description of medieval Lincoln might be interested to learn that a production of the N-Town plays, one of the medieval biblical cycles that may originally have been presented in Lincoln, is scheduled for next summer.
The plays, like the better-known cycle from York, dramatize the history of mankind from the creation through the Resurrection.
They will be performed in the nave of Lincoln Cathedral every evening from Aug. 7 to 20 by a cast of professional actors and townspeople.


Lawyers, Class Actions and Fees
To the Editor:
"Millions for Us, Pennies for You" (Dec. 19) is yet another stroke of evidence for the drastic reforms needed in our judicial system.
Exorbitant attorneys' fees in such areas of law as bankruptcy and class-action suits are truly obscene, and it is the little guy (whom the laws were supposed to protect) who comes up short.
JEFFREY SCHRECK  Fort Lee, N.J., Dec. 19


For New Mayor, a Goal That Was Short of Expectations
As he waged his long effort to become mayor of New York City, Rudolph W. Giuliani harked back to the administration of one mayor more than any other: Fiorello H. La Guardia.
As he prepared to make the transition into the Mayor's office in City Hall, he insisted on using the desk that Mr.
La Guardia had used from 1934 to 1945 and that Mayor David N. Dinkins had had removed.


Asian-American Proves Marine Bias
Four years ago, Bruce I. Yamashita was expecting to earn his commission as a second lieutenant in the Marine Corps when he was abruptly discharged for "leadership failure."
But this week Mr.
Yamashita, a Japanese-American who was born and reared in Hawaii, won his commission after proving that he was the target of vicious racial and ethnic harassment during his 10-week officer training program.


Out In the Cold


Fame Bowl Becomes Wheatley Showcase
Michigan 42, No. Carolina St. 7
Once again, Tyrone Wheatley placed the team before himself.


Cities Are So Much More Orderly Than People
For various reasons, starting with long exposures, 19th-century photographers of cities tended to concentrate on the well-ordered majesty of vista and facade while scanting the decidedly irregular appeal of human beings.
Yet all through the century, people were racing and pouring into urban centers.
In 1800, not one city in the western world had a million inhabitants, but by 1850, Paris did, and London had more than two million.
By 1900, 11 cities, including New York, Berlin, Tokyo and Calcutta, had expanded beyond a million.
Photographers, like all city dwellers, resorted to strategies to avoid the crowds: Eugene Atget, for one, would get up very early to find Paris pure.
Between about 1890 and 1915, photographers made three discoveries about cities that still influence urban imagery.
One: that urban areas were dangerous and destructive to their inhabitants. (Jacob Riis's photographs of tenement life came out around 1890.) Two: that the undistinguished corners of metropolis and the life of its streets were piquant subject matter.
Three: that urban geometries were the perfect modernist subject, and that rather than documenting the city's splendors the camera could cull abstractions and personal artistic statements from its surfaces.


'Sesame Street,' Just a Few Steps From Broadway
SAVION GLOVER, THE TAPdancing prodigy, does a few fluid steps in front of the crimson puppet named Elmo.
His footfalls, on the cobblestones of "Sesame Street," are like a soft drumbeat from the distinguished line of Jimmy Slyde, Sandman Sims and Mr.
Glover's mentor, Gregory Hines.
A moment later, Elmo stamps his gleaming black tap shoes into a frenzy of noise, then falls dizzy on his shaggy bottom.
"Elmo is fine," the Muppet tells the concerned dancer.
"Elmo does not have very far to fall."


Choreographers To Composers: Please Write Us Music That Moves
Music for dance was once considered a poor cousin to scores created for the concert hall.
Mean jokes were made about the likes of Glinka, Minkus and Delibes.
But many choreographers today go out of their way to work closely with composers who provide inspiration as well as distinctive musical styles of their own.
Or so it would seem from the number of scores commissioned for the 1994 "Altogether Different" festival, which begins on Tuesday and runs through Jan. 23 at the Joyce.
The festival will lead off with Doug Elkins's "Scott, Queen of Marys" to a score by Mio Morales, with whom the choreographer is working for the first time.
All but one of the festival's seven choreographers have sought new music for their premieres; only Doug Varone chose existing music, by John Adams, for his three new works. (Ann Carlson, bucking the tide, put together the score for her new piece by herself.)


Running Sexism
To the Sports Editor:
At a time when young people are unfortunately becoming less and less active in physical activities, Marc Bloom is implying that girls would be better off becoming couch potatoes, which is also sexist.


Sally D. Jackson, Paul F. Nace Jr.
Sally D. Jackson, the president of Jackson &amp; Company, a public relations firm in Boston, was married Friday to Paul Foley Nace Jr., the president of Paul Nace &amp; Associates, a real estate development and consulting firm in Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Jerry Bellamy, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Biltmore Four Seasons Hotel in Montecito, Calif.
Ms.
Jackson, 47, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Jackson of Roslyn, L.I.
Her father, who is retired, was an announcer and host for radio and television programs.


CUOMO TO PROPOSE PACKAGE OF CUTS IN NEW YORK TAXES
Moving into an election year in which he may seek a fourth term, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will propose a package of tax reductions in his State of the State address on Wednesday, including a credit for low-income working families, administration officials said today.
The package is also expected to include cuts in the corporate tax surcharge and the state hotel tax.
Mr.
Cuomo plans to announce whether he will seek a fourth four-year term by the end of this week, but not until after delivering Wednseday's speech, said Anne W. Crowley, his press secretary.  [ Page 24. ]


REBEL ATTACKS HIT 4 TOWNS IN MEXICO
Hundreds of armed men who said they were declaring war on the Mexican Government attacked four towns in the southern state of Chiapas this morning, seizing Government buildings and killing as many as seven people, reports from the area said.
The insurgents, who launched their attacks about four hours after midnight, said they were members of the Zapata Army of National Liberation, a previously unknown group that takes its name from the peasant hero of the 1910 Mexican Revolution.
They vowed to advance on Mexico City unless the Government met their demands for sweeping social reforms.


The Furious Man From Busseto
VERDI A Biography.
By Mary Jane Phillips-Matz.
Illustrated. 941 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $45.


Not Quite A First
To the Editor:
In his article Bernard Weinraub says "Schindler's List" is the "first Hollywood film seeking to depict the enormity of the Holocaust." Mr.
Weinraub overlooks "Triumph of the Spirit," the 1989 film directed by Robert M. Young and starring Willem Dafoe and Robert Loggia; it was shot in Auschwitz and told of the roundup and extermination of Greek Jews.
There was also Alan Pakula's 1982 "Sophie's Choice," with Meryl Streep and Kevin Kline.


When 'No-o-o Problem' Means Big Problem
I AM starting the new year with a telephone story so banal that it qualifies as one of those everyday urban droplets that eventually gathers into the steady drips that leave grooves in our souls.
Sometime on Friday, Dec. 10, I called (212) 890-2350, the NYNEX Order Center, and ordered new telephone service from Mrs.
W.
Johnson, whose warm voice vibrated No-o-o Problem.
I never bothered to keep a coper's log, she was so positive.
She promised that sometime between 1 and 5 P.M. on Monday, Dec. 20, a technician would arrive and install my new phone.
Mrs.
W.
Johnson even gave me my new telephone number, although she did suggest that I shouldn't give it out quite yet.
If there was any problem -- and she chuckled at that improbability -- I should just call back and ask for her.


Three Ties Aren't Enough For Isles
Their own captain, Patrick Flatley, has accused the Islanders of being too vulnerable and volatile.
Their own coach, 60-something Al Arbour, has threatened to suit up on defense himself if his players don't get their act together.


For Cities in Middle Age, Growing Pains Are Real
NEW YORK CITY assumed its current shape 96 years ago in a joyous consolidation of Manhattan and the Bronx with the City of Brooklyn, Staten Island and the area now called Queens.
Around much of the country, cities still routinely annex neighboring areas.
But for New York, such expansion is now unthinkable, and in fact city government may go the way of Yugoslavia.
In November, Staten Island residents voted to secede, and Queens has a small secessionist movement too.
Why are some voices in the nation's biggest city saying, "Smaller is better"?
And why is this happening even as younger places, particularly in the Sunbelt, are successfully using the grow-your-own-city technique that New York employed at the last turn of the century?


The Question of Carlos
TRACKING THE JACKAL The Search for Carlos, the World's Most Wanted Man.
By David Yallop.
Illustrated. 629 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


For Giants, a Season of Surprises Needs One More
One Giants coach was asked this week about playing the mighty Dallas Cowboys, who recently had 11 players named to the Pro Bowl squad, enough to basically start their own team.
He laughed.
"In the history of the league," said offensive coordinator George Henshaw, "how many football teams have played against a traveling all-star team? That's what we're up against. It's like we're playing the Harlem Globetrotters."
The game that everyone has been talking about is finally here.
So much on the line, so much to lose.
The Giants must only hope they don't get slam-dunked like the Washington Generals.


Cokie Roberts, Nina Totenberg and Linda Wertheimer
For the 14.7 million listeners of National Public Radio, Cokie Roberts, 50, Linda Wertheimer, 50, and Nina Totenberg, 49, are the Three Musketeers: gutsy, witty, informed reporters who break stories from inside the Washington political machine.
As a troika they have succeeded in revolutionizing political reporting.
Twenty years ago Washington journalism was pretty much a male game, like football and foreign policy.
But along came demure Linda, delicately crashing onto the Presidential campaign press bus; then entered bulldozer Nina, with major scoops on Douglas Ginsberg and Anita Hill; and in came tart-tongued Cokie with her savvy Congressional reporting.
A new kind of female punditry was born.
Today the three are expanding their audiences by branching out into television.
Roberts, in addition to her NPR wake-up stint on "Morning Edition," is the first regular female panelist to appear on "This Week," on ABC, and is Ted Koppel's frequent understudy on "Nightline." Wertheimer anchors NPR's flagship broadcast, "All Things Considered," but also makes appearances on the CBS Sunday talkfest "Face the Nation." And Totenberg, NPR's legal affairs correspondent, does commentary and reporting for ABC.


Repairing a Leaky Faucet Can Make a Household Hero
FIXING a kitchen faucet is usually not only easy, but can also make a household hero in moments.
Most faucets are simple to take apart, clean and put back together -- often all that is needed to repair them -- with just a screwdriver and one or two pairs of pliers.
Single-handle faucets with a ball or a cartridge are the two most popular types.
The single handle controls both hot and cold water.
If the flow from a faucet is uneven or seems restricted, remove and clean the aerator, the small screen attached to the end of the faucet.
But before beginning, close the drain or cover it with an inverted saucer to avoid losing small parts.


'In Spiritual Places, Mundane Problems'
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 26 article, "In Spiritual Places, Mundane Problems," suggested that the West Park Presbyterian Church was cut out of the designation of the Upper West Side Historic District because its rector was the most vociferous opponent of the inclusion of his church in the district.
I was chairman of the Landmarks Preservation Commission at the time of this designation and I would like to set the record straight.


Street Vendors Agree to Move To 2 City-Approved Market Sites
Moving street peddlers off the sidewalks into their own city-sanctioned markets has been a difficult idea to sell in some neighborhoods.
But Washington Heights may be an exception.
Since Mayor Dinkins announced last spring that his administration would enforce laws against illegal sidewalk peddlers, the Department of Business Services has been looking at neighborhoods around the city with high concentrations of vendors to find a way to move them off the streets without creating disturbances.


Hartford Greets Minor League Basketball
WITH two seconds left in the first quarter, James Blackwell launched a 3-point shot from about 25 feet out that swished cleanly through the net, and the crowd at the Hartford Civic Center went wild.
The shot merely tied the score at 30-30, but it had earned the home team, the Hartford Hellcats, a half point.
And in the Continental Basketball Association such points (one point is awarded to the "winner" of each quarter and a half point for a tie) are important, since they can ultimately determine the champions in the league's four divisions.
As it turned out, the Hellcats, after "losing" the second period to the opposition, the Wichita Falls Texans, went on to win the third and fourth quarters and the game before a crowd of 3,526.
The victory earned the team 3 more points to give them 5 1/2 points for the night.


Miss McJennett And Mr. Scott
Patricia Ross McJennett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. McJennett 3d of Providence, R.I., was married on Thursday to John Douglas Scott, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas A. Scott of Menlo Park, Calif.
The Rev.
J.
Daniel Burke officiated at St.
Martin's Episcopal Church in Providence.
The bride, 24, and the bridegroom, also 24, graduated from Stanford University.
On Feb 1, she will begin a predoctoral fellowship at the National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases in Bethesda, Md.
Her father is the president of Adams Hill Consulting Inc., a financial consulting company in Providence.
Her mother, Jane P. McJennett, teaches at the Providence Country Day School.


Ruling May Keep Incinerator Cold
An administrative law judge reviewing the city's application to upgrade and reopen the Shore Road incinerator has ruled that hearings on its potential emissions must be held before any permits are granted.
The city's Corporation Counsel has appealed the ruling, which could delay the reopening for years.


Journal; Extras In the Shadows
Negative words about "Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's Holocaust movie, are verboten in polite company.
Everyone from President Clinton to the nation's movie critics has called it a masterpiece, with some enthusiasts pointedly reassuring readers that, at 3 hours 5 minutes, the film is not a moment too long.
"Schindler's List" is the culture's new Messiah: the antidote to the terrifying 1993 Roper Organization poll in which 22 percent of the American public expressed doubt that the Nazi extermination of the Jews actually happened.
So why, I asked myself, did this particular American Jew find "Schindler's List" more often numbing than moving?
And why am I skeptical that Holocaust ignoramuses will even see it, let alone be swayed by it?


News Media Vipers
To the Editor:
To those who believed that news coverage of the 1992 Presidential election was slanted against George Bush, I would suggest it is now evident that the news media do not play favorites.
From the insinuations surrounding President Clinton and Michael Jackson, it is clear the news media are not biased toward liberal or conservative issues.
Nor does there seem to be some cohesive plot.


3 Yachts Offer Cabins For Luxury Cruises
Three 125-foot yachts, each based in a different part of the world, now offer individual cabins to travelers who want to sail on the boats without chartering the whole thing.
Each has six luxury cabins, priced at $550 a person a day in double occupancy.
The boats, owned by Oceancruise of Switzerland, and available for booking through SMI Executive Yacht Charters of Newport, R.I., are Colombaio Sun, sailing in the Caribbean; Colombaio Star in the Gulf of California during the winter and in the Mediterranean during the summer, and Colombaio Sky in the Mediterranean.
Call (800) 547-1578.


Lawyers, Class Actions and Fees
To the Editor:
Kurt Eichenwald's article is a work of demonizing.
The demon is attorney Herbert Beigel of Chicago.
Herb, a former Justice Department prosecutor with the organized-crime task force, founded the firm Beigel &amp; Sandler (which now bears the sesquipedalian moniker of Beigel Schy Lasky Rifkind &amp; Hennessey).
Herb Beigel is also, I should disclose, my law partner and friend.


Repairing a Leaky Faucet Can Make a Household Hero
FIXING a kitchen faucet is usually not only easy, but can also make a household hero in moments.
Most faucets are simple to take apart, clean and put back together -- often all that is needed to repair them -- with just a screwdriver and one or two pairs of pliers.
Single-handle faucets with a ball or a cartridge are the two most popular types.
The single handle controls both hot and cold water.
If the flow from a faucet is uneven or seems restricted, remove and clean the aerator, the small screen attached to the end of the faucet.
But before beginning, close the drain or cover it with an inverted saucer to avoid losing small parts.


Teacher's Lessons About the Neediest Last for Years
Andrew D. Heineman, a lawyer in Manhattan, learned the importance of giving to charity when he was very young.
The value, he said, was not so much instilled in him as drilled into him.
In the late 1940's, at the Horace Mann School in Riverdale, Mr.
Heineman's Latin teacher was William J. Nagle, a fiery Irish scholar with a curly wisp of white hair.
Mr.
Nagle stood sentinel each morning at the entrance to the school's auditorium, where the students assembled before classes.
Every winter, he made it his personal mission to make sure that each youth contributed to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


ONE COP, EIGHT SQUARE BLOCKS
Future Kevin Jetts will be able to do more good if the communities they are policing aren't rotting from the inside out.
The place to begin is in school -- not with an occasional auditorium speech, but with an organized, ongoing program -- "Morality and Reason 101," if you like.
GLEN J. SPANGLER Long Island City, Queens


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $390,000
42 West 15th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 11 1/2-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls, 4 exposures; maintenance $1,148, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $398,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Eychner/Greenwich Village)


A Foundation Offers Prostitutes an Alternative
To the Editor:
Megan Ratner writes thoughtfully about her feelings toward the prostitutes who work on her block in " 'Them' and 'Us' " (Nov. 28).
She says that a "sea change in laws and attitudes is needed" so that these women's lives not be forfeit.
She believes such change "hardly likely."


Miss Gardner, Mr. Ginsberg
Stephanie Lynne Gardner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard M. Gardner of Andover, Mass., was married last evening to Scott Ginsberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Ginsberg of Marblehead, Mass.
Rabbi Harry A. Roth performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Ginsberg, 26, is a physical therapist and the clinical supervisor at the Northeast Rehabilitation Outpatient Center in North Andover, Mass.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the founder and medical director of New England Neurological Associates in North Andover.
Her mother, Naomi Gardner, is the director of public relations for the Northeast Rehabilitation Hospital in Salem, N.H.


Habitats/A Fort Greene Brownstone; Second Empire Phoenix
SPIKE LEE'S brownstone is three doors away, built during the Civil War in the same spectacular Second Empire French style as Dolores Hunter's house at 185 Washington Park.
"I knew this neighborhood before Spike Lee moved in," said Mrs.
Hunter, who is about to close on the final segment of a construction loan for her house in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn.
"There's always been doctors and lawyers here; it's always been a very reputable block."


Q and A
Interest On Security  Q. I have been advised that if a landlord deposits a tenant's security deposit in a non-interest- bearing account, there is no obligation for the landlord to pay interest to the tenant.
Is this so?


Corrections
An article on page 33 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the conductor Roger Norrington omits a line, and the page number on which the article is continued, in some copies.
The last sentence at the bottom of the second column should read, "And while it has become fashionable (especially in threatened mainstream orchestral circles) to twit period Romanticism as a fad best abandoned, Mr. Norrington's excursions into the late 19th century are just as appealing as his outings in older music." The article is continued on page 35.


An Update On Grandma's
On Jan. 1, the modern preoccupation with the lean and svelte swells to obsessional proportion as surely as does the holiday-indulged human physique.
The turn of the year is inexorably linked to turning a new dietary leaf, and even as people plan a celebratory bacchanalian fete, most of them are preoccupied with penance.
The question this time of year is: How best to implement a change of eating habits.
Thoughts of liquid diets and low-fat regimes abound and the public is buffeted, moment by moment, by the barrage of advertisements for commerical weight-loss regimes that appear, like angels of mercy, to banish the demon of overindulgence.


Time to Rock the Boat On Robbing the Cradle
The evidence against the tennis industry's penchant for cradle-robbing is hard to avoid: In the basket cases of Tracy Austin and Andrea Jaeger, tennis caused their bodies to disintegrate while they were still teen-agers, and in the more recent dilemma of Jennifer Capriati, the damage has spread to the psyche as well.
If the tennis community has a conscience at all, there won't be any 13-year-old pigtailed, pinafored "professionals" available for exploitation in 1995 and beyond.


POSTINGS: Madison at 68th; Facelift for 1882 Building
An old six-story building on the Upper East Side is getting a facelift, thanks to MaxMara, an upscale Italian women's clothing company.
MaxMara, which also owns stores in San Francisco and Palm Beach, Fla., is renovating the facade of the 10,000-square-foot building at 813 Madison Avenue, on the northeast corner of 68th Street.
Most notable will be the new limestone shop-front on the first two floors.


Seeking Autumn Stripers Under Winter Conditions
Recurrent northeasters and dropping temperatures drive striped bass from the New England coast south past New York waters in autumn.
In a good year, they will pause in the Bight and provide a period of exceptional fishing into early December, but it is the rare angling foray toward the latter part of the run that doesn't offer strong hints of the impending winter.
Fortunately, the predawn darkness on a recent day foretold of tolerable conditions ahead -- a hard frost had settled out of the night sky, indicating a chill start, but more importantly, merciful winds.


Events From Magic to Mime
A PUPPET show based on the "Snow Queen" story will be presented today at the Town Hall Theater in Irvington at 1:30 P.M.
Sibelius has unwittingly provided the musical score for this version by Playtime Productions, suitable for youngsters 4 and older.
Other events for children are in the offing at the Town Hall Theater.
Next Saturday at 7:30 P.M., Zauber and Company presents an evening of magic as a benefit for the Church of St.
Barnabas.
Then Playtime Productions returns on Jan. 22 at 1:30 P.M. with "The Wizard of Oz."To make reservations -- a good idea since tickets bought at the door cost $1 more -- call the box office at 591-6602.


Shari Loessberg, Christopher Smart
Shari Louise Loessberg, the daughter of William and Barbara Loessberg of Richardson, Tex., was married Friday to Christopher William Smart, a son of William and Avis Smart of Charleston, S.C.
The Rev.
Raymond Kemp performed the ceremony at St.
Steven Martyr Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
The bride is the vice president of corporate banking at the Dialog Bank in Moscow.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a law degree from the University of Texas at Austin.


Industrial Wastes In Sludge
The otherwise informative article "A 2-Million-Pound-a-Day Problem" (Nov. 28) fails to properly define sludge.
It is not simply "treated household sewage," nor is it "inadvertently" contaminated with industrial wastes.
In fact, the major problem in sludge processing is that these potentially hazardous industrial wastes are an integral and permanent component of the sludge itself.
Industrial plants disgorge their byproducts into the same sewer systems as our dwellings, so that many metals (e.g., lead, arsenic, copper, nickel, cadmium) and organic chemicals (e.g., PCB's, benzene compounds, ethers, formaldehyde, dioxins) are inherently present in sewage in concentrations that can vary dramatically from day to day.
Some of these substances can be toxic in very small amounts.


Business Diary: December 26 - 31
THE ECONOMY That Was the Week That Wasn't  Let's be honest about it: Nothing much happened last week -- except figuring out where to put those presents, how to pay those bills.
Yes, Government numbers came out, agencies made rulings, corporations issued press releases.
But we know computers were spitting out that data to maintain the illusion that solemn, sober capitalism can cruise through the holidays with barely a hiccup.
It brings to mind that futuristic classroom where the teacher's voice sputters out of a tape recorder, heard only by rows of students' tape recorders.
Still, the economic news that got through -- especially the word of surprising strength in the housing market -- was enough to nudge the stock market to three straight records, as the Dow industrials got within a hair of 3,800 before turning tail at week's end.


Charles Moore, Pied Piper of Post-Modernism
Perhaps it is unjust to say of an architect that he will be best remembered for something other than his buildings, especially when the architect designed as many wonderful buildings as Charles Moore did.
But what other way is there to make the point that Moore's passion for architecture was so broad and so deep that it started a whole generation of architects thinking a different way?
Moore, who died last month at 68, was our age's greatest architectural enthusiast.
He believed utterly in the power of architecture to reflect and enhance joy, and he communicated his feelings with such power that he became something of a pied piper of post-modernism.
He left the theorizing to Robert Venturi and the celebrity status to Michael Graves and Philip Johnson; his mission, as he saw it, was to preach a gospel of kindness and common sense.


The Executive Life; What's 3 Pounds Hefty, With Addresses? 1994
IN many professional and executive suites, the simple calendar is out of date.
Among those turning a page into 1994 will be millions who have given up the once-trusty pocket notebook or desktop reminder in favor of "personal organizers." These can be book-sized loose-leaf binders like Franklin Planners, Day Runners, Day-Timers and Filofaxes, which feature sections for addresses and phone numbers, maps and messages and personal notes, as well as dates.
High-tech types, meanwhile, opt for the electronics of Sharp Wizards and Casio Bosses, electronic organizers that provide a simliar system for tracking projects, monitoring tasks and finding key information quickly.
But a random survey suggests that people still feel safer with some paper at their fingertips.


The Philadelphia Story: Inspiring for New Mayor
Like Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Mayor of Philadelphia, Edward G. Rendell, is a former prosecutor with a penchant for the limelight, a white politician in his late 40's who succeeded his city's first black Mayor.
But it is their cities' common problems, not personal similarities, that attracted the new Mayor to Mr.
Rendell.
Mr.
Giuliani often has cited Mr.
Rendell's fiscal reforms in the nation's fifth-largest city as a possible guide for New York City.


UP AND COMING: Romane Bohringer; She Runs Scared, Wins Prizes
Romane Bohringer is the first to admit she is a bit overwhelmed by her sudden success.
"I'm only 20 years old," the French actress insisted.
"Every time I shoot a film, I feel it is my first. So I'm always learning. I have the impression I'm entirely new at this, that I know nothing."
Yet her performance in her first two films -- Claude Miller's "Accompanist," which opened in New York 10 days ago, and Cyril Collard's "Savage Nights," scheduled to open in New York next month, has already won her recognition here as a fine actress in the making.


Those Sob Sisters, Death and Loss, Arrive
This winter, 'tis the season to be melancholy, what with a flood of feature films that render viewers inconsolable.
"It's a three-handkerchief movie," brags an ad for "My Life," in which Michael Keaton discovers he has inoperable cancer.
A competing ad ups the ante, referring to "The Joy Luck Club" as a "four-hankie classic." It is, too, as it depicts the lives of four Chinese women who endure suffering in the country of their birth and, on top of that, cannot communicate with their American daughters.


'The Hub of Change Is Union Square'
To the Editor:
The Dec. 19 article "The Hub of Change Is Union Square" made no mention of The Guardian Life Insurance Company of America, a company that has been literally and figuratively a cornerstone of the Union Square area for 82 years.
It now has 1,500 employees in the Union Square area alone.


A Mayor Leaves, They Stay Behind
JOHN ZISSELL, a janitor, is the first one in, at 6 A.M.
"I turn on the lights," he says.
Then he raises the flag.
The day unwinds slowly at City Hall, but it quickens soon enough.
In the warmer weather, the aggrieved coagulate in groups on the graceful front steps, bay for the cameras and deposit their protests before breaking apart.
Inside, in corridors, in doorways, behind closed doors, men and women mull policy and political consequences.
Emotional issues, like what to do about carriage horses, bring floods of people through the grand rotunda.
Fifteen months ago, 10,000 police officers stormed the place.


How Politics Nipped a Sports Betting Bill
A campaign to legalize sports betting that ran longer and, at times, hotter than the recent gubernatorial election officially ended with the passing of 1993.
But before it passed into history it became an exercise in lobbying that rivaled anything New Jersey has seen, as it pitted the state's $7 billion casino industry against the wealthy owners of professional sports teams.
Though the debate was often cast as one centering on money and morality, the proposal's ultimate demise resulted from a political decision by a handful of state legislators that one Republican lawmaker said had more to do with his party's concerns about fueling Democratic voter turnout.


Celebrating New Flowers in a New Year
A FEW outstanding flowers have been announced for the New Year.
They will be worth watching for as the seed and nursery catalogues start arriving in the next few weeks.
The newcomers that every gardener usually watches for are the All-America Selections.
These prize winners are the grow-from-seed plants that have gone through two years of testing nationwide.
Judges compare them with flowers already in commerce to see if they are better.
Only the finest grow-from-seed plants make the awards list.


Now, Home Is Where the Job Is
IF the image of our past, whether based on myth or reality, is that the United States welcomed immigrants, we're losing our remaining illusions.
Data compiled by the Federal Census Bureau and other demographers indicate that for immigrants, the welcome wagon is often flanked by a "For Sale" sign."
The figures show that, with a few notable exceptions, states that are magnets to immigrants are becoming less attractive to native-born citizens and are either losing population or not growing as fast as they once were.


A Teacher's Lament On Teen-Age Pregnancy
To the Editor:
I have taught English in a vocational high school since 1957, and I have seen firsthand the sharp increase in teen-age pregnancy.
It led me to write this updated version of A. E. Housman's "When I Was One-and-Twenty."


For the Jets, It Figures to Be a Long Day's Journey Into Night
What a strange position for the Jets to be in for their last game of the regular season.
By the time they take the field against the Oilers at the Astrodome at 8 P.M.
Eastern time, the Jets will know exactly what's at stake in the game.
It's an all-or-nothing proposition.
The Miami-New England, Pittsburgh-Cleveland and Denver- Raiders games will be over before the Jets (8-7) play the Oilers (11-4).
The outcome of those earlier games will determine whether the Jets will be playing for the last playoff spot or simply playing out the string.


Piers With More Than a View
Except for its sweeping views of the Statue of Liberty, the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and the Manhattan skyline, the dilapidated waterfront along Red Hook hardly seems the spot for trendy waterside cafes, an Italian specialty food store and a glassware boutique.
But in the last year, a Brooklyn developer, Gregory O'Connell, has transformed a stretch of the area's never-picturesque waterfront into a thriving haven for import-export businesses and light manufacturing, the first step in his $2 million reclamation plan.


Science Fiction
As the millennium approaches, the collapse of civilization as we know it has become an increasingly popular subgenre in science fiction.
The collapse, which only a few years ago was typically triggered by nuclear war, is now more likely to be blamed on environmental or political mismanagement.
Such stories tend to focus on what happens after the old social order falls apart; the ensuing chaos offers a heady freedom that tempts many writers to make up their own rules as they go along.
In her fine new novel, PARABLE OF THE SOWER (Four Walls Eight Windows, $19.95), Octavia E. Butler accepts a more difficult challenge: poising her story on the brink of change, she tries to imagine a new social order at its moment of conception.
The opening chapters, set in southern California in the year 2024, depict a society that has continued to unravel from our own day but that nevertheless remains recognizable.
The middle-income community where 15-year-old Lauren Oya Olamina and her family live has a high wall around it; the price that water peddlers charge to street people has gone up again; there's a new drug called pyro that prompts addicts to get their kicks by setting fires.
But daily life by and large follows familiar grooves, and it takes an especially keen eye to see the great disaster looming.


And What About . . . ?
To the Editor:
George Stevens's 1959 film adaptation of the Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett play "The Diary of Anne Frank," starring Millie Perkins, was a superb example of American movie making and one of the first major films about the Holocaust.
RUSSELL J. CATALDO  Kearny, N. J.


Clear Today; Tomorrow, Who Knows?; Catch '94
IT'S a new year and therefore -- admit it and face it bravely -- time to look ahead.
The good news (or maybe not) is that the future may not be quite the yawning void of which Marcus Aurelius wrote.
That's only if the past is indeed prologue.
But it may not be.
It does, however, allow some educated guesses at what's coming.
Herewith a handful:


Crostini With Cheese and Olive Paste for Tasty Party Snacks
WHEN friends drop by over the New Year it would be great to offer them a pound of Beluga caviar with their drinks.
Whole black truffles would be nice, too, wrapped in bacon and aluminum foil and baked in the ashes of an open fire, just as they do in the south of France.
Most of us, alas! don't have quite such a well-stocked larder or the time to prepare platters of elaborate hors d'oeuvres.
I find that hot crostini always go down well with guests, whether they are drinking Cristal rose or a glass of beer.
Crostini (little toasts) are popular in Italy, where stale bread does not automatically find its way into the bird feeder, or worse still, out with the trash.
Instead, day-old bread is often toasted and used as a base for snacks made with various toppings.
I like to combine goat cheese with sun-dried tomatoes and black-olive paste for an easy, last-minute hors d'oeuvre, which is put under the broiler and served hot.
A good Vermont or English cheddar cheese also makes excellent crostini, combined with a dash of mustard.
The clean, tart flavor of green-olive paste (available at specialty stores) complements prosciutto and mozzarella to make crostini that go well with wine.


Fewer Killings Tallied in '93 In New York
Even as public outcry over violent crime grew, reported homicides in New York City declined slightly in 1993, continuing a trend, police officials said yesterday.
They attributed the drop to factors including the increase in police officers and efforts at community policing.
While the overall change was slight, there were large variations in the reported homicide rates for individual boroughs.
There was a major drop in Queens and smaller ones in the Bronx and Staten Island, along with a large rise in Brooklyn and a small one in Manhattan.


Lina Molokotos, Carl L. Liederman
Lina Molokotos, the daughter of Michael and Helen Molokotos of Kephisia, Greece, was married yesterday to Carl Leonard Liederman, a son of Veronica R. Kaufman of El Macero, Calif., and Dr.
Paul C. Liederman of San Diego.
Rabbi Charles Davidson and the Rev.
Henry Fehrenbacher, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Liederman, 28, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in communications from Boston University.
She is a market research analyst at the Periodical Studies Service, a magazine consulting company in New York.


Ten Years Young
IN the 10 years since Paper Magazine first appeared, New York's tidy pop culture scene has fragmented.
The melting-pot era of Studio 54, when everyone waited behind the velvet ropes together, evolved into a city tethered by velvet ropes of the imaginary kind.
First, rap culture emerged; then, hip-hop and rave.
The 60's were revived, then the 70's, and from the ashes of 1980's decadence arose Generation X, a group of young network television dropouts who didn't buy the traditional marketing methods used by magazines and advertising agencies.
From the start, Paper's independent, unpredictable approach to covering the arts, clubs, music and style has appealed to a young audience suspicious of the corporate world.
That pull, it seems, is still strong today.
"There is this reaction in Generation X against synthesizing, Corporate America and artificiality," said Kim Hastreiter, who has shared the titles of editor and publisher with David Hershkovits since the magazine's inception.
"Paper," she said "is not synthetic."


Governor's Quest for the Fish of Memory
The last crusade of Gov.
Cecil D. Andrus of Idaho, one of the most enduring politicians of the American West and the man who taught President Jimmy Carter how to fly fish, begins not far from his door at the Statehouse.
There, amid statues of heroic miners and pictures of oversized potatoes, is a prominent glass display of three mounted fish.
They are virtually all that is left from what used to a prodigious strain of salmon that would migrate 920 miles from the Pacific Ocean to the Continental Divide in Idaho to spawn.


SURFACING
PUBLISHING  New Yorker greetings: The Tina Brown regime continues to break with tradition at the 68-year-old New Yorker.
It has just entered into its first licensing deal, with Hallmark Cards, for a set of humorous cards featuring the magazine's trademark cartoons.


Civil Air Patrol's Mission Involves a Lot More Than Flying
THEY call themselves the Lone Eagle Squadron, but the name was not meant to imply an exclusive organization.
This 50-member Civil Air Patrol unit is actively recruiting other volunteers to help accomplish its missions of search, rescue and education.
Commitment is the main qualification to join.
Age is hardly a consideration.
At a recent exercise at Morristown Airport, some squadron members were a half-century older than others.
A love of aviation is a typical symptom, but it is not unanimous or even a requirement.


ONE COP, EIGHT SQUARE BLOCKS
Is it such a radical idea to reward people for the fine work they are doing, and let them continue to do the job at which they are succeeding?
It is no wonder that we lack stability in schools and neighborhoods and that good plans fail for want of common sense.
It happens in the classroom when marvelous teachers leave to take administrative positions, where they will be supervising adults or shuffling papers rather than dealing with children.
Now it is happening in law enforcement, where an individual who has worked hard to build rapport with a community must move to another area to procure advancement, as in the case of Officer Jett.
RITA F. TANCREDI Freeport, L.I.


On Washington; Up Close and Personal
We had settled what we were. Now we were simply haggling over the price.
It was one of those moments of cozy debasement that Washington specializes in, only this time the quid pro quo was more naked than usual.


A Jet Problem
To the Sports Editor:
As a season-ticket holder of the New York Jets since the team's inception, I read with interest the complaints of some of the players regarding "no-show" fans.
The explanation for this phenomenon is simple: for over 20 years, the Jets have been a lousy football team.
As a result, season-ticket holders cannot even give their seats away when unable to attend the game.
Is this my fault or the fault of the team?
LEONARD D. STEINMAN  New York


On Language; Next Year: Zero Misteaks
Experts who wallow in the admission of error erode the credibility of their mavenhood.
But in a doubt-defying feat of clay, let me rid my conscience of the most egregious of my last year's language gaffes, in both my language columns and my political essays, so as to start the year with a clean slate. (Thereby to would be better than so as to, but for some reason thereby has acquired an overly formal connotation, like albeit.)
When President Clinton spoke of "people that are different than we are," I popped him lightly on the use of different than, which is not as strong a differentiation as different from, but then went on to suggest fixing the end with "people who are different from ourselves."


Corrections
A caption with the music listings in the Arts and Leisure guide today misidentifies the singer shown.
He is Noel Harrison.


Alexes Hazen, David Boyum
Alexes Hazen, a daughter of William and Judith Hazen of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to David Anders Boyum, the son of Asmund and Joy Boyum, also of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Pamela Brownlow Bakal, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Hazen, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University, where she is now a second-year medical student.
Her father is a managing director of J. &amp; W. Seligman &amp; Company, an investment management firm in New York.
Her mother retired as the executive assistant at Sculpture House Casting Inc. in New York, a sculpture contracting and restoration company.


A Down-to-Earth Poet Is an Inspiration to Students
LEO CONNELLAN was one big surprise to Corey Vertefeuille.
"I pictured a poet as a hippie, or somebody just out of Yale -- definitely not him," Mr.
Vertefeuille said.
Mr.
Vertefeuille never expected a poet to be a big, bulky 65-year-old man who talks plainly and intensely about poetry, about his own hard life and hard work, and about how much ordinary people can accomplish despite the odds.


Mutual Funds; The Fading Luster of Utilities
WHEN the mutual fund industry discovers it has a product offering a seemingly unbeatable combination of high return, good income and low risk, it does what you'd expect: pump out many more of the winning funds.
And that's just what has happened over the last year with utility funds.
Merrill Lynch, Alliance, Benham, American Capital, Strong and Lindner, among others, all recently started utility funds or have them in the works.


Japanese Ceramics Take Forms Human And Otherworldly
Japanese potters continue to lead the world in innovative ceramics of remarkable diversity, ranging from roughly glazed pots to shimmering celadon vases.
And, increasingly, they are combining sculptural forms with evocative finishes that simulate the look of parched earth, speckled stone, rippled cloth, pitted metal or abstract painting.
The creative energy visible throughout "Modern Japanese Ceramics in American Collections," an exhibition at the Japan Society Gallery through Feb. 6, reflects in large measure skillful adaptations of ancient, medieval and 19th-century potting techniques.
The show is the first comprehensive survey in the West of contemporary Japanese ceramics.
The majority of the 120 works by 87 artists are utilitarian objects -- vases, platters, bottles, boxes and trays.
Some of the other pieces, which are sculptures, nonetheless have characteristics like those in food or wine vessels.


Interested in Hell
To the Editor:
While I too am grateful for the many good illustrations that may be found in Alice Turner's "History of Hell," I wish to dissent in part from Andrew Greeley's positive review thereof (Dec. 12).
This book represents very weak scholarship and incredibly thin theology, and has all the marks of a book by a Playboy fiction editor who has had a smattering of courses in comparative religion.


Technology; In Far More Gadgets, a Hidden Chip
EACH DAY, hundreds of computers no larger than a postage stamp control what we can and cannot do, infiltrating ever deeper reaches of our material lives.
Called "embedded" microcontrollers, or microprocessors, the tiny devices are single-purpose computers that makers of everything from cable TV converter boxes to car engines, sewing machines to Stairmasters, are using to give their products the sophisticated features consumers now take for granted.


Putting a High Gloss on Berlin and Potsdam
IN EVERY GREAT CITY, THERE ARE small museums and galleries in which we can find, one at a time, sharp-focus scholarly exhibitions.
In those small but cogent displays, informational overload plays no part.
We leave them renewed and refreshed.
The special exhibitions downstairs at the Frick Collection are an example of this.
So are the loan shows at the Drawing Center in SoHo.
A new entrant in this category is the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts, which has recently opened in an elegant five-story town house, remodeled for the purpose, at 18 West 86th Street in Manhattan.
As its name indicates, it is primarily a teaching institution at graduate level, but it also has in hand an exhibition program.


Wall Street; Who Works Hardest Among the Analysts?
BY some measures, the Wall Street grind is worst at Salomon Brothers Inc. -- for people in the business of securities research.
Each of Salomon's 83 analysts covered 18 companies on average during 1993, according to Nelson's Investment Research, a Port Chester, N.Y., publisher of data on Wall Street research.
That compares with a more modest 10.5 companies followed by each of Merrill Lynch's 150 analysts worldwide and 11 apiece by the 110 analysts at Lehman Brothers.
Nelson's said that Merrill Lynch was the most aggressive hirer of analysts in 1993, increasing its number of stock analysts covering American companies by 19 percent.
Merrill covers 1,045 American companies, up from 930 in 1992, Nelson's said.


Suzanne Bratone, Nicholas Childs
Suzanne Bratone, the daughter of Arthur and Barbara Bratone of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married Friday to Nicholas d'Olier Childs, a son of David and Anne Childs of New York.
The Rev.
Erik Kolbell, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 26, graduated from Colby College, as did her husband.
She is a specialist in the corporate contributions department of the Philip Morris Companies in New York.
Her father is a shareholder in several overseas companies, including Batco Industries, a construction-equipment distribution company in Bornem, Belgium.
Her mother is the executive director of the American Indian College Fund in New York.


Q and A
Italy by Bus and Train
Q.
I will be traveling to Italy next May and I will spend a few weeks in Montefortino, in The Marches region north of Ascoli Piceno.
Is it possible to take a train from Rome to Ascoli Piceno and then a bus to Amandola and Montefortino?
Please tell me if there are any other options. -- Ralph J. Buratti, Bethelem, Pa.


An Encounter With Mortality Breathes New Life Into Art
For three months, Sandi Gold toiled away in the gallery of the library here, painting and drawing with pastels for 12 hours a day, six days a week until she produced a monumental mural that stretched almost 60 feet.
Then, this afternoon, armed with sponges, mops, water and paint, she washed it all away.


Adult Class Offers New Slant on Theater
ANGELS IN AMERICA" is not a show that Peter and Leda Kahn would have normally ventured to see. The provocative Broadway show, subtitled "A Gay Fantasia on National Themes," is an ambitious, two-part, seven-and-a-half-hour production, which moves freely between fantasy and reality, combining characters dead and alive and tackling themes as broad and divergent as gay life styles, the moral responsibility of the individual, the role of government and the existence of God. The Kahns gave it mixed reviews.
"It just wasn't my kind of thing," Mr.
Kahn, who is retired from the export business, said.
"They overdid it and wore you out. It was like going to a banquet and eating too much."


Seductive Catalogues Versus Realistic Plants
I SPENT the holidays in New Hampshire -- with no turkey, hurray! -- and walked along an icy river in a woods barely crusted with snow.
We saw beaver dams -- and the lodge where they sleep -- but no beavers; just the footprints of their wedged paws.
And as the sky darkened at only 4 o'clock, and the water turned to black satin, a pointy head broke the surface.


ONE COP, EIGHT SQUARE BLOCKS
Policing in the next century must be proactive rather than merely reactive.
Community policing is a means to that end.


Welfare and Social Work Both Need Reform
To the Editor:
"Welfare Recipients Are Victims, Not Criminals" (letter, Dec. 20) by Jennifer E. Baity, a graduate student at the Columbia University School of Social Work, states she is alarmed by the "frightening implications" of President Clinton's proposed welfare reform.


A Bite of Emu
Passengers on Qantas Airlines were requesting lighter, healthier Australian food, according to an airline spokeswoman.
So Qantas is serving emu, a flightless bird that looks like a giant ostrich, on long-haul flights originating in Australia.
The farm-bred emu is red meat but is low in cholesterol, the spokeswoman explained.
First-class passengers tuck into a smoked emu appetizer; in business class, the emu is braised in garlic and ginger.
Economy class, alas, gets none.


About Weddings
Starting today, the Weddings pages will be devoted entirely to reports of marriages.
Engagement notices will be discontinued to create space for a larger number of weddings each week.


POSTINGS: Housing for Low-Income Elderly; . . . 130 on 8.5 Acres in Westfield, N.J.
Construction began last month on a 130-unit housing project for the elderly in Westfield, N.J., on a site adjacent to an existing home, Westfield Senior Citizen Housing.
Forest City Ratner Companies is the developer of the project.
The architect is Swanke Hayden Connell Ltd. of Manhattan.


Hospital Switches Its Academic Partner
Beth Israel Medical Center has become the Manhattan campus for the Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University in the Bronx.
Under a new agreement, many of the 700 students at Albert Einstein College will get their clinical education at Beth Israel's 940-bed hospital at First Avenue and 16th Street or its 240-bed North Division on East End Avenue and 87th Street.


Doe Mayer, Jed Dannenbaum
Doe Mayer, a daughter of Janet and Michael Mayer of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married on Thursday to Jed Dannenbaum, the son of the late George and Virginia Dannenbaum.
Rabbi Marc Sirinsky performed the ceremony at the Malibu (Calif.) Club.
Ms.
Mayer, who will keep her name, graduated from New York University.
She is an associate professor of film and television production and the director of the documentary production program at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles, where she received a master's degree in film production.


Elizabeth O'Connell and Horatio Potter
Elizabeth Gunn O'Connell, a daughter of Carol G. Cushman and a stepdaughter of Charles W. Cushman of Hartland Four Corners, Vt., and Tokyo, was married on Monday to Robert Hitt Horatio Potter, a son of Diana B. Hitt Potter of Stockbridge, Mass., and Jeffrey B. Potter of East Hampton, L.I.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
The bride, 31, graduated from Columbia University.
She teaches the second grade at the Children's Storefront School in New York.
Her stepfather is an English professor at Tokyo and Toin Universities in Tokyo and the coordinator of the Toin Cultural Student Exchange Program.
Her mother is an English lecturer at the Waseda University High School in Tokyo.


Sports of The Times; Phil Simms Is 'Most Valuable'
IN the Giants' locker room, Doug Riesenberg was describing what Phil Simms is like in the huddle.
"Phil exudes confidence, he takes control," the right tackle said.
"He has presence. He could be getting killed, but he doesn't whine. If somebody's offside, he'll say, 'I can't believe that.' But he doesn't chew you out."


All the Presidents' Man
TENSION BETWEEN OPPOSITES Reflections on the Practice and Theory of Politics.
By Paul H. Nitze.
Illustrated. 212 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.


Streetscapes/Central Park's Bridle Paths; The Challenge of Restoring Long-Neglected Trails
CENTRAL PARK'S bridle trails offer a perfect illustration of what the park was like before the Central Park Conservancy began to make a difference a decade ago: They look like abandoned wagon paths, alternately swampy mud and rocky hardpan, bounded by collapsing fencing and scraggly undergrowth.
The Conservancy is ready to fix the trails, too, and the nonprofit organization's most recent fund-raising effort displays not only its usual determined ingenuity but also the challenges that such a restoration faces.


Keeping Doors Shut
It weighs just over seven ounces and looks like a geometry class prop.
But when it's slipped under a door, the Swege, a triangular black block lined with 20-gauge stainless steel, holds the door shut, providing security and privacy.
"It's not new for the hotel maid to knock once and barge in," said John Hebert, its inventor.
The Swege -- the name comes from safety and wedge -- comes in a neat felt travel bag and costs $19.95, plus $3.50 shipping.
Contact Sentinel Door Guard Inc. at (800) 366-7778.
TERRY TRUCCO


Save the Neighborhood. Fix the Pudding.
THE day was not going well for Seymour Siegel, a food manufacturer who produces, among other things, 1 million pounds of coleslaw and 1.5 million pounds of potato salad every day.
First, the shrimp was not fresh.
His son Richard, the company's chief executive, had just rejected 9,000 pounds of it, delaying by a day the preparation of thousands of shrimp salads.
Then at noon he learned that his noodle pudding, based on a heavenly recipe from his mother, Jean, was too thick, and ordered about 30 pounds of it thrown away.


Repairing a Leaky Faucet Can Make a Household Hero
FIXING a kitchen faucet is usually not only easy, but can also make a household hero in moments.
Most faucets are simple to take apart, clean and put back together -- often all that is needed to repair them -- with just a screwdriver and one or two pairs of pliers.
Single-handle faucets with a ball or a cartridge are the two most popular types.
The single handle controls both hot and cold water.
If the flow from a faucet is uneven or seems restricted, remove and clean the aerator, the small screen attached to the end of the faucet.
But before beginning, close the drain or cover it with an inverted saucer to avoid losing small parts.


Heather H. Hoyt, William Neburka
Heather Hamilton Hoyt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry H. Hoyt Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to William Ramsey Neburka, the son of John W. Neburka of Bradford, Pa., and Linda R. Fisher of Wilmette, Ill.
The Rev.
Gary Fertig performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.


Dishonor for a Hero President
Ulysses S. Grant may rank as a disappointing President, but he was a hugely popular and widely respected war hero.
His remains deserve better treatment than they get from the National Park Service, keeper of his massive tomb in New York City.
The sepulcher shows its age.
Frank Scaturro, a 21-year-old history major at Columbia University, has undertaken to set things right by documenting the tomb's condition and neglect in a lengthy report he sent to everyone from President Clinton on down.
He became fascinated by Grant as a 12-year-old, and hasn't quit.
Studies at Columbia now put him just a few blocks from the tomb on Riverside Drive.


A Debate Stirs: Should 'Georges' Get a Face Lift?
Like many faces that have been outside in New York for a long time, George Washington's -- staring up Fifth Avenue from two marble likenesses on the Washington Square arch -- shows the ravages of life in the city.
After a sandblasting in 1966, both statues, along with the arch itself, began a deterioration hastened by pollution and age.
Now, as plans for the arch's first comprehensive renovation start to move through the city review process, which could take up to two years, conservationists have begun debating how best to preserve the statues.
Some are arguing that there is nobility in the time-worn visages of the figures, which depict Washington in peace and in war.
Others want them retired to a less rigorous public display, removed from the elements and replaced in the arch with more resilient replicas.


For Drugstores, Pushing Pills Is Much Less Profitable
UNTIL you talk to them, Bert Drachtman and Alexander Grass do not seem to have much in common.
Mr.
Drachtman and his wife run the Seventh Avenue Pharmacy in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn, while Mr.
Grass runs the Rite Aid Corporation, a $4 billion-a-year drugstore chain that definitely is not a Mom and Pop operation.
But increasingly, Mr. Drachtman and Mr. Grass are talking the same language.


SUNDAY, January 2, 1994; Virtual Morality
What makes a good video game?
Never mind whether and how to regulate the violent content of such games.
The more interesting question is: What makes these games tick?
A quick and unscientific review of successful games suggests that first, they have to have a mythic underpinning.
Think of the Mario brothers as trickster figures.
Witness the ubiquitous Wagnerian elves, damsels, monsters and heroes.
"The Legend of Zelda" might as well have been "Der Ring des Nibelungen" for the musically impaired.


Ker-BLAM!
Ed Kirko says he's never heard of Giorgio Armani.
Or Donna Karan.


The Nation; Add Gun Buybacks To the Public Wish List
IT may have started as a holiday exercise in wishful thinking.
But last week, as a "toys for guns" exchange in Manhattan's embattled Washington Heights continued to draw in scores of weapons each day, grizzled police veterans were becoming believers and even the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People had joined in, laying plans to sponsor similar programs in other cities.
Before Christmas, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelley had compared the new program to chicken soup: can't do any harm.
But his tone changed as the guns poured in in response to a local businessman's offer of a $100 Toys-R-Us gift certificate for each surrendered weapon, on top of $75 in cash offered from an existing city gun-purchase program.
"I'm converted," the Police Commissioner told reporters.
"Sometimes chicken soup works."


Confusing Start for the Theater Season
WHATEVER is destined for the second half of the New Jersey theater season is bound to be calming, in contrast to the confusion and tumult of its beginnings.
For openers, "Paper Moon" was being touted by the Paper Mill Playhouse as a Broadway tryout -- no maybes about it -- so that audiences in New Jersey were all revved up about getting a jump on New York.
A premiere date was set and a marquee put in place, with full-page advertisements heralding the event.


The Tortugas: Reefs and Wrecks
AFTER a 25-minute flight from Key West, our floatplane entered the anchorage of Garden Key in the Dry Tortugas through much the same narrow channel, bordered by forests of staghorn coral, as had Spanish caravels centuries ago.
Peering through the salt-glazed window of the low-flying aircraft, I could observe hawksbill and loggerhead sea turtles.
In the distance was the imposing structure of Fort Jefferson, the largest of America's 19th-century coastal forts.
Seventy miles west of Key West in the Gulf of Mexico, the Dry Tortugas are seven tiny islands, the shapes of which are continually being altered by wind and sea.
By boat, the Dry Tortugas are five to six hours from Key West.
The seas can be rough, so an up-to-date nautical chart (National Ocean Service 11438) is strongly recommended.
Charts can be obtained from local marinas.


Commercial Property/A Look Back at 1993; Taking the Bad With the Good in the Year That Was
IT'S hard to resist plagiarizing Charles Dickens when you assess the last year in real estate.
It was indeed the best of times and the worst of times.
The good news first.
Most property managers, brokers and leasing agents saw their revenues go up.
The landlord's queue at bankruptcy court was barely a few folks deep, and many found that mortgage-backed securities were a viable route to refinancing troubled buildings.
Rents in midtown crept up as large blocks of better space got scarce.


President's Accuser: A Perennial Foe Who Still Insists He Is Clinton's Friend
Cliff Jackson was eating a tuna sandwich at the Kettle, a 24-hour restaurant here, trying to explain what it was that led him to spread stories damaging to his fellow Arkansan and former Oxford classmate, Bill Clinton.
"It has nothing to do with sex," said the man who had arranged for two state troopers to make accusations in a national publication that they had set up sexual liaisons for Mr.
Clinton while he was Governor of Arkansas.
Rather, Mr.
Jackson said, "sex is a symptom of the basic Bill Clinton -- the deception, manipulation and exploitation of people."


Giuliani May Model Fiscal Plan On Innovations Tried Elsewhere
When Rudolph W. Giuliani raises his hand for his final, ceremonial swearing-in today, he will assume the helm of a municipal government that is vast in scale and ambition but is living chronically beyond its means and is facing a budget gap of more than $2 billion.
Mr.
Giuliani, the first Republican Mayor of New York City since John V. Lindsay, has promised to change all that.
Following the lead of fiscally conservative mayors in Philadelphia, Los Angeles and Indianapolis, and citing innovations undertaken in Phoenix, Mr.
Giuliani seems prepared to bring New York into a great urban experiment.


Revamping an Old Subway Station
Built 90 years ago, the Union Square subway station has become one of the city's busiest, shabbiest and most confusing.
Now, after undergoing piecemeal renovations over the years, the station is scheduled for a major overhaul aimed at improving the flow of pedestrian traffic.
The Transit Authority is hoping to present plans at a joint meeting of Community Boards 4, 5 and 6 this month.
The project, which will cost $38.5 million, is expected to reach the bidding stage by August, with construction starting by December, said Valerie Baker, the Transit Authority's deputy vice president and chief architect.
The project is part of a Transit Authority plan to renovate the entire underground system; since 1983, improvements have been completed on 61 stations.


Why Destroy Incentives For Builders to Use Plazas?
To the Editor:
I am a strong supporter of limits to the development of massive towers in the city.
However, it seems to me that Proposal 2 in the City Planning Department's recommendations, as reported in The City on Dec. 5 and Dec. 26, is an example of throwing out the baby with the bath water.


Strike Up the Bodhran! The 'Seisuns' Will Go On


Christopher Spreads The Limelight Around
THE Clinton Administration has embarked on a new foreign policy strategy.
Call it constructive repackaging.
The strategy, made evident in two new appointments over the last few weeks, involves a change not in ideologies but in personalities, and a focus on marketing the message better to Congress and the American people.


Awaiting Word of Cuomo's Plans
All eyes will be on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo this week, and not just because he will be delivering the 12th State of the State address of his career.
Mr.
Cuomo is also expected to reveal his plans for the new year, such as whether he will spend 1994 as a candidate for re-election or as a lame duck.
The Governor, who originally said he would announce a decision by the end of 1993, now plans to disclose his intentions at the end of this week, said Anne W. Crowley, his press secretary.


They're No. 1


Cape Town Journal; But Will '94 Be a Cakewalk for These Strutters?
This is how Marawaan Giergo and thousands of other victims of apartheid greeted 1994, the year of their expected liberation from white rule:
They dressed themselves in bright satin suits and bow ties and cheap Panama hats.
They painted their faces minstrel-style in black and white.
Clutching little umbrellas, they capered before their families and friends to songs that ranged from "Old Folks at Home" to "The Impossible Dream."


New Mayor Takes His Oath In a Sea of Democratic Faces
Threading his way through City Hall's worn old rotunda yesterday morning, Raymond B. Harding, the leader of the state Liberal Party and one of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's principal backers, paused to smile and exult: "The day of liberation is at hand -- from the 22-year hegemony of the Democratic control at City Hall."
But Mr. Harding's words were barely out of his mouth before their limits came clear.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI PROMISES AN ERA OF INNOVATION
Calling on New Yorkers to cast aside fears and doubts, Rudolph William Giuliani, a former Federal prosecutor who cracked two decades of Democratic dominance of City Hall, was inaugurated as the 107th Mayor of New York City and promised that his administration would usher in an era of innovation and revived confidence.
A1.


Giuliani's No-Frills Speech Evokes an Earlier Era
RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI pledged yesterday that "New York City is poised for dramatic change."
But what change?


Holtz Sees Neither Logic Nor Justice in No. 2 Rating
Lou Holtz, the Notre Dame coach, mixed sarcastic humor with a touch of self-pity today in discussing the poll balloting that left his Fighting Irish as the No. 2 team in college football.
Florida State, Holtz said, is "an outstanding team."


Moe Isn't Picky; Any Medal Will Do
Tommy Moe will celebrate his 24th birthday during the Winter Olympics.
He has picked out the perfect present.
There's always room in his jewelry collection for a medal from the men's downhill race.
Moe, who is from Palmer, Alaska, stepped into his first pair of skis at age 4.
He won the world junior championship at 19 and was pegged as the next great American downhiller.
Nearly five years later, he has become an overnight success.


Outlook '94; Soundings
Over the River and Through the Woods
Just think.
The same $10 billion satellite technology the Defense Department uses to target missiles and navigate sea and sky is on its way to helping Buicks and Hondas launch pinpoint visits to in-laws and shopping malls.
The global positioning system of 24 satellites allows anyone with a pocket-sized receiver to deterimine their best trajectory.
What if there's a glitch?
Well, Tomahawk missiles might level the Paramus Park Mall as hordes of shoppers converge on Iraq's Defense Ministry clamoring for Sega's latest Sonic the Hedgehog games.
For Your Business Card, An Internet Address
Coming to a computer screen near you this year: more e-mail and e-papers.
The hottest addition to a business card will be an Internet electronic mail address, right below your personal fax and mobile phone numbers.
As for e-papers, some are already on-line, with more set for this year.
Right now, say some news executives, e-news and advertising is only where television was in the 1940's.
In the coming decades, they say, cryptic commands and abort, retry and fail messages will become forgotten insults to fully empowered couch potatoes.
Fortuneless Fats
Maybe Calvin Trillin was right when he said that those Midwestern grain silos hold stockpiles of leftover Chicken a la King.
If so, where will food and chemical processors stash all their leftover Simplesse and other Frankenstein diet compounds of the 1980's?
These, remember, were to slice quivering chunks of fat from our meals and our physiques with no taste loss.
Nutrasweet has already quit making Simple Pleasures, its Simplesse ice cream.
Other fake fats win few nods from consumers or the F.D.A.
Watch for more silos.
Bart Meets Madden
Boom!
Bam!
Doink!
That's either the sound of John Madden calling a football game with Pat Summerall or Rupert Murdoch buying N.F.C. broadcast rights, $1.6 billion worth, for his Fox Network.
Summerall and Madden are a team built out of succinct subtlety and Rabelesian wit, a duo that seems to have been mated since the days of Amos Alonzo Stagg.
Problem is, they work for CBS, which is left without football for the first time since the Eisenhower administration.
Madden's agent has already heard from Fox, however, and Bart Simpson is still available.
Have Pen Spell Gibberish
Dadaist poets of the World War I era composed verses by pulling words on paper scraps out of hats.
Proof, perhaps, that Apple's Newton is not ahead of its time, but seven decades behind.
Meant to be the first hand-held computer to recognize written words, it instead became a babbling generator of gibberish, costing a hatful of big bills.
EO, Momenta and Zoomer also proved to be less clever than their names.
For now, the keyboard remains mightier than the pen.
In Advertising A New Bluff
Don't touch that remote control.
It may seem like the same old boring ad, but it's a new and improved boring ad.
Such is the plea from advertisers who prepare several different commercials in the same campaign to hold viewers who can immediately banish spots they've already seen, and seen.
Advertisers want different advertisements for different audiences and shows.
Sometimes, however, attacking from all sides causes unintended casualties.
The barrage of 80 different ads CBS made to introduce its new late-night host left even David Letterman sputtering.
He's Laughing All the Way to the Bank
They call it free speech.
But "The Miss Howard Stern New Year's Eve Pageant," costing $39.95 on pay-per-view, was expected to gross at least $6 million for the host.
Mr.
Stern has also multiplied his fortune by turning bawds, body parts and bigotry into books, books, books, plus the top-rated radio show in New York.
He became a civil liberties test case once the F.C.C. fined his employer, Infinity Broadcasting, $1.2 million.
Then, last week, the agency delayed the company's purchase of three large radio stations.
By the time the case ends, Supreme Court Justices will probably be listening to his show.
But hopefully, for safety's sake, not while they're driving.


A High-Technology Outcry Against the U.S. Patent System
The nation's 203-year-old patent system is on a collision course with new technology.
Framing a crucial public-policy issue for 1994, a growing number of software publishers and patent experts are calling for fundamental changes in the way the Government assigns ownership to computer hardware and software inventions.
Failure to revise the system, these critics say, will stifle creativity in crucial high-technology areas.


...Today's Corporate Game Plans Know No Boundaries: ABB Asea Brown Boveri; Global Arms, Regional Muscle
A lot of companies like to call themselves global.
Few can do so with as much justification as ABB Asea Brown Boveri, the Zurich-based industrial giant, which operates 1,300 companies in 140 countries.
Operating worldwide is not a plus by definition.
With most big markets in recession for the past two years, profits have stagnated at ABB after doubling from 1988 to 1992.
Demand has shrunk in its core business of supplying the electric-power generation and distribution industries.


Fran Carpentier, Ira Louis Salom
Fran Carpentier, a senior editor of Parade magazine in New York, and Dr.
Ira Louis Salom, an internist with the Queens-Long Island Medical Group in Elmhurst, Queens, were married yesterday.
Judge Shirley Wohl Kram of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated at the Water's Edge Restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 38, is the daughter of Victor and Stella Carpentier of Brooklyn.
She and her husband graduated from New York University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Language of the Deaf Evolves To Reflect New Sensibilities
Perhaps as recently as two or three years ago, a deaf person would sign the word "Japanese" simply by twisting the little finger next to the eye.
But today, many of the more than 200,000 people who use American Sign Language avoid using this sign because it is a reference to a stereotypical physical feature, slanted eyes.


THE NEW MAYOR: The Overview; Giuliani Urges Dream of Better City and End to Fear
Calling on New Yorkers to cast aside fears and doubts, Rudolph William Giuliani, a former Federal prosecutor who cracked two decades of Democratic dominance of City Hall, was inaugurated yesterday as the 107th Mayor of New York City and promised that his administration would usher in an era of innovation and revived confidence.
"The era of fear has had a long enough reign," said Mr.
Giuliani in a speech from the steps of City Hall.
"The period of doubt has run its course. As of this moment, the expressions of cynicism -- New York is not governable, New York is not manageable, New York is not worth it -- all of these I declare politically incorrect. Let's not use them anymore."
Addressing an audience of 5,000 gathered on a brilliant and crisp winter day, Mr.
Giuliani pledged to "summon our courage to raise our hope and to build our confidence." Mr.
Giuliani, the first Republican to be elected Mayor since 1966, also asked for a chance to demonstrate his ideas.
"Don't let those who are so fearful of transformation stop the process before it begins, killing ideas by fear," he said.


Technologies to Watch: From Antisense and CD-ROM . . . : Biotechnology; Medicine Tries A New Route
If it can be seen, heard or read, the impulse these days is to turn it into a digital data file and sell it to someone willing to pay good money to see, hear or read it.
Little surprise, then, that the technologies to watch in 1994 involve the storage or transmission of information. (Although in one case, the information transfer occurs not between computers but within the cells of the human body.)
Few approaches in biotechnology's continuing quest to produce safer and more potent drugs have been as tantalizing as antisense, which offers the promise of specific action by halting disease at the genetic level.
This year, the first antisense compounds should complete human trials, which could lead to commercial drugs by mid-1995.


The Performance Record, by Type of Fund
Listed below are the 33 major types of mutual funds, with their abbreviations used in the main table, and the performace of the best and worst funds in each group, as well as the average performance.
Figures for the quarter and year ended Dec. 31 are total returns, assuming reinvested dividends.
Figures for the five-year period are annualized.
3
MONTH
TOTAL
RETURN
ONE
YEAR
TOTAL
RETURN
Abbrev./Fund Objective
No.
Best
Avg.
Worst
No.
Best
Avg.
Worst
DOMESTIC GENERAL STOCK FUNDS
AG Aggressive Growth
45
10.72
1.41
-20.73
43
41.39
17.81
3.93
C Growth
389
9.54
2.23
-7.11
354
38.99
12.14
-9.01
GI Growth and Income
222
8.82
2.02
-4.28
203
37.07
11.62
-3.5
EI Equity Income
58
5.57
1.15
-8.09
53
24.90
13.68
-3.51
SC Small Company
141
11.54
2.50
-7.81
124
58.50
17.21
-10.06
DOMESTIC SPECIALIZED STOCK FUNDS
SF Financial
11
5.92
-3.12
-8.60
11
49.30
18.24
-0.36
SH Health Care
11
13.62
8.80
2.57
11
11.81
1.22
-8.41
SN Natural Resource
15
13.43
-1.84
-12.97
14
37.94
20.46
2.89
SP Precious Metals
21
37.07
27.65
19.37
21
264.94
92.44
55.90
ST Technology
20
8.41
1.31
-5.61
20
43.32
24.90
7.47
SU Utility Industry
48
12.21
-1.89
-7.26
38
47.65
16.08
8.03
S Other Specialized
16
10.83
2.79
-7.38
16
51.42
21.31
-4.87
INTERNATION STOCK FUNDS
WW Worldwide
60
18.42
9.62
0.26
52
59.50
32.29
17.10
WP Pacific Area
33
49.56
20.51
-23.93
25
105.70
57.31
14.15
WE European
17
13.01
9.06
2.90
17
38.26
29.28
22.95
WF Other Foreign
111
39.73
13.40
-0.49
94
85.81
42.14
20.74
HYBRID FUNDS
AA Asset Allocation
60
25.85
3.27
-1.87
51
75.82
15.48
4.91
B Balanced
97
5.91
1.20
-5.36
87
21.85
10.96
-1.05
I Income
38
8.21
1.74
-2.34
33
21.54
12.74
-0.08
CV Convertible Bond
17
4.04
1.75
-2.29
17
24.47
16.24
9.92
INTERNATIONAL BOND FUNDS
WB World Bond
63
15.66
3.25
-3.97
56
51.57
17.26
4.65
SW Short Term World Inc.
27
4.02
1.51
-0.21
26
11.89
6.25
-0.26
CORPORATE BOND FUNDS
CG General Corporate
167
5.31
0.20
-2.21
147
30.97
10.69
3.41
CQ High Quality Corp.
98
1.40
0.00
-1.59
94
14.95
8.43
2.40
CY High Yield Bond
76
6.63
4.67
1.03
69
31.69
19.47
12.95
GOVERNMENT BOND FUNDS
GG General Government
184
8.34
-0.09
-3.76
155
21.28
7.89
1.77
GT Treasury Bond
42
0.60
-0.66
-4.63
40
35.62
11.39
2.27
GM Mortgage
77
1.79
0.29
-0.87
70
13.68
6.85
1.61
GA Adj. Rate Mortgage
48
1.44
0.49
-1.25
44
7.06
3.78
-0.53
MUNICIPAL BOND FUNDS
MN National Municipal
233
3.41
1.14
-0.46
212
16.01
11.27
3.84
MY New York Municipal
64
1.99
1.07
0.10
60
15.48
12.18
7.69
MC California Municipal
78
2.00
0.96
0.03
73
26.37
12.28
5.84
MS Other State Municipal
287
2.27
1.06
-0.38
268
15.02
12.12
5.70
FIVE
YEAR
TOTAL
RETURN
Abbrev./Fund Objective
No.
Best
Avg.
Worst
DOMESTIC GENERAL STOCK FUNDS
AG Aggressive Growth
37
28.89
17.81
8.24
G Growth
212
29.16
15.15
5.95
GI Growth and Income
128
28.24
13.41
7.92
EI Equity Income
32
18.06
12.32
8.33
SC Small Company
72
29.04
17.15
7.43
DOMESTIC SPECIALIZED STOCK FUNDS
SF Financial
8
27.22
21.34
15.16
SH Health Care
9
30.20
19.35
7.73
SN Natural Resource
11
17.68
9.75
3.19
SP Precious Metals
19
11.86
7.51
0.13
ST Technology
16
26.82
18.98
12.04
SU Utility Industry
18
19.80
14.29
6.79
S Other Specialized
8
25.54
19.49
14.22
INTERNATIONAL STOCK FUNDS
WW Worldwide
26
15.89
10.75
2.76
WP Pacific Area
10
18.18
6.87
-3.57
WE European
8
12.32
8.22
2.45
WF Other Foreign
31
19.72
11.08
3.40
HYBRID FUNDS
AA Asset Allocation
30
16.28
11.54
5.53
B Balanced
40
17.50
12.61
8.12
I Income
19
15.25
11.95
7.89
CV Convertible Bond
14
19.64
13.81
9.31
INTERNATIONAL BOND FUNDS
WB World Bond
19
15.05
10.31
6.89
SW Short Term World Inc.
0
NA
NA
NA
CORPORATE BOND FUNDS
CG General Corporate
56
15.89
10.71
6.69
CQ High Quality Corp.
45
13.35
9.94
5.64
CY High Yield Bond
56
17.23
11.37
6.75
GOVERNMENT BOND FUNDS
GG General Government
93
13.48
9.79
3.87
GT Treasury Bond
24
17.20
11.12
5.14
GM Mortgage
41
11.25
9.87
7.12
GA Adj. Rate Mortgage
5
9.11
7.62
5.94
MUNICIPAL BOND FUNDS
MN National Municipal
146
12.00
9.31
5.83
MY New York Municipal
36
11.03
9.81
7.93
MC California Municipal
43
11.65
9.69
8.15
MS Other State Municipal
115
11.01
9.46
5.14
Source: Morningstar


Technologies to Watch: From Antisense and CD-ROM . . . : Data Compression; Communications Gatekeeper
If it can be seen, heard or read, the impulse these days is to turn it into a digital data file and sell it to someone willing to pay good money to see, hear or read it.
Little surprise, then, that the technologies to watch in 1994 involve the storage or transmission of information. (Although in one case, the information transfer occurs not between computers but within the cells of the human body.)
If the information age ever produces its much-bruited video wonders, the thanks should go in no small part to computer scientists laboring at a technique called data compression.
Without compression, interactive video games, full-motion video-conferencing, 500-channel television and high-definition television is not possible.


Make-or-Break Year for Electric Cars
No matter what year the question is broached, mass-produced electric cars always seem to be just over the horizon.
But California rules, which have been adopted and are now in force New York State and are soon to go into effect in Massachusetts as well, will require that 2 percent of the cars sold in the 1998 model year be electrics.
So 1994 may represent a moment of truth, whether for the car makers or the regulation writers.


For the Nations of the Western Hemisphere, Renewed Growth: Canada; Strong Growth But Weak on Jobs
Canada is struggling to get back on its feet economically after heavy-duty structural changes the last half-dozen years, including the painful redirection of resources in response to freer trade, disinflation, new technology and changes in the nation's tax laws.
The convalescence demonstrates how closely linked the patient is to its huge southern neighbor.
The economy is growing again but not because of any quickening in the pace of domestic consumption.
The engine is exports, chiefly to the United States, which are setting new monthly records.


Atop the Amex Charts in 1993
MOST ACTIVE ISSUES
Volume
1993
1993
Dec. 31
Change
(millions)
high
low
close
from '92
Echo Bay Mines
265.9
$14.50
$4.13
$12.88
+$7.94
Royal Oak Mines
234.6
7.00
1.44
4.75
+3.13
Energy Services
181.4
4.06
1.00
3.38
+2.25
Amdahl
83.7
8.50
4.38
6.00
-1.25
Cheyenne Software
69.5
40.25
16.41
27.88
+7.78
Atari
66.8
12.75
0.50
5.75
+4.56
Interdigital Comm.
60.3
11.38
4.63
5.25
-4.00
Hasbro
59.9
40.50
28.13
36.25
+3.63
Nabors Industries
58.2
11.00
6.13
8.13
+1.63
NTN Commuications
57.3
11.50
4.38
10.00
+5.06
Pegasus Gold
57.3
28.13
12.63
22.00
+7.13
New York Times "A"
53.0
31.25
22.38
26.25
-0.13
S.&amp;P. units-"Spiders"
51.7
47.16
42.81
46.59
+2.66
Ivax
50.3
29.75
19.25
28.75
-0.50
Weatherford Int'l
48.8
13.75
4.75
10.63
+4.75
WINNERS AND LOSERS Common stocks whose prices rose or fell the most in percentage terms, as calculated by Media General.
Stocks that begin the year under $5 are excluded.
Only one class of stock is included for each company.
BIGGEST GAINS
1993
1993
Dec. 31
% Change
high
low
close
from '92
Fibreboard
$35.63
$6.88
$33.75
390.6%
Bush Industries "A"
32.00
8.88
30.88
252.9
Rowe Furniture
23.25
5.51
21.25
235.2
Charter Medical
27.00
8.00
25.88
223.5
Cohu
22.50
6.56
19.13
183.4
Clear Channel Communications
48.13
16.20
46.00
182.2
Oriental Federal Savings Bnk
30.99
10.34
27.25
153.3
Income Oppor. Realty Trust
17.50
6.00
15.13
142.1
American Bilrite
49.63
18.50
45.50
137.8
Forest City Enterprise "B"
44.13
18.38
43.00
137.2
BIGGEST GAINS
Health Professionals Inc.
$13.13
$0.56
$1.13
-86.5%
Advanced Medical
9.75
0.88
1.44
-85.0
Angeles Mortgage Invst. Trust
16.88
1.13
2,75
-82.4
Rx Medical Services
24.50
5.00
5.38
-78.5
Cognitronics
18.38
3.88
4.31
-75.2
Phoenix Laser Systems
9.13
2.13
2.38
-74.3
Farragut Mortgage
7.50
1.25
1.38
-73.7
Rymad Mortgage Investment
5.38
1.00
1.38
-73.1
Clinicorp
10.00
1.88
2.13
-71.6
Cancer Treatment Holdings
5.63
1.50
1.75
-68.2


Professionals' Picks for '94 And Their Reasons
The following money managers were asked to pick their favorite stocks for 1994 and to explain their choices.
Thomas Medcalf, senior portfolio manager, IDS Mutual, Minneapolis: BankAmerica Corporation, San Francisco: "A regional bank now, selling at 8 1/2 times next year's earnings, that has lagged because of the California economy."


Revise U.S. Refugee Policy on Haiti and Cuba
To the Editor:
The arrival in Miami of a mixed group of Cuban and Haitian boat people from the Bahamas (news article, Dec. 20) not only underscores "how differently refugees from the two Caribbean countries are treated under United States immigration law," but also points to a gross anomaly in this country's refugee policy.


Revise U.S. Refugee Policy on Haiti and Cuba; Bad Neighbor Policy
To the Editor:
Regarding the "tepid support" you report Washington showing for the return to power of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in Haiti, and our frustration in handling him (news article, Dec. 18), it is worth pointing out that the United States is much more familiar with the tactics of preventing revolutions than in facilitating them.
Witness our years of intervention in Central America and elsewhere in the Caribbean.


'92 NBC Talks Are Reported
Paramount Communications Inc. came very close to acquiring NBC from its parent, the General Electric Company, in 1992, but the deal fell apart at the last moment, according to an article in the February issue of Vanity Fair.
In April 1992, the chairman of Paramount, Martin S. Davis, and the chairman of General Electric, John F. Welch Jr., were close enough to a deal that Paramount was writing press releases.
But there was a sticking point: regulatory approval for the transfer of NBC's television stations to Paramount.


Olympic Park Will Give Downtown Atlanta Growth and Jobs
To the Editor:
Re "Billy's Olympic Dream Park" (Op-Ed, Dec. 20) by John Huey, on the proposal by Billy Payne to build a $100 million Centennial Olympic Park in Atlanta for the 1996 Olympics: It annoys me as an African-American when white people think they are speaking on my behalf.
John Huey makes many of the classic mistakes of which so many pseudoliberals are often guilty, beginning with the presumption that the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games and Billy Payne are racially insensitive.


Jeanne Moreau's Perfect Part: Life
She sat in the lounge of a Beverly Hills hotel, smoking cigarettes, her voice raspy, her wide-set brown eyes narrowing as she spoke.
"I'm 65, I'll be 66 in January," Jeanne Moreau said with a shrug and laugh.
"What should I do? Shoot myself? I've never worried about age. If you're extremely, painfully frightened of age, it shows. Life doesn't end at 30. To me age is a number, just a number. Who cares?"


Abroad at Home; Inside The Beltway
When President Clinton last month chose Bobby Ray Inman as his next Secretary of Defense, establishment Washington gushed.
Politicians and journalists vied in their adjectives for the retired admiral: brilliant, shrewd, masterful.
Why the awed response?
Has Mr.
Inman showed himself to be another George C. Marshall, a former military officer with the vision of a statesman?
Is he a Henry Stimson, a great Republican figure who can help bring the country together on issues of war and peace?


Wall Street Dares to Hope for More
It was Wall Street's first $1 trillion year.
And the good times may keep on rolling in 1994.
As interest rates fell last year, businesses jumped to refinance their debts and to raise new equity capital on the surging stock market, issuing a record $1.06 trillion in stocks and bonds, up 21 percent from 1992.


CHRONICLE
"The Private Island," Lanai, in Hawaii, stayed that way New Year's Day for the wedding of BILL GATES , the Microsoft billionaire, to MELINDA FRENCH .
Mr.
Gates, one of the nation's richest men, hired his own security force to keep reporters and photographers away while he and Ms.
French exchanged vows on the 17th hole of The Challenge golf course.


The Play Is Just Not the Thing
Among the failures was Brian Friel's eagerly anticipated "Wonderful Tennessee," which lasted all of one week despite respectful reviews.
Its early demise was all the more disappointing in light of Mr.
Friel's considerable success with "Dancing at Lughnasa" two seasons ago.
Also quick to close were the works of two Pulitzer Prize winners, "Any Given Day," by Frank Gilroy, and the two-part "Kentucky Cycle," by Robert Schenkkan, as well as "The Twilight of the Golds," by Jonathan Tolins, and "Mixed Emotions," by Harold Baer.


Third-Stringers Give Lions First
Lions 30, Packers 20
The Detroit Lions, with third-stringers Erik Kramer and Eric Lynch leading the way, played nearly flawless football yesterday in beating the Green Bay Packers, 30-20, at the Silverdome for their second National Football Conference Central title in three years.


Big Outcry Doesn't Slow Killing of Youths in Rio
When eight youths were shot to death as they slept on the streets of Rio five months ago, international attention was drawn to the frequent slayings of young people here.
Despite the outcry, preliminary statistics indicate that the killing of minors in Rio de Janeiro may have increased in 1993 by as much as 40 percent over 1992.


With More Flops Than Hits, No Wonder Hollywood Is Jittery
Forget comedy sequels.
Worry about westerns.
Focus on hiring A-list movie stars, but only if they play predictable roles: Robin Williams as a nanny, Julia Roberts as a woman on the run, Tom Cruise as a vacuous yuppie lawyer in danger.
With movie studios planning to release at least 150 films in 1994, the economic lessons of 1993 have made Hollywood jittery.
The average cost of a film is about $25 million, there were more duds than hits, and some of the biggest studios endured financial flops in a generally bleak year.


Rabin Says Israel Is in No Hurry to Resume Talks With the P.L.O.
Israel dug in its heels against the Palestine Liberation Organization today, with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin saying he was in no hurry and would let the Palestinians "sweat" before resuming talks on a troop withdrawal and transfer of civil authority in the occupied territories.
Mr.
Rabin was also quoted by the state radio as having questioned the reliability of the P.L.O. and its chairman, Yasir Arafat.
He reportedly told the Cabinet at its weekly meeting that Israel could no longer rely on oral agreements with the Palestinian leadership and would insist that everything be put down on paper from now on.


Outlook '94; 500-Channel TV: The Vision Recedes
THE television world is going to change in 1994, industry executives say, but not so you would notice -- if you are a viewer, that is.
Talk raged in 1993 about the video revolution to come, but as the year ended many of those who had started the talk were retrenching a bit.
More common were cautionary warnings about the unrestrained hype that had created an expectation of 500 channels in the near future.


Cowboys Turn the Giants Into Not-So-Wild Card
It was one of the best games in a long time, which is why the Giants' overtime loss to the Dallas Cowboys today was so hard for the team to swallow.
In a somber, almost depressed, Giants locker room, the talk was about rebounding, because, after all, the playoffs are around the corner.
But this one will sting for a while, and nothing showed that more plainly than the sight of safety Myron Guyton, who sat alone at his locker for 10 minutes, in full uniform, his head in his hands, not talking.


Whether It's Bluejeans or Mini-Motors or Power Plants . . .: Levi Straus; American Symbol With a Cause
Think globally . . .
Think globally . . .
Think globally.
This is the corporate executive's mantra for the new year.
With the North American Free Trade Agreement in place and a new world trade agreement moving smartly forward, companies are aggressively expanding beyond national borders and innovating at every turn to snare new business.
Caterpillar, for example, elbowed Japanese companies aside in China's coal fields by agreeing to establish a parts warehouse and fly in mechanics.
In Silicon Valley, Applied Materials came from behind by spending 15 percent of sales each year on research and development.
ABB Asea Brown Boveri is consolidating manufacturing and shifting production of components to take advantage of the free trade accord.
In Latin America, Bunge &amp; Born is betting that the region's rate of consumption will grow faster than its overall economies.
Levi Strauss, long a global visionary, sounds a sobering note.
It continues to turn its back on China's vast market for bluejeans because of human rights concerns.
Here, then, six companies and their global strategies:
For all the companies that are marketing products globally, few sell items that better represent American culture than Levi Strauss Associates.
Not only has the privately held company become the world's largest brand-name apparel manufacturer, its cornerstone product, Levi's, has virtually become the generic name for bluejeans.


Russia and Europe Confront Challenges to Jobs and Growth . . . : Russia; Economic Change At a Crossroad
Europe, battered by recession, expects 1.5 percent growth in 1994.
Japan is still mired in economic woes, though there is some talk of a rebound.
China, whose growth in the last year has been in the mid-teens, could experience a slowdown -- to merely spectacular 10 percent growth.
Then there is Russia, which must balance international calls for austerity with domestic politics and slow- or fast-paced privatization.
From around the world, correspondents of The New York Times assess local economies.
After a clear look at the dark underside of Russian nationalism, manifested by the spectacular vote for Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky in last month's elections, Westerners must regard Russia as one of the world's great crap shoots.


Emily C. Blum, Leon M. Metzger
Emily Carla Blum, a daughter of Herbert H. and Elaine Blum of New York, was married yesterday to Leon Michael Metzger, the son of Erich and Ruth Metzger of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Hershel Schachter performed the ceremony at the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 35, will keep her name.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in management from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a market research manager for Reuters, the news service, in New York.


CD-ROM Applications Are Marching to Video Stores
While cable and television companies are gradually developing services that will allow viewers to select video programming at the touch of a keypad, the current video industry still has the opportunity to introduce another generation of packaged goods before the onset of serious electronic competition.
"CD-ROM will be the killer application this year," said Craig Bibb, a media analyst at Paine Webber.


Susan Warshell, Seth Charnes
Rabbi Susan Gail Warshell, the daughter of Leslie and Thelma Warshell of Chicago, was married yesterday to Seth G. Charnes, the son of Herbert Charnes of Union, N.J, and the late Esther Charnes.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Charnes is the rabbi of Temple Ahavath Sholom in Short Hills.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in Hebrew letters from Hebrew Union College, where she was ordained.
Her father retired as an insurance salesman with Acacia Mutual Life of Chicago.


For the Nations of the Western Hemisphere, Renewed Growth: Mexico; Despite Advances, A Nervous Market
Although Mexico's economy enters 1994 with three of the uncertainties of last year behind it, there still is likely to be a great deal of nervousness in the Mexican market next year.
In the space of a few weeks at the end of 1993, the United States approved the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mexico's legislature approved a new foreign investment law, and the ruling party selected as its 1994 presidential candidate -- and overwhelming favorite to win the August 1994 election -- Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, who immediately vowed to continue the economic policies of the current president, Carlos Salinas de Gortari.


Atop the Nasdaq Charts in 1993
MOST ACTIVE ISSUES
Volume
1993
1993
Dec. 31
Change
(millions)
high
low
close
from '92
Intel
894.1
$74.50
$42.75
$62.00
+18.50
Novell
735.8
35.25
17.00
20.75
-7.75
Tele-Comm. "A"
620.3
33.25
17.50
30.25
+9.00
Synoptics Comm
571.0
42.75
20.00
27.88
+0.75
Cisco Systems
554.9
65.75
38.13
64.63
+25.31
MCI Communications
549.9
29.88
18.81
28.25
+8.44
Microsoft
503.5
98.00
70.38
80.63
-4.75
Apple Computer
494.1
65.25
22.00
29.25
-30.50
Amgen
459.6
71.75
31.00
49.50
-21.13
Oracle Systems
448.9
37.75
13.31
28.75
+14.56
Spectrum Info. Tech.
428.3
13.13
2.41
7.63
+4.31
Sun Microsystems
403.5
41.00
21.13
29.13
-4.50
Dell Computers
360.5
49.88
13.50
22.63
-25.38
Newbridge Networks
345.1
73.88
19.13
54.75
+34.13
Adobe Systems
341.0
37.00
15.63
22.25
+6.50
WINNERS AND LOSERS Common stocks whose prices rose or fell the most in percentage terms, as calculated by Media General.
Stocks that begin the year under $5 are excluded.
Only one class of stock is included for each company.
BIGGEST GAINS
1993
1993
Dec. 31
% Change
high
low
close
from '92
Glenayre Technologies
$55.38
$7.17
$43.50
467.1%
Digital Microwave
30.00
5.25
29.75
440.9
Western Deep
48.50
9.00
48.50
385.0
Microage
39.88
8.00
38.25
378.1
Cellular Tech. Services
31.75
5.13
24.75
371.4
Unites Cos. Financial
40.75
8.25
39.50
338.9
Orange Free State
44.00
9.50
44.00
323.9
International Cabletel
30.75
4.75
23.50
299.7
Dial Page
77.50
8.00
39.75
297.5
Players International
27.63
6.13
24.75
296.0
BIGGEST LOSERS
Fonic
$13.38
$0.28
$0.41
-96.9%
SK Technologies
10.00
.38
.53
-94.5
Judicate
19.69
1.25
1.25
-93.0
American Int'l Petroleum
20.31
1.75
2.00
-89.5
Sanborn
7.13
0.50
0.81
-87.5
Incomed
8.25
0.50
0.69
-87.4
All for a Dollar Inc.
13.75
1.50
1.75
-86.1
Ophthalmic Imaging
11.13
1.00
1.13
-86.1
Diamond Entertainment
8.13
0.88
0.88
-85.9
Innovo Group
7.63
0.50
0.88
-85.3


HOW MUTUAL FUNDS PERFORMED THROUGH FRIDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1993


The Health Care Outlook for 1994: A Range of Forecasts
The chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Dan Rostenkowski, predicts that Congress will pass major health care legislation this year.
Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, disagrees.
She detects "considerable slippage" in support for such legislation in the three months since President Clinton addressed a joint session of Congress.


In Year That Promises Difficulty, Usual Investing Rules Apply
One portfolio manager, no youngster himself, calls the bull market "long in the tooth." Another pro describes stocks as "somewhat expensive." Some others say flat-out that the unprecedented recent stability in the American stock market is likely to give way to a skid, albeit a short-lived one, in 1994.
Such distinctions aside, people who buy and sell equities for mutual funds -- including a few fearless bulls -- are in broad agreement: making money for investors will be more difficult this year.


Federated Acquires Stake in Macy In Bold Move Toward Expansion
Federated Department Stores, in a bold move to create the largest department store company in America, announced yesterday that it had bought a stake in a leading rival, R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
If Federated should succeed in taking control of Macy, which some analysts said yesterday that they doubted, it would bring together some of the best-known department stores in the country: Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Burdines of Federated, and Macy's, Bullock's and I. Magnin, owned by Macy.


Technologies to Watch: From Antisense and CD-ROM . . . : Software; CD-ROM to Test The Marketplace
If it can be seen, heard or read, the impulse these days is to turn it into a digital data file and sell it to someone willing to pay good money to see, hear or read it.
Little surprise, then, that the technologies to watch in 1994 involve the storage or transmission of information. (Although in one case, the information transfer occurs not between computers but within the cells of the human body.)
From interactive adventure games like Activision's "Return to Zork" to the film clips and reviews of Microsoft's "Cinemania 94," CD-ROM titles are finally creating excitement and sales.
And the silvery disks do promise a sharp break with the nerds-only tradition of the computer industry: software that is intended to be fun to use.


Whether It's Bluejeans or Mini-Motors or Power Plants . . .: Caterpillar; Worldwide Watch For Opportunities
Think globally . . .
Think globally . . .
Think globally.
This is the corporate executive's mantra for the new year.
With the North American Free Trade Agreement in place and a new world trade agreement moving smartly forward, companies are aggressively expanding beyond national borders and innovating at every turn to snare new business.
Caterpillar, for example, elbowed Japanese companies aside in China's coal fields by agreeing to establish a parts warehouse and fly in mechanics.
In Silicon Valley, Applied Materials came from behind by spending 15 percent of sales each year on research and development.
ABB Asea Brown Boveri is consolidating manufacturing and shifting production of components to take advantage of the free trade accord.
In Latin America, Bunge &amp; Born is betting that the region's rate of consumption will grow faster than its overall economies.
Levi Strauss, long a global visionary, sounds a sobering note.
It continues to turn its back on China's vast market for bluejeans because of human rights concerns.
Here, then, six companies and their global strategies:  To Siegfried R. Ramseyer, crossing borders is second nature.
Growing up in Geneva, he never thought twice about choosing say, a French restaurant for dinner -- in France.
"They were the best restaurants," said Mr.
Ramseyer, who lived half an hour from the French border.


Tonight, The Jets Sleep With The Fish
Before the Jets took the field at the Astrodome tonight, everything unfolded so beautifully for them to make the playoffs.
Miami had done its part by losing to New England in overtime.
The door was open.
All the Jets had to do was walk through it.
Instead they walked into a buzzsaw as the Houston Oilers tore the Jets to shreds and trashed their playoff hopes with a 24-0 victory before a raucous crowd of 61,040 at the Astrodome.
With so much on the line and in the biggest game of the season, the Jets came up completely empty, as did the Miami Dolphins in New England.
The Jets finished with an 8-8 record and out of the playoffs.
Pittsburgh got the final American Football Conference wild-card playoff spot.


Mexican Troops Battling Rebels; Toll at Least 57
Government troops battled hundreds of armed peasants today after the rebels seized this colonial city and three other southern Mexican towns just hours into the new year.
The attacks, which the rebels said were timed to coincide with the effective date of the North American Free Trade Agreement, left 27 people dead, officials said.
At least 30 more were killed in heavy fighting as the rebels began retreating into the forested hills with army troops in pursuit, the Defense Secretary said tonight.


...To Ultrafast Data Transmissions That Can Find You: Communications; Almost Everything Goes Wireless
In the decade since they were introduced, cellular telephones have become a fixture of American business life.
Now the time may be right for an explosion in other types of wireless communications -- whether with computers, fax machines or a coming generation of "smart" messaging systems that can track down the recipient.
Thanks to a series of related developments, text and other types of data services are poised to expand rapidly from their minuscule share of the wireless market, in which voice communication predominates.
Perhaps the most important change on the data front is that cellular telephone companies are beginning to offer an entirely new technology called cellular digital packet data.


TAXES
The economic recovery will have to pick up steam for tax revenues to increase enough to help the Guiliani administration make ends meek.
Real estate assessments have declined for three years running.
Property tax revenues, which account for half of the city's tax receipts, are now projected to drop $250 million to $300 million in the 1995 fiscal year, which begins July 1.
Revenues on taxes from financial services has jumped again after nose-diving in the late '80s.
Sales tax receipts, which also fell early in the decade, should pick up if the economy continues to improve.
Personal income tax receipts have increased each year, propelled by rate increases of 12 percent in fiscal 1991 and 14 percent in fiscal 1992.


Outlook '94; Soundings
No Time for Scoundrels
Will 1994 be the year Wall Street finally starts rooting out brokerage industry scoundrels?
After last year's scandals, that's what executives promise.
Instead of letting rogue brokers bounce from firm to firm, they are considering a "three strikes and you're out" policy, dismissing them after three substantiated customer complaints.
With Friends Like Arthur Levitt . . .
After suffering Richard C. Breeden as the politically ambitious chief of the Securities and Exchange Commission, investment firms toasted the arrival this year of Arthur Levitt Jr., a former American Stock Exchange chairman and an industry insider.
Since then, he has given old friends reason to recork their champagne.
He wants to curb political contributions by municipal bond underwriters and pay brokers by performance instead of the number of trades they churn up.
This year, Mr.
Levitt will decide whether companies must publish the cost of the zillions of executive stock options they grant.
Marcy!
Is it time to bring back Dick Breeden?
Flip Side of the Mortgage Coin
There may be no free lunch, but the person eating isn't always the one paying.
Those who refinanced their mortgages feasted last year with money saved from lower payments.
Those who held securities backed by these mortgages often got the bill.
Some buyers of Ginnie Maes, CMO's and other Wall Street exotica, lured by high rates, suffered losses or unexpectedly got back money that they had to reinvest at lower rates.
Here's an idea: With mortgages so low, the best investment might be a house.
Thinner Ranks, but Fatter Payrolls
The body count is down, the dollar count up.
Wall Street's payroll remains a good deal shorter than in 1987, but those who survived are having a blast.
Lower interest rates and a continued bull market brought investment firms record profits for the third straight year.
At Goldman, Sachs, profits doubled, to $2 billion, easily $5 million a partner, much more for some.
Over at Smith Barney Shearson, Sandy Weill is building his staff with the sort of salary offers that could lure Michael Jordan out of retirement and into investment banking.
On the Trail of Easy Money
This year, banks might have to borrow from someone other than the Government.
Profits, and share prices, have soared since 1990 as they gathered low-rate deposits and bought higher-rate Treasuries.
But bank stocks began to cool off last year.
An improving economy and rising rates suggest that the easy money has been made.
A bank's corporate borrowers, after all, can't pledge the Washington Monument as security.
Guidance for Brinksmanship
Something ventured, something gained: Investors' appetite for risk paid off last year as bonds rallied and stocks climbed to new highs.
Sober C.D.'s and money markets continued to yield 2.5 or so percent.
Mutual fund sales set records, even as many strategists warned that the markets had climbed to perilous levels.
Want to learn how much risk these rookie investors are willing to take?
Wait till the markets retreat and see who flees.
Swimming With the Currency
You have to be a foreign visitor or currency speculator to afford New York's latest improbable fashions, like purple Victorian velvet or 60's love beads.
The biggest bargain attracting foreigners, whether to apparel or entire corporations, is the currency.
But as the United States' growth outstrips Europe's and Japan's, the dollar could recover.
Then Americans could afford to take home, say, deconstructionist tatters or pin-striped men's kilts from Paris and Milan.
It's Gold, It's Buy, It's Sell, It's . . .
Gold fell to $326 an ounce in March, rose to $410 in July, fell to $340 in September and finished at $392.
Gold experts in New York and London pointed to buying or selling by George Soros, Sir James Goldsmith, the Russian Government, Chinese jewelers and the Sultan of Brunei.
The expert consensus on price swings this year: a further rise in explanations.


...To Ultrafast Data Transmissions That Can Find You: Networking; Quest for Speed And Distance
In the Synoptics Communications Inc. computer design laboratory in Santa Clara, Calif., researchers routinely send crystal-clear video images over fiber-optic cables that link their office work stations.
The existence of such systems, though still several years away from becoming standard fixtures in business offices, heralds a transformation under way in the computing, telephone and cable television industries.


Sports of the Times; Notre Dame Still Loses Voting Game
THE thing is, Lou Holtz has a point.
He keeps looking for logic and he keeps getting emotion.
He keeps looking for objectivity and he keeps getting subjectivity.
He just wants the rules to hold still, so he can get a grip on them.
He's starting to take this personally.
Holtz has run into the ultimate illogical charm of college football, the we-know-it-when-we-see-it theory that delivers a champion or two every Jan. 2.
Holtz tends to think Notre Dame should be the champion on a regular basis.
And let's be honest about this, don't we all, deep in our trembling hearts, really think of Notre Dame as the once and future champion?


The Performance Record, by Type of Fund
Listed below are the 33 major types of mutual funds, with their abbreviations used in the main table, and the performace of the best and worst funds in each group, as well as the average performance.
Figures for the quarter and year ended Dec. 31 are total returns, assuming reinvested dividends.
Figures for the five-year period are annualized.
3
MONTH
TOTAL
RETURN
ONE
YEAR
TOTAL
RETURN
Abbrev./Fund Objective
No.
Best
Avg.
Worst
No.
Best
Avg.
Worst
DOMESTIC GENERAL STOCK FUNDS
AG Aggressive Growth
45
10.72
1.41
-20.73
43
41.39
17.81
3.93
C Growth
389
9.54
2.23
-7.11
354
38.99
12.14
-9.01
GI Growth and Income
222
8.82
2.02
-4.28
203
37.07
11.62
-3.5
EI Equity Income
58
5.57
1.15
-8.09
53
24.90
13.68
-3.51
SC Small Company
141
11.54
2.50
-7.81
124
58.50
17.21
-10.06
DOMESTIC SPECIALIZED STOCK FUNDS
SF Financial
11
5.92
-3.12
-8.60
11
49.30
18.24
-0.36
SH Health Care
11
13.62
8.80
2.57
11
11.81
1.22
-8.41
SN Natural Resource
15
13.43
-1.84
-12.97
14
37.94
20.46
2.89
SP Precious Metals
21
37.07
27.65
19.37
21
264.94
92.44
55.90
ST Technology
20
8.41
1.31
-5.61
20
43.32
24.90
7.47
SU Utility Industry
48
12.21
-1.89
-7.26
38
47.65
16.08
8.03
S Other Specialized
16
10.83
2.79
-7.38
16
51.42
21.31
-4.87
INTERNATION STOCK FUNDS
WW Worldwide
60
18.42
9.62
0.26
52
59.50
32.29
17.10
WP Pacific Area
33
49.56
20.51
-23.93
25
105.70
57.31
14.15
WE European
17
13.01
9.06
2.90
17
38.26
29.28
22.95
WF Other Foreign
111
39.73
13.40
-0.49
94
85.81
42.14
20.74
HYBRID FUNDS
AA Asset Allocation
60
25.85
3.27
-1.87
51
75.82
15.48
4.91
B Balanced
97
5.91
1.20
-5.36
87
21.85
10.96
-1.05
I Income
38
8.21
1.74
-2.34
33
21.54
12.74
-0.08
CV Convertible Bond
17
4.04
1.75
-2.29
17
24.47
16.24
9.92
INTERNATIONAL BOND FUNDS
WB World Bond
63
15.66
3.25
-3.97
56
51.57
17.26
4.65
SW Short Term World Inc.
27
4.02
1.51
-0.21
26
11.89
6.25
-0.26
CORPORATE BOND FUNDS
CG General Corporate
167
5.31
0.20
-2.21
147
30.97
10.69
3.41
CQ High Quality Corp.
98
1.40
0.00
-1.59
94
14.95
8.43
2.40
CY High Yield Bond
76
6.63
4.67
1.03
69
31.69
19.47
12.95
GOVERNMENT BOND FUNDS
GG General Government
184
8.34
-0.09
-3.76
155
21.28
7.89
1.77
GT Treasury Bond
42
0.60
-0.66
-4.63
40
35.62
11.39
2.27
GM Mortgage
77
1.79
0.29
-0.87
70
13.68
6.85
1.61
GA Adj. Rate Mortgage
48
1.44
0.49
-1.25
44
7.06
3.78
-0.53
MUNICIPAL BOND FUNDS
MN National Municipal
233
3.41
1.14
-0.46
212
16.01
11.27
3.84
MY New York Municipal
64
1.99
1.07
0.10
60
15.48
12.18
7.69
MC California Municipal
78
2.00
0.96
0.03
73
26.37
12.28
5.84
MS Other State Municipal
287
2.27
1.06
-0.38
268
15.02
12.12
5.70
FIVE
YEAR
TOTAL
RETURN
Abbrev./Fund Objective
No.
Best
Avg.
Worst
DOMESTIC GENERAL STOCK FUNDS
AG Aggressive Growth
37
28.89
17.81
8.24
G Growth
212
29.16
15.15
5.95
GI Growth and Income
128
28.24
13.41
7.92
EI Equity Income
32
18.06
12.32
8.33
SC Small Company
72
29.04
17.15
7.43
DOMESTIC SPECIALIZED STOCK FUNDS
SF Financial
8
27.22
21.34
15.16
SH Health Care
9
30.20
19.35
7.73
SN Natural Resource
11
17.68
9.75
3.19
SP Precious Metals
19
11.86
7.51
0.13
ST Technology
16
26.82
18.98
12.04
SU Utility Industry
18
19.80
14.29
6.79
S Other Specialized
8
25.54
19.49
14.22
INTERNATIONAL STOCK FUNDS
WW Worldwide
26
15.89
10.75
2.76
WP Pacific Area
10
18.18
6.87
-3.57
WE European
8
12.32
8.22
2.45
WF Other Foreign
31
19.72
11.08
3.40
HYBRID FUNDS
AA Asset Allocation
30
16.28
11.54
5.53
B Balanced
40
17.50
12.61
8.12
I Income
19
15.25
11.95
7.89
CV Convertible Bond
14
19.64
13.81
9.31
INTERNATIONAL BOND FUNDS
WB World Bond
19
15.05
10.31
6.89
SW Short Term World Inc.
0
NA
NA
NA
CORPORATE BOND FUNDS
CG General Corporate
56
15.89
10.71
6.69
CQ High Quality Corp.
45
13.35
9.94
5.64
CY High Yield Bond
56
17.23
11.37
6.75
GOVERNMENT BOND FUNDS
GG General Government
93
13.48
9.79
3.87
GT Treasury Bond
24
17.20
11.12
5.14
GM Mortgage
41
11.25
9.87
7.12
GA Adj. Rate Mortgage
5
9.11
7.62
5.94
MUNICIPAL BOND FUNDS
MN National Municipal
146
12.00
9.31
5.83
MY New York Municipal
36
11.03
9.81
7.93
MC California Municipal
43
11.65
9.69
8.15
MS Other State Municipal
115
11.01
9.46
5.14
Source: Morningstar


Major Says Northern Ireland Initiative Still Stands
Despite a recent wave of violence and growing doubt about the future of the peace initiative in Northern Ireland, Prime Minister John Major said today that an offer to republican hard-liners to join peace talks was still on the table.
But he said they must agree to accept the current proposal from him and the Irish Prime Minister as it stands, without negotiation.
"I have no more to tell them and I don't think Albert Reynolds will either," Mr.
Major said in a BBC radio interview.
The British leader refused to set a deadline for their acceptance of the proposal, saying only that he was prepared to be "patient for a little while" longer.


Review/Theater; The Divine to the Ridiculous In a Twelfth Night Festival
When Jesus, Mary and Joseph come together on New Year's Day with the Magi, mummers, fire jugglers, Good King Wenceslaus, St.
George and a dragon, as well as the Pipes and Drums of the New York State Courts, various dancers, musicians and singers and jokes about Michael Jackson, John Wayne Bobbitt and Howard Stern, there are two possibilities:
One is a holiday hangover of nightmarish proportions.
The other is the annual Boar's Head and Yule Log Festival at the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine.


Neediest Cases; Neediest Cases Helps Youths Become Leaders
For most of his childhood, Antuan McNeil lived with constant change.
While his parents were caught up in drugs and alcohol, he lived with a succession of relatives, sometimes moving several times in a year.
By age 14, Antuan was so used to being passed around that when his father, Anthony Illidge, overcame his addiction and gained custody, the boy figured it could not last.


Dolphin Disappearance Leaves Shula Hurting
Don Shula, the symbol of jut-jawed defiance, slumped in a chair, looking at his bare feet, not quite ready to get up to take a shower.
"Knowing our whole season was on the line the last two weeks and not winning," said the man with more victories than any other National Football League coach in history, "this hurt. This is something that will be hard to live with."


One Is Killed, 3 Are Missing In Fire at Club
One person was killed and three others were reported missing yesterday in a fire of undetermined origin that roared through a gay men's club in Queens, sending survivors wrapped in towels running into the street, Fire Department officials and witnesses said.
The fire, which mushroomed suddenly with a backdraft explosion and created blinding clouds of smoke, broke out about noon and destroyed the Northern Men's Sauna and Health Club, a two-story frame structure inside a warehouse at 33-65 Farrington Street, on an industrial block just off the Northern Boulevard-Main Street hub of Flushing.


...While a Sluggish Japan Sighs Amid Asia's Roaring Tigers: China; Slower Growth, Still Spectacular
Through 5,000 years of history, the Chinese have believed that great catastrophes presage the passing of an emperor and the ushering in of a new dynasty.
So it was said in 1976 that the great Tongshan earthquake, which killed a quarter million Chinese with a single shrug of the earth on July 28 of that year, presaged the death of Mao Zedong on Sept. 10.


Thomas to Knicks Reported
Isiah Thomas has become the newest and hottest candidate to fill the Knicks' point guard slot vacated by the injured Doc Rivers.
Although Knicks President Dave Checketts said last night that "nothing is lined up on the table" with the Detroit Pistons, a report in a Detroit newspaper said the Pistons would deal the veteran star to the Knicks this week, if Thomas said he wanted to leave after meeting with the club's owner, William Davidson, perhaps as soon as today.


Prague's Offer to House U.S. Overseas Radio Poses Problem
An offer by the Czech Republic to let Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty move their headquarters from Munich to Prague, where they could continue broadcasting to Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, is presenting the Clinton Administration with something of a foreign policy quandary on the eve of the President's visit to Prague and Moscow next week.
The United States Government-financed radios are facing tremendous financial pressure, from the Administration and from members of Congress who say they are cold war relics, to close down their operational headquarters in Munich, one of the most expensive cities in Europe.


Outlook '94: A Special Section
The year begins with stock prices at or near record highs from New York to Hong Kong.
Cash pours into mutual funds.
Economics dominates political decision making and focuses more attention on growing developing nations and less on Europe.
At home, economists predict growth of about 3 percent and subdued inflation.
A special section examines trends in business, technology and markets.
SECTION C (2 PARTS).
TODAY'S OTHER SECTIONS: Foreign, National, Metro: Section A. SportsMonday, with The Arts: Section B.


Oiler Coaches Exhibit More Punch Than Jets
This was a scene that would remind New York fans of Billy Martin and Reggie Jackson trying to fight each other in the Yankee dugout in 1977.
Except that tonight's altercation in the Astrodome wasn't a baseball manager against one of his star players.
This one involved football coaches, with Buddy Ryan, the defensive coordinator of the Houston Oilers, and Kevin Gilbride, the offensive coordinator of the Oilers, clashing while their players were beating the Jets by 24-0.
Late in the first half, after Gilbride's offense had turned over the ball to the Jets with an ill-advised passing play that resulted in a fumble, Gilbride and Ryan exchanged words on the sidelines.


'93 Donations Increased For Most Area Charities
With some notable exceptions, charities report that they received more donations this holiday season than last, as changes in tax laws and a bullish stock market encouraged end-of-the-year giving.
A large number of organizations in the New York region estimate that contributions will be about 10 percent higher than a year ago.
Charities largely credit the increase in donations to a revision in the tax law that allows donors to write off the current market price of a gift -- instead of a lower purchase price -- without increasing their tax liability under the alternative minimum tax law.
That way, wealthy donors are not penalized for deducting the full value of assets that have appreciated over time.


Low Rates May Keep 1994 Bond Sales Sluggish
Treasuries were everything in 1993, but in 1994 they won't be.
And reversals of that stripe will keep heads spinning and returns down in 1994.
Mortgage-backed securities, which took a beating last year, may be back in vogue, as fewer people refinance higher-rate mortgages.
Municipal bonds, underperforming last year because of the oversupply of issues as cities took advantage of low rates, should also shine.
And if 1993 was the year of capital gains -- of double-digit total returns -- this will be the year of the coupon -- single-digit payoffs mostly from interest earned.


It's Home, Frozen Home, for Bills
Bills 30, Colts 10
The Buffalo Bills are staying home for the playoffs.
Thurman Thomas rushed for 110 yards and 1 touchdown and Jim Kelly and Frank Reich both passed for a score today as the Bills beat the Indianapolis Colts, 30-10, in Buffalo to earn the home-field advantage throughout the American Football Conference playoffs.


Crestfallen? No, Still Confident
The Giants may have lost the game, but they did not seem to lose their self-confidence, their self-respect or their perspective.
After today's 16-13 overtime loss to the Dallas Cowboys, which put them in the playoffs as a wild-card team rather than a division champion, they were plainly disappointed.
But they talked of their situation with a quiet confidence that they had held their own against perhaps the National Football League's best team.


Reporter's Notebook; In Private, Clinton Tells 'What I Have Learned'
As an exercise in self-revelation, President Clinton's 35-minute presentation, "What I Have Learned," here late Saturday night was described by some of his fellow Renaissance Weekend participants as somewhat less than fully revealing.
But then, few of the other participants were being very revealing either.
At a gathering of public people that was officially private, even journalists among the guests insisted that the details of what the President had said to the crowd of 1,000 had to remain strictly off the record.


Outlook '94; A Policy Compass Points East and South
REMEMBER the G7, the group of major industrialized nations that gathers every year in circumstances of considerable pomp to dream up new inspiration for the world economy?
It's now clear that the institution, and the view of the world that went with it, are fast going out of fashion.
The reasons are simple.
The bulk of the G7 -- that is Western Europe and Japan -- is in an economic trough deep enough to preclude rapid recovery in 1994 or even 1995.
Areas of growth and real economic opportunity increasingly lie in Latin America and Asia outside Japan.


Outlook '94; The Triumph of the Bulls Continues
ON Wall Street, it has been the best of worlds.
Inflation seems all but dead, and the public is pouring money into stocks and bonds -- mostly through mutual funds whose managers can hardly believe their good fortune.
New securities are being sold almost as fast as the printing presses can run them off, and even corporate takeover activity is up.
As 1993 ended, records were set almost everywhere.
The Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 each reached new highs last week, and so did stock markets in Mexico and Canada, virtually every major European country, and such other markets as Hong Kong, Singapore, Indonesia and Brazil.
With the singular exception of Japan, stock market bulls are triumphant almost everywhere, regardless of whether the local economy is strong or weak.


CHRONICLE
VICTOR BORGE has a birthday today that calls for an entertainment.
And, says the Danish humorist-pianist who is turning 85, he means to sit back for once and be entertained by others.
The "others" are his five children -- Sana, Vebe, Ronald, Janet and Frederikke -- and their spouses and his nine grandchildren.
The younger family members will be joining Mr.
Borge and his wife, Sana, for the celebration aboard the Queen Elizabeth 2, which is to leave New York on a round-the-world cruise.
It is a long-standing tradition in the Borge family that the children must not turn up with store-bought birthday presents.
Instead, they must make whatever gifts they bring.
"Perhaps there will be a poem, a song, an album, a funny story about what they have been doing in the past year," he said.
"Whatever they do or bring will be something personal, not a last-minute purchased ash tray."


Traders Still Expect a Higher Bid From Viacom
With just five business days left for Viacom Inc. to raise its offer for Paramount Communications Inc., traders on Wall Street continue to expect that the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation will increase its $600 million stake in Viacom's battle for Paramount.
The chairman of Viacom, Sumner M. Redstone, must raise his offer by the close of business on Friday, according to the rules set down by the Paramount board.
Otherwise, Paramount will proceed with a sale to QVC Network Inc., which currently has the higher offer and the support of the board.


Georges Paques, 79, French NATO Aide Jailed for Espionage
Georges Paques, a former press officer for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization who admitted giving allied military data to the Russians and who was convicted of treason to his native France in 1964, died in Paris on Dec. 19.
He was 79.
Mr.
Paques was convicted in Paris by a five-member Court for the Security of the State and was sentenced to life in prison.
But President Charles de Gaulle reduced the sentence to 20 years, and Mr.
Paques was released in 1970, after having served six years.


'I Want to Go to Sleep'
My cousin Florence Hosch has always known how she felt and what she wanted to do.
"I am fine," she told callers last summer, when a stubborn infection revealed a terminal lung condition that put her in the hospital for several months.
"I am happy," she said, in a voice that brooked no question.
"I am 90 years old. I have had my life. I want to go to sleep." Her problem was that she was the captive of a medical system dead set against that, and her pills were at home.
For decades, she had made her position clear: if life ceased to be worth living, she would end it on her own.
"I have the means," she would say crisply, as if speaking of money in the bank or fertilizer for her garden.
"Right here on my bedside table."


Revise U.S. Refugee Policy on Haiti and Cuba; Democracy Repressed
To the Editor:
I participated in the international Cry for Justice delegations to Haiti, traveling in that country Oct. 25 to Nov. 25.
I met people who have suffered beatings, jailings, threats of death, destruction of property, because they were pro-democracy and supported Haiti's President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was ousted by a military coup.


Upbeat Farewell For a 'Jazz Pastor'; Musicians' Minister Retires
Long before it became self-consciously fashionable in New York, John Garcia Gensel was wearing black-on-black clothing, conversing in Cool Speak and becoming a connoisseur and friend of jazz as he drifted like bar smoke from Manhattan nightclub to nightclub and beyond.
A Lutheran minister with a fan's ear for the music and an open heart to the largely churchless men and women who create it, Pastor Gensel began, more than 30 years ago, a jazz ministry that took church to jazz and brought jazz to church.
It has been a lifelong improvisation that has produced a "joyful noise," said Pastor Gensel, a stocky man with swept-back, steel-gray hair.


Essay; Art Vs. Artifice
The technicians have found a way to bring back the musical past.
Memorable performances have been "digitally remastered" and sound better than they ever did before.
I buy the compact discs of Peggy Lee, Dick Haymes, Rosemary Clooney, dub them to a tape -- it's legal -- and play "Sunny Side of the Street," "I Surrender, Dear," "Come On-a My House" while driving to work in my vehicular cocoon.
It knocks me out to hear Buddy Clark singing "When I go to sleep, I never count sheep, I count all the charms about Linda."


Bridge
Whether bridge tournaments should always be democratic, or whether aristocracy should have a place, is a subject for debate.
In North America democracy rules: every bridge event, with the doubtful exception of an occasional Calcutta, is open to all if they meet certain objective criteria.
They may be expected to meet a master-point test, to have a specific record in tournament play, to be women, or to be 55 years old.
But they are never required to be the best players.
This is not true in other parts of the world.
Britain and the Netherlands both have events to which the world's best players are invited by a committee.
There is a similar event in Brazil, where the players are of the highest quality.
Twenty-four of them played a month ago, and the winners were Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, the reigning world pair champions.


Revise U.S. Refugee Policy on Haiti and Cuba; Stay and Fight
To the Editor:
It is about time that you and those sympathetic to Haitian boat people, rather than criticize the President's policy toward them, advise these boat people that the solution to their problem is not to get on a boat and head for the United States, but to stay in Haiti and fight for democracy.
Oppressed people around the world are surrendering their lives for democratic changes.
Why can't Haitians?


THE NEW MAYOR: The First Family; Playing at City Hall: Young and the Restless
After all the years of campaigning, the bitter defeat and the joyous victory, Rudolph W. Giuliani stepped up to the lectern in front of City Hall yesterday in one of the culminating moments of his life -- his inaugural address as Mayor of New York City.
And there, suddenly beside him, was a pudgy, towheaded boy.
"I'm going to have a co-addressee, I guess," Mr.
Giuliani said, by way of introducing for those in the audience or watching on television who did not already know the little boy, the Mayor's 7-year-old son, Andrew Harold Giuliani.


Wisconsin's 'Other' Team Is Doing Fine
Wisconsin 71, Marquette 52
The day after Wisconsin's football team won the first Rose Bowl in school history, the basketball team dusted off its own record books with a 71-52 victory over Marquette in Madison, Wis.


THE NEW MAYOR: Reporter's Notebook; The Pomp! The Thrill! The Wails! The Seats!
Dennis Pantzer stood on a park bench in City Hall Park with his small son, Michael, on his shoulders and strained to hear the new Mayor he had voted for, trying to catch the amplified message of unity drifting thinly through the trees.
But all Mr.
Pantzer and his family could hear were the whistles and yells of a couple hundred protesters across the street, who were screaming "Jobs Not Jails!" and generally causing a ruckus.


Ayala Levin, David Kruss
Ayala Deborah Levin, the daughter of Ezra and Batya Levin of New York, and David Moshe Kruss, the son of Jack and Avril Kruss of Cape Town, were married last evening.
Rabbi Shlomo Riskin officiated at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Jerusalem.
The bride, 24, graduated from Brown University and is studying for a master's degree in contemporary Jewish history at Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Her father is a partner in Kramer, Levin, Naftalis, Nessen, Kamin &amp; Frankel, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, also a lawyer, practices in Riverdale, the Bronx.


Sports of The Times; The 'Biggest Game' Is Still in the Future
FOR 960 minutes through 16 games this season, the Giants had played the Cowboys dead even: 11-4 in the standings, 13-13 on the scoreboard.
But after 10 minutes 44 seconds of overtime, the Cowboys broke the tie.
And the Giants' hearts.
But those hearts healed quickly.


Patents
THE Patent and Trademark Office will be the focus of a fundamental debate this year, as the Clinton Administration examines the patent system's role in the development of economically competitive technologies.
Right off the bat, the office will tackle a dispute over software patents sparked by the sweepingly broad patent awarded to Compton's New Media for multimedia search systems.
So harsh has been the outcry that the Patent Commissioner, Bruce Lehman, has said the award will be re-examined.


It Takes More Than Victory to Make Bowden a Believer
After one of the most frantic final seconds in the history of college football, after the coldest and most premature victory shower of Bobby Bowden's life, even after the Hold Everything, last-gasp, 45-yard field-goal attempt of Nebraska's Byron Bennett sailed wide to the left in the dark, open end of the Orange Bowl to secure Florida State's pulsating 18-16 victory over the Cornhuskers, the coach of the Seminoles was still not yet a believer.
Not even after the obligatory commemorative championship hats and T-shirts were passed out on the field and in the winning dressing room.
Not after the silver cup with the 17 oranges was presented to Bowden, and his children and grandchildren reassured him that his time had come.


A High-Technology Outcry Against the U.S. Patent System
The nation's 203-year-old patent system is on a collision course with new technology.
Framing a crucial public-policy issue for 1994, a growing number of software publishers and patent experts are calling for fundamental changes in the way the Government assigns ownership to computer hardware and software inventions.
Failure to revise the system, these critics say, will stifle creativity in crucial high-technology areas.


Croatia Threatens Direct Military Intervention in Bosnian Fighting
Faced with Muslim advances against their separatist proxy militia in central Bosnia, leaders of the Croatian Government are threatening direct military intervention.
With another set of Balkan peace talks scheduled to begin two weeks from now in Geneva, Croatian officials have started a campaign to focus attention on the strategic Lasva valley northwest of Sarajevo, where troops of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government have surrounded some 65,000 Croats, mostly civilians.


Public School Leadership Fight Tearing a Hasidic Sect
The people of this Hasidic village are so passionately devoted to their Rebbe, or Grand Rabbi, that few will marry, change jobs, buy a house or undergo surgery without his blessing.
Yet for four years, the villagers, members of the Satmar Hasidic sect, have been responsible for running a public school system, which by its very nature must provide a greater tolerance for dissent and individual freedom.


More Prayers in the Face of Unending Pain


Apple to Introduce On-Line Computer Service
So popular did on-line services for personal computers become in 1993 that one leading computer maker has decided to begin 1994 by entering the on-line game.
On Wednesday, Apple Computer Inc. will announce that it is introducing a new service, called E-World, that is intended to compete with established forces like America Online, Compuserve and Prodigy.


The Night That Ewing Unraveled
Things seemed to be unraveling around Patrick Ewing worse than ever last night.
His team, his body, his reputation and even his uniform were falling apart.
Playing without their two marquee stars, Alonzo Mourning and Larry Johnson, the Charlotte Hornets were already leading Ewing's bewildered Knicks by a dozen points early in the third quarter when Ewing decided the bandage around his stomach and right leg for his ailing hamstring was wrapped too tight.


By Land and Air Smith Fires Dallas
To maximize your earning power, Emmitt Smith's advisers told him during the off season, you've got to land with another team.
You'll never grab the dollars that you can on a team with Troy Aikman at quarterback.
You might have to sit out and force your exit, force a trade.
Jerry Jones, the Cowboys' owner, before the season wanted Smith signed but he also wanted to stay near the salary cap and to have room to maneuver with free agents for the 1994 season.
Smith was a pivotal cog, Jones knew, but maybe, just maybe, we're good enough to win without him, he thought.


The Other Giulianis
For the first time in a generation, a Mayor's young children will join him in Gracie Mansion.
At least one is making his presence felt.
Page A16.


HOW MUTUAL FUNDS PERFORMED THROUGH FRIDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1993


Happy New Tax Year
Post offices across the land start delivering Form 1040's today, but taxpayers will file fewer than last year.
That is not a measure of tax evasion, but a sign that more people are high-tech filers.
The result should be fewer errors and faster refunds.
Thousands of taxpayers in southern Ohio can do it all by phone this year.
For the past two years, the Internal Revenue Service has tested touch-tone "tele-filing" by Ohioans who use Form 1040EZ -- mainly single taxpayers who earn less than $50,000 a year and claim no dependents.
But they still had to mail a signed verification and a W-2 withholding form.
Now, in the lower half of the state, even the "signature" can be spoken into the I.R.S. computer.
There is nothing to mail -- except the check.


Topics of The Times; The Irrelevant Umbrella
As a correspondent for The Chicago Daily News, Fred Sparks rarely missed a revolution.
But despite his chosen specialty, Sparks was careful.
He almost never flew to an assignment; during the Korean War he commuted between Tokyo and the front by ship and jeep.
So when a fledgling correspondent covering a revolution in a country where it seldom rained challenged Sparks's habit of constantly toting an umbrella, the veteran correspondent had a ready answer.
"After covering a good many revolutions," he said, "I've noticed that no one ever shoots at a man carrying an umbrella."


A Smart Buy, or Too Smart by Half?
The same kind of huge mistake, made years ago, sent Federated Department Stores and R. H. Macy plummeting toward bankruptcy.
But Federated's blunder was much bigger.
As a result, it now may be in a position to take control of Macy.
But in arranging the deal that was announced yesterday, in which Federated paid $449.3 million for half a secured claim against Macy, Federated's chairman and chief executive, Allen I. Questrom, may have purchased debt that is too good to enable such a bid to succeed.


Testing the High Hopes for TV Shopping
Just when it seemed as if all the pizazz had gone out of retailing, when financiers and technocrats had replaced the merchant princes and price had become the only weapon with which to compete, the era of electronic selling dawned in America.
Well, sort of.
Electronic retailing has been around for more than a decade, mostly in the form of mercilessly cheerful televised hucksters pushing cubic zirconia and tacky knickknacks, or as lists of airline, theater and movie schedules and fares called up on computer screens.


...Today's Corporate Game Plans Know No Boundaries: Mabuchi Motor; An Un-Japanese Model for Japan
Gadget lovers would be at a loss if it was not for the Mabuchi Motor Company.
This little-known company controls half the world market for the tiny motors that give movement to everything from compact disk players to electric toothbrushes and automatic pepper grinders.
Mabuchi plans to make one billion mini-motors this year, ranging from fingertip-size models for controlling automatic zoom lenses in cameras to fist-size devices used in power tools.
The price for a mini-motor averages about 90 cents.


Why a Kick Fails To Reform Behavior
To the Editor:
"As Boot Camps for Criminals Multiply, Skepticism Grows" (front page, Dec. 18) reviews the evidence that this cut-rate militaristic approach to incarceration is ineffective, that what politicians describe as "intuitively" plausible or based on "common sense" doesn't work.


What U.S. Film Makers Really Wanted
To the Editor:
Prof.
Jagdish Bhagwati's Dec. 24 letter on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade contains, alas, a huge error of fact, which is understandable, since few observers have a grasp on what was at issue.


Start-ups, Yes, but Few Acquisitions Are Seen for Magazines
Although they are still waiting for advertising to rebound, magazine industry executives are predicting a healthier year in 1994.
They look for new magazines from leading publishers like Meredith, Hearst, News America and Time Inc.


Winners and Losers: Stock Funds
Funds primarily invested in stocks.
Limited to funds listed on Nasdaq with at least $30 million in assets.
Total Return for 1993.
BEST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
BEST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
PERCENT CHANGE Morgan Stanley Institutional: Asian Equity . . . 49.56% Fidelity Southeast Asia . . . 47.08 Morgan Stanley Asian Growth "A" . . . 43.71 Morgan Stanley Asian Growth "B" . . . 43.57 Merrill Lynch Dragon "A" . . . 40.93 Merrill Lynch Dragon "B" . . . 40.63 Fidelity Emerging Markets . . . 39.73 Eaton Vance Traditional: Greater China Growth . . . 39.14 Eaton Vance Marathon: Greater China Growth . . . 37.23 Lexington Strategic Investments . . . 37.07 WORST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
PERCENT CHANGE Trak Small Capitalization Value Equity . . . -10.06% Dean Witter Capital Growth . . . -9.01 Invesco Strategic Health Sciences . . . -8.41 Yacktman . . . -6.58 Pasadena Growth . . . -5.87 Flag Investors Quality Growth . . . -5.61 Reynolds Blue Chip Growth . . . -5.23 Rightime Growth . . . -5.15 Voyageur Growth Stock . . . -5.04 Invesco Strategic Environmental Services . . . -4.87 WORST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
PERCENT CHANGE DFA Japanese Small Company . . . -23.93% Equity Strategies . . . -20.73 Japan Funds . . . -14.32 T. Rowe Price Japan . . . -13.46 Fidelity Select: Natural Gas . . . -12.97 Fidelity Japan . . . -12.62 Invesco Strategic Energy . . . -12.47 Fidelity Select: Energy Service . . . -12.14 Putnam Energy Resources . . . -9.89 Fidelity Select: Energy . . . -9.56


Outlook '94; Contrarians Take Heart
The optimistic scenario is this: Growth in the economy is picking up, but not enough to cause inflation concerns or make the Federal Reserve think about tightening credit.
That will boost earnings of many companies that depend on American business, and earnings of exporters will rally later in the year as growth starts to accelerate in Europe.
With interest rates remaining low, investors will keep on chasing stocks, raising share prices.
Sounds great.
But, the contrarian asks, what if inflation isn't quiescent?
By Floyd Norris.
C25 Americans Gallop to the Bourses
There was a time -- and not that long ago, really -- when the typical American investor gave little thought to investing abroad.
No more, though.
International mutual funds, which set the pace among funds last year, are expected to continue their torrid pace in 1994.
Yield-hungry American investors have figured out that markets overseas are likely to outpace those at home.
Some financial advisers are even suggesting that as much as 25 percent of an individual's portfolio should be in foreign investments.
Favorite ports: Mexico, the Pacific Rim countries.
But most investment experts remain cautious about Japan and its sluggish economy, hestitant about China because of uncertainty about political stability and property rights and lukewarm about Western Europe.
The emerging markets of Eastern Europe are attractive only on a case-by-case basis as countries develop rules on corporate law and private property to protect investors.
Russia is regarded as still too questionable to offer investment opportunities.
By Leslie Wayne.
C28  The Seers' Picks
Time for Wall Street crystal ball gazing.
Barton Biggs of Morgan Stanley sees a 60 to 70 percent chance that short-term interest rates will rise in 1994.
Elaine Garzarelli, right, of Lehman Brothers says regional bank stocks are a bargain.
E.
Gerald Corrigan, formerly New York Fed chairman and now with Goldman Sachs, predicts corporate restructuring will continue, particularly outside the United States.
Nicholas Brady of Darby Advisors and former Treasury Secretary, believes the boom in foreign stocks is good for another five years.
Richard Parsons of the Dime Savings Bank sees thrift consolidation accelerating, pushing the R.T.C. to the brink of history by yearend.
C30  The Trillion Dollar Year
Wall Street firms issued stocks and bonds worth $1.06 trillion last year, while their profits hit a mere $9 billion.
Some are betting (and hoping) that the frenzied pace will continue.
By Saul Hansell.
C26  New Stars in Credit Markets.
It could be a year of new directions in which Treasury securities don't perform so well, mortgage-backed securities come back in vogue and municipal bonds shine again.
By Jonathan Fuerbringer.
C26  Fidgeting About a Correction
The bull market is long in the tooth and nearly everyone is jittery about the inevitability of a correction.
But markets have a way of proving the consensus wrong.
As Lord Keynes put it: "The inevitable never happens. It is the unexpected always." By Robert D. Hershey Jr.
C29


For the Nations of the Western Hemisphere, Renewed Growth: Latin America; Strong Growth Draws Investors
In a sluggish world economy, Latin America is expected to maintain its position in 1994 as the fastest-growing region after Southeast Asia.
Building on three years of economic growth of more than 3 percent, Latin America is expected to grow by 3.5 percent this year.


Atop the Big Board Charts in 1993


Correction
A chart yesterday comparing 1992 and 1993 homicide figures in New York's five boroughs, as reported by the Police Department, misstated the 1992 figure for Manhattan in some editions.
It was 418, not 318.
As noted in the article the increase in Manhattan in 1993 was 6.


Russia and Europe Confront Challenges to Jobs and Growth . . . : Eastern Europe; Another Test For Free Markets
Europe, battered by recession, expects 1.5 percent growth in 1994.
Japan is still mired in economic woes, though there is some talk of a rebound.
China, whose growth in the last year has been in the mid-teens, could experience a slowdown -- to merely spectacular 10 percent growth.
Then there is Russia, which must balance international calls for austerity with domestic politics and slow- or fast-paced privatization.
From around the world, correspondents of The New York Times assess local economies.
With little question, Poland appears to be Eastern Europe's star economy.
The gross domestic product grew an estimated 4 percent in 1993, making it the fastest-growing economy in all of Europe and the only one of the former Communist countries to achieve economic growth.
Substantial growth in retail sales, evident in the burgeoning Western-style shops in big cities, and an upswing in industrial production accounted for much of the acceleration.


INSIDE
Prague's Awkward Offer
As the President prepares to visit Prague and Moscow, he faces a tempting but potentially problematic offer to move Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty to Prague.
Page A8.
Fatal Fire at Gay Club
One person was killed and three others were reported missing in a fire of undetermined origin that roared through a gay men's club in Queens, fire officials said.
Page A15.


Atop the Nasdaq Charts in 1993
MOST ACTIVE ISSUES
Volume
1993
1993
Dec. 31
Change
(millions)
high
low
close
from '92
Intel
894.1
$74.50
$42.75
$62.00
+18.50
Novell
735.8
35.25
17.00
20.75
-7.75
Tele-Comm. "A"
620.3
33.25
17.50
30.25
+9.00
Synoptics Comm
571.0
42.75
20.00
27.88
+0.75
Cisco Systems
554.9
65.75
38.13
64.63
+25.31
MCI Communications
549.9
29.88
18.81
28.25
+8.44
Microsoft
503.5
98.00
70.38
80.63
-4.75
Apple Computer
494.1
65.25
22.00
29.25
-30.50
Amgen
459.6
71.75
31.00
49.50
-21.13
Oracle Systems
448.9
37.75
13.31
28.75
+14.56
Spectrum Info. Tech.
428.3
13.13
2.41
7.63
+4.31
Sun Microsystems
403.5
41.00
21.13
29.13
-4.50
Dell Computers
360.5
49.88
13.50
22.63
-25.38
Newbridge Networks
345.1
73.88
19.13
54.75
+34.13
Adobe Systems
341.0
37.00
15.63
22.25
+6.50
WINNERS AND LOSERS Common stocks whose prices rose or fell the most in percentage terms, as calculated by Media General.
Stocks that begin the year under $5 are excluded.
Only one class of stock is included for each company.
BIGGEST GAINS
1993
1993
Dec. 31
% Change
high
low
close
from '92
Glenayre Technologies
$55.38
$7.17
$43.50
467.1%
Digital Microwave
30.00
5.25
29.75
440.9
Western Deep
48.50
9.00
48.50
385.0
Microage
39.88
8.00
38.25
378.1
Cellular Tech. Services
31.75
5.13
24.75
371.4
Unites Cos. Financial
40.75
8.25
39.50
338.9
Orange Free State
44.00
9.50
44.00
323.9
International Cabletel
30.75
4.75
23.50
299.7
Dial Page
77.50
8.00
39.75
297.5
Players International
27.63
6.13
24.75
296.0
BIGGEST LOSERS
Fonic
$13.38
$0.28
$0.41
-96.9%
SK Technologies
10.00
.38
.53
-94.5
Judicate
19.69
1.25
1.25
-93.0
American Int'l Petroleum
20.31
1.75
2.00
-89.5
Sanborn
7.13
0.50
0.81
-87.5
Incomed
8.25
0.50
0.69
-87.4
All for a Dollar Inc.
13.75
1.50
1.75
-86.1
Ophthalmic Imaging
11.13
1.00
1.13
-86.1
Diamond Entertainment
8.13
0.88
0.88
-85.9
Innovo Group
7.63
0.50
0.88
-85.3


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Crescent Airways Corp., Lawrenceville, Ga., an initial public offering of two million units, each unit representing two shares and one redeemable warrant.
Thomas James.


...While a Sluggish Japan Sighs Amid Asia's Roaring Tigers: Southeast Asia; Dynamic Markets But Growing Pains
Among the dazzling economies of Southeast Asia, what has gone up seems likely to keep going up in 1994.
Southeast Asia remains the most economically dynamic region on earth, and regional forecasts suggest that economic growth will continue to hum along at up to 7 percent next year, much more than double the pace expected in the United States.


THE NEW MAYOR: Man in the News; Spiritual Reform Mayor: Rudolph William Giuliani
One day last spring, as Rudolph W. Giuliani ended a visit to Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School in Brooklyn, the crucible of discipline that shaped his world view and helped propel him into public life more than 30 years ago, he reflected on the changes in manners, mores and standards that have transformed the New York he once knew.
Surveying a city in which the consuming educational debates centered on multiculturalism and condoms, the pressing public fear was collapse of order in the streets, and a million residents swelled the welfare rolls, he said, "I think one of the things that happened to us is we became so arrogant that we believed we could reconstruct everything."


Mountaineer Feats Fail To Impress the Gators
As Steve Spurrier reflected on Florida's 41-7 rout of West Virginia in the Sugar Bowl, he related a comment that Don Nehlen, the Mountaineers' coach, had made shortly before the New Year's Day game.
"I thought he was kidding me, trying to lull me to sleep," Spurrier recalled.
"He said, 'Steve, I don't know if we can keep up with you guys.' "


Books of The Times; Looking for America, or Is It Japan?
Dance Dance Dance By Haruki Murakami Translated from the Japanese by Alfred Birnbaum. 393 pages.
Kodansha International. $22.
Haruki Murakami, Japan's most popular novelist, writes metaphysical Far Easterns with a Western beat.
His rapid-fire style and American tastes seem deliberately designed to break any possible connection to traditional novelists from his own country like Kobo Abe, Yukio Mishima or Yasunari Kawabata, Japan's only Nobel laureate in literature.
True, in his fiction there are echoes of Raymond Chandler, John Irving and Raymond Carver, but Mr.
Murakami's mysterious plots and original characters are very much his own creation.
"Dance Dance Dance" is the latest and liveliest example of Mr.
Murakami's frequent-flier fiction.
His characters are constantly on the go.
In the novel, the author takes the reader on a business-class trip across two cultures, from Japan to Hawaii and back home again.
His protagonist is a 34-year-old freelance writer at loose ends who doesn't need much money and is always ready for new adventures.
Along the way, the freelancer encounters various women: dream girls, nice girls, call girls and a mature, smart-alecky 13-year-old named Yuki.
Yuki almost steals the novel away from the protagonist because she's so wise, sad and witty.
She behaves like Eloise at the Plaza and thinks like an unblemished Lolita.
It's a tribute to Mr.
Murakami's abilities as a seasoned novelist ("A Wild Sheep Chase," "Norwegian Wood," "Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the End of the World") that all of his female characters stand out as individuals.
The unnamed protagonist in "Dance Dance Dance," faced with an early midlife crisis after a divorce, appears to be living on the rungs of a psychic stepladder, treading gingerly between depression and nihilism.
To make an occasional living, he lowers himself in his own eyes by writing restaurant reviews for a women's magazine.
With self-contempt, he describes his writing this way: "Shoveling snow. You know, cultural snow."
As in his imaginative novel "A Wild Sheep Chase," Mr.
Murakami's man takes swipes at the Japanese conglomerates that gobble up small companies and at the bribery that is built into business and government.
"Advanced capitalism has transcended itself," the freelancer says.
"Not to overstate things, financial dealings have practically become a religious activity. The new mysticism. People worship capital, adore its aura, genuflect before Porsches and Tokyo land values. Worshiping everything their shiny Porsches symbolize. It's the only stuff of myth that's left in the world."
Mr.
Murakami's novels are fairly apolitical, but this time there's a plot reason behind his protagonist's comments about capitalism in the 1980's.
The freelancer is trying to find an attractive young woman of limited virtue with whom he once shared a room in Sapporo in the seedy but homey Hotel Dolphin.
She has disappeared; even more strangely, so has the hotel.
In its place now stands one of those glass-and-steel caravansaries with flags of various nations waving along the driveway.
The Hotel Dolphin has been replaced by the pretentiously named "l'Hotel Dauphin."
Enter the Sheep Man, whom we have met before in "A Wild Sheep Chase." Who is he?
And what is he doing in the dark corridors of the Dolphin that, somehow, still exists if one pushes the right elevator button, and walking through walls inside the Dauphin?
The Sheep Man may be whatever the author allows the reader to think he is: phantom, conscience, elder wise man, sci-fi figment, symbol of goodness in a rotten world, maybe all of these.
Whichever, the Sheep Man has only one piece of philosophical advice for the freelancer: "Dance. As long as the music plays."
A reader puzzled by the Sheep Man must be patient with Mr.
Murakami.
For "Dance Dance Dance" becomes a murder mystery when several of the freelancer's acquaintances begin to disappear.
At the same time, the heart of the novel contains a story about the changing needs of love.
A woman with interesting ears is replaced by a woman wearing interesting spectacles.
My favorite character, 13-year-old Yuki, drops pearls of wisdom to the 34-year-old freelancer.
They're together because he is acting as her companion at the request of her estranged parents, who are busy with their own love affairs and businesses.
At one point, speaking contritely of her mother's deceased American boyfriend, whom she once called a goon, Yuki says, "Mediocrity's like a spot on a shirt -- it never comes off."
Americanisms dance across the pages of the novel, practically turning Japan into an anchored aircraft carrier for American products and culture.
The protagonist eats two doughnuts for breakfast at Dunkin' Donuts and burgers for lunch at McDonald's; he also drops into the Kentucky Fried Chicken and Dairy Queen franchises.
Truman Capote, Count Basie, Keith Haring, Darth Vader, Clint Eastwood, Walt Disney, Gerry Mulligan and Jodie Foster are all mentioned.
In between listening to rock tapes while tooling along in his old Subaru, the freelancer reads a biography of Jack London.
Mr.
Murakami's keen translator, Alfred Birnbaum, who keeps "Dance Dance Dance" hopping, valiantly interprets the author's numerous references to American music, books and movies.
In fact, he may even exceed the challenge now and then by dropping in a New Yorkism, as when the freelancer says: "Before noon I drove to Aoyama to do shopping at the fancy-schmancy Kinokuniya supermarket."
Wonder how you say fancy-schmancy in Japanese?


THE NEW MAYOR: The Others; Advocate Green Gives Public An Inside Look at a New Job
In his first address as the city's first Public Advocate, Mark J. Green lost no time yesterday trying to define a job whose responsibilities have been markedly vague to many citizens.
After his swearing-in ceremony on the steps of City Hall, Mr.
Green gave an inaugural address in which he described his job -- the city's second-highest elected position -- as a "quality-of-life cop patrolling the bureaucracy beat, no matter whose toes we may have to step on."


...Ultrafast Data Transmissions That Can Find You: New Materials; Superconductor Spinoff Products
Researchers continue to find intriguing variants of the ceramic superconducting compounds discovered in the late 1980's.
When cooled below a critical temperature, superconductors can transmit electricity with virtually no resistance while generating powerful magnetic fields capable of staving off intruding magnetic fields that might cause interference.
Until the ceramics were discovered, the only known superconductors were metallic substances that required cooling with liquid helium to just above absolute zero -- more than -450 degrees Fahrenheit.
Liquid helium is expensive -- about $4 a liter -- and it quickly boils away.


Outlook '94; 500-Channel TV: The Vision Recedes
THE television world is going to change in 1994, industry executives say, but not so you would notice -- if you are a viewer, that is.
Talk raged in 1993 about the video revolution to come, but as the year ended many of those who had started the talk were retrenching a bit.
More common were cautionary warnings about the unrestrained hype that had created an expectation of 500 channels in the near future.


Trouble With Angels; Motorcycle Gang Is in a U.S. Court Fight Over Its Clubhouse
Seventy-seven East Third Street is, according to the police, a place to be avoided.
But to the Hell's Angels, it is home.
Since 1969, America's best-known and most-feared bunch of Harley-riding, tattooed nonconformists have called the East Village apartment house both headquarters and home in New York City.
According to a history that is part neighborhood remembrance, part Angels lore and part police reports, the ramshackle, six-story building and the streets around it have been the scene of countless decibel-cranking parties, LSD-laced misadventures, drug deals, orgies and random acts of violence against passers-by.


Outlook '94; Gillette's World View: One Blade Fits All
SOME people join the Navy to see the world; Alfred M. Zeien joined the Gillette Company.
He spent nine years as an executive in Germany.
Some of those years gave him the adventure that he had sought, and others were pure hardship.
But out of the experience came a point of view, a way of thinking about the marketplace that shapes Gillette's operations today.
Mainly, he realized that shoppers in Caracas or Bangkok want the same merchandise as those in Chicago or Boston.
Acting on this insight, Mr.
Zeien (pronounced Zane), now Gillette's chairman, set about transforming the company from a multinational corporation into a global one.
The difference: While multinationals spend millions to alter products to suit the tastes of different countries, global companies try to sell the same razor or coffee maker to everyone.


Unlikely And Likely Heroes Pace Nets
Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman had 23 points apiece tonight, but they were hardly the only ones who played starring roles in the Nets' 101-97 victory over the Celtics.
Coleman had a game-high 16 rebounds as well -- getting his 17th double-double of the season.
There were other impressive numbers, however, for some lesser lights.


Henry Byroade, 80, Ambassador To Egypt and 5 Other Countries
Henry A. Byroade, a career diplomat who was Assistant Secretary of State for the Middle East, South Asia and Africa from 1952 to 1955 and Ambassador to Egypt in 1955 and 1956 and later to five other countries, died on Friday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 80 and lived in Potomac, Md.
The cause was cardiopulmonary arrest, and he had surgery for cancer in June, said his daughter, Linda B. Griffin of Burtonsville, Md.


A High-Technology Outcry Against the U.S. Patent System
The nation's 203-year-old patent system is on a collision course with new technology.
Framing a crucial public-policy issue for 1994, a growing number of software publishers and patent experts are calling for fundamental changes in the way the Government assigns ownership to computer hardware and software inventions.
Failure to revise the system, these critics say, will stifle creativity in crucial high-technology areas.


Review/Television; Taking the Pulse of Ailing American Industry
The sorry condition of American industry is not a new subject for television, and some of the material in "Challenge to America" will be familiar to the conscientious viewer. (Just a few months ago, for example, "Frontline" carried an unsparing account of the decline of General Motors.) But Hedrick Smith's new four-and-a-half-hour program goes beyond criticism to seek the reasons Japanese and German industries have outstripped their American counterparts and to advocate ways of fighting back.
In tonight's opening hour, Mr.
Smith, a former New York Times correspondent, traces the much-lamented troubles of General Motors, I.B.M. and RCA to the arrogance, inertia and shortsightedness of their top managers.


Experts Predict Financial Market Trends
What will be the most significant trend in financial markets in the new year?
Several pundits of the business world were called upon to answer the question.Here are their responses.
Leo Melamed Chairman emeritus, Chicago Mercantile Exchange
The spread of financial derivatives will continue to the point where they have taken center stage in the world of finance.
That is good news and bad news.
It's good news because derivatives add liquidity to markets.
But there are risks involved.
In the coming year, I think regulators will be wrestling with these issues.


The Older Mother
To the Editor:
You report on Britain's reaction to a 59-year-old woman who became the mother of twins through fertility treatments (front page, Dec. 29).
The former chairman of the British Medical Association Council, you state, "could not imagine how a woman of 69 would cope with 10-year-old twins." Why not?
In the United States, numerous grandmothers care for their grandchildren in the foster care system.
And many affluent Americans prefer having grandmothers as caretakers for their children when both parents work.


Transcript of Inaugural Speech: Giuliani Urges Change and Unity
Following is a transcript of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's inaugural speech at City Hall yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:
Rabbi Sherer, Cardinal O'Connor, Rev.
Charles Mixon, who are offering prayers today at this inauguration.
Each of them reminds us not just with the prayers that they offer but with the example of their lives, of the centrality of God to our city.
I thank them very much for being here.


OTHER NEWS
Federated Department Stores may have purchased debt that is too safe if it wants to gain control of R.H.
Macy.
News Analysis.
C23 Viacom and Blockbuster Entertainment are still discussing raising more money in the Paramount Communications batte.
C24 Index of Companies in the News.
C20


Nightmare Is Remade A 'Miracle'
The flames that lit the Mississippi night last April had the quality of a dimly remembered nightmare suddenly becoming vivid reality.
But eight months after three white youths burned two black churches on the 25th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., something remarkable has unfolded in this corner of southwest Mississippi, where racial violence was almost a daily fact of life in the civil rights era.


Topics of The Times; A Double Dose for Children
The latest report on the state of the world's children contains some good news: Children in developing countries are not dying at such high rates from preventable diseases.
Unfortunately, the battle against disease and other problems that afflict children is not yet won.
Ten years ago, child deaths from measles totaled 2.5 million a year; today the annual toll is 1 million.
Annual deaths from diarrheal dehydration have dropped from 4 million to less than 3 million.


Mr. Giuliani's Dreams
Rudolph Giuliani took office on the steps of City Hall yesterday promising a return to New York City's halcyon days of hope, promise and achievement -- a time that may never have existed quite as he describes it, but has a place in the heart of New York's 107th Mayor, and in the dreams of millions of New Yorkers.
"The era of fear has had a long enough reign," Mr.
Giuliani said, with his 7-year-old son, Andrew, standing happily at his side.
"The period of doubt has run its course. As of this moment, the expressions of cynicism -- that New York is not governable, New York is not manageable, New York is not worth it -- all of these I declare politically incorrect."


Dixy Lee Ray, 79, Ex-Governor; Led Atomic Energy Commission
Dixy Lee Ray, former chairwoman of the Atomic Energy Commission and Governor of Washington, died yesterday at her home on Fox Island, near Tacoma.
She was 79.
She had suffered for some months from a severe bronchial condition, said a friend, Lou Guzzo, who is a television commentator.


Health Fight Certain But Outcome Is Not
Lawmakers, officials of the Clinton Administration and experts outside the Government see the battle over health care as the biggest political challenge facing Congress this year, but their expectations of the outcome differ widely.


World Economies


Modern Maternity
Several weeks ago, in London, a woman gave birth to twins.
Why did this seemingly unremarkable event merit headlines?
Simple.
She is 59 years old.
True, her children came into this world by a somewhat circuitous route.
Eggs donated by a younger woman were fertilized by the older woman's 45-year-old husband and implanted in her at a Rome fertility clinic.
But in-vitro fertilization and donor eggs are, if not yet commonplace, not unusual in the wonderful new world of obstetrics.
Once again, then, why the headlines?
Simple.
She is 59 years old.


Outlook '94; Soundings
No Time for Scoundrels
Will 1994 be the year Wall Street finally starts rooting out brokerage industry scoundrels?
After last year's scandals, that's what executives promise.
Instead of letting rogue brokers bounce from firm to firm, they are considering a "three strikes and you're out" policy, dismissing them after three substantiated customer complaints.
With Friends Like Arthur Levitt . . .
After suffering Richard C. Breeden as the politically ambitious chief of the Securities and Exchange Commission, investment firms toasted the arrival this year of Arthur Levitt Jr., a former American Stock Exchange chairman and an industry insider.
Since then, he has given old friends reason to recork their champagne.
He wants to curb political contributions by municipal bond underwriters and pay brokers by performance instead of the number of trades they churn up.
This year, Mr.
Levitt will decide whether companies must publish the cost of the zillions of executive stock options they grant.
Marcy!
Is it time to bring back Dick Breeden?
Flip Side of the Mortgage Coin
There may be no free lunch, but the person eating isn't always the one paying.
Those who refinanced their mortgages feasted last year with money saved from lower payments.
Those who held securities backed by these mortgages often got the bill.
Some buyers of Ginnie Maes, CMO's and other Wall Street exotica, lured by high rates, suffered losses or unexpectedly got back money that they had to reinvest at lower rates.
Here's an idea: With mortgages so low, the best investment might be a house.
Thinner Ranks, but Fatter Payrolls
The body count is down, the dollar count up.
Wall Street's payroll remains a good deal shorter than in 1987, but those who survived are having a blast.
Lower interest rates and a continued bull market brought investment firms record profits for the third straight year.
At Goldman, Sachs, profits doubled, to $2 billion, easily $5 million a partner, much more for some.
Over at Smith Barney Shearson, Sandy Weill is building his staff with the sort of salary offers that could lure Michael Jordan out of retirement and into investment banking.
On the Trail of Easy Money
This year, banks might have to borrow from someone other than the Government.
Profits, and share prices, have soared since 1990 as they gathered low-rate deposits and bought higher-rate Treasuries.
But bank stocks began to cool off last year.
An improving economy and rising rates suggest that the easy money has been made.
A bank's corporate borrowers, after all, can't pledge the Washington Monument as security.
Guidance for Brinksmanship
Something ventured, something gained: Investors' appetite for risk paid off last year as bonds rallied and stocks climbed to new highs.
Sober C.D.'s and money markets continued to yield 2.5 or so percent.
Mutual fund sales set records, even as many strategists warned that the markets had climbed to perilous levels.
Want to learn how much risk these rookie investors are willing to take?
Wait till the markets retreat and see who flees.
Swimming With the Currency
You have to be a foreign visitor or currency speculator to afford New York's latest improbable fashions, like purple Victorian velvet or 60's love beads.
The biggest bargain attracting foreigners, whether to apparel or entire corporations, is the currency.
But as the United States' growth outstrips Europe's and Japan's, the dollar could recover.
Then Americans could afford to take home, say, deconstructionist tatters or pin-striped men's kilts from Paris and Milan.
It's Gold, It's Buy, It's Sell, It's . . .
Gold fell to $326 an ounce in March, rose to $410 in July, fell to $340 in September and finished at $392.
Gold experts in New York and London pointed to buying or selling by George Soros, Sir James Goldsmith, the Russian Government, Chinese jewelers and the Sultan of Brunei.
The expert consensus on price swings this year: a further rise in explanations.


A March Marks the Anniversary of Fatah


Outlook '94; The Road From Lab to Marketplace
TECHNOLOGY and the marketplace are an odd couple.
Technology is about what's possible or producible; business is about human wants, needs and pocketbooks.
Yet a breakthrough technology -- the telephone, the jet engine, the microprocessor -- is a breakthrough only if people adopt it, using it to change the way they work and live.
So the ability to generate enthusiasm, investment, business conferences and consultants' fees does not really count.
Instead, the big question for a promising technology is when, if ever, will it become more than a concept or a market-test?
When will it become an industry?
The crossover -- when technological potential becomes market phenomenon -- is what experts call an "inflection point" or, in techspeak, a "paradigm shift."


Utah Falls 19 Behind, but Wins
Jazz 92, Trail Blazers 90
Karl Malone scored 18 of his 25 points in the second half last night as the Utah Jazz rallied from 19 points down to defeat the Portland Trail Blazers, 92-90, for their fourth straight victory.


1994 Schedules Announced
With the results of yesterday's National Football League games, the Giants and Jets learned their opponents for the 1994 season.
The Giants will face the four teams from the American Conference Central Division, as well as two each from the National Conference West and Central.
They will have home games against Minnesota, Detroit, Pittsburgh and Cincinnati, and road games against New Orleans, the Los Angeles Rams, Houston and Cleveland.


First a Suspicious Whistle, Then the Gripes
Giants guard William Roberts was asked what he learned from the 16-13 overtime loss to the Dallas Cowboys.
"I guess we can't chop block," he answered sarcastically.
It was a reference to a 15-yard penalty on center Brian Williams during the Giants' first drive of overtime.
The penalty killed their momentum and the drive.
The Giants, however, disagreed with the call and ripped into the officiating.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending . . .
November  Tuesday  Auto Sales . . .
December  Wednesday  Factory Orders . . .
November  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
December  Consumer Borrowing . . .
November


New Detroit Area Code Causing Confusion, Ire and Lost Calls
In December, much of suburban Detroit got a new area code.
The trouble is that some phone systems have not gotten the message.
Customers have reported that an annoying number of calls made to them are not getting through if the caller uses the new area code, 810, said Dean Hovey of Ameritech, the Great Lakes spinoff of the former Bell system.


CHRONICLE
When TRAN THI HUYEN stepped onto American soil in San Francisco for the first time, the 84-year-old Vietnamese mother received a celebrity's welcome -- dozens of news photographers snapping pictures.
Ms.
Huyen seemed to take it in stride, walking hand-in-hand with three daughters, including LE LY HAYSLIP , whose life is portrayed in the movie "Heaven and Earth."


Joanne Kourepinos, Kenneth Adams
Joanne Kourepinos, a contract analyst in New York at Tishman Speyer Properties, a real-estate development company, was married yesterday to Kenneth A. Adams, an associate in New York of Winston &amp; Strawn, a Chicago law firm.
The Rev.
Robert G. Stephanopoulos performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Adams, 33, graduated from Wheaton College in Norton, Mass.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Kourepinos of Levittown, L.I.
Her father owns a Dunkin' Donuts franchise in Levittown.


Here Come Florida's Rangers
The Florida Panthers are not just another expansion team.
Part of that is because they are coached by Roger Neilson and led by goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck, both former Rangers who return to Madison Square Garden tonight for the first time since they left the team.
Neilson was fired as Rangers coach last Jan. 4 while Vanbiesbrouck was traded to the Vancouver Canucks last summer before being selected by the Panthers in the National Hockey League's expansion draft.
What also makes the Panthers different is that they roar into tonight's game with the Rangers on a 7-1-3 tear, and with a record of 16-15-6 find themselves two points behind Montreal for the eighth, and final, playoff position in the Eastern Conference.


In Search of Fun for Creativity's Sake
DURING an interview late last month, Frank Lowe, the chairman and chief executive of the Lowe Group, recalled a recent conversation with Philip H. Geier Jr., the chairman and chief executive ofLowe's parent, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
"What we do should be more fun," Mr.
Lowe said he told Mr.
Geier, "more smiles, more laughter. It's all become so serious. There's no sense of jollity."


Martin Rubenstein, 58, Broadcast Executive
Martin Rubenstein, a former business executive of three major broadcasting networks, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 58.
The cause was heart disease, said his daughter, Deborah Rubenstein.


Review/Television; A Stand-Up Guy, and His Family
Another sitcom.
Another show with a goofy dad, a wry mom and three troublesome but wonderful kids.
Television marches on.
Groan.
But then, against all odds, the tired formula works.
Latest instance: "The Good Life," getting an NBC preview tonight at 8:30 before settling into its regular weekly time period tomorrow at 8:30.
This is still another series squeezed out of a stand-up comedy act.
On the current scene, just think of Roseanne Arnold ("Roseanne"), Jerry Seinfeld ("Seinfeld") or Tim Allen ("Home Improvement").
This time the stardom scepter descends on the shoulder of John Caponera, a guy who has paid his dues on everything from "Star Search" to "Comic Strip Live" to "An Evening at the Improv." A native of Chicago, Mr.
Caponera plays John Bowman, a middle-class, suburban-Chicago husband and father struggling to find a reasonable middle ground to contemporary survival.
Not easy.


Critic's Notebook; Less as More in Choreography Style
Less is more.
Less is more.
Less is more.
Critics and teachers have long drummed that dictum into countless writers, choreographers, artists and architects.
It is advice worth heeding, provided that no one treats it as unassailable.
There are times when more is more, when a dance, poem or play cries out for elaborateness.
The trouble is, how does one distinguish between such occasions and those when lavishness piles up as clutter?


Public School Leadership Fight Tearing a Hasidic Sect
The people of this Hasidic village are so passionately devoted to their Rebbe, or Grand Rabbi, that few will marry, change jobs, buy a house or undergo surgery without his blessing.
Yet for four years, the villagers, members of the Satmar Hasidic sect, have been responsible for running a public school system, which by its very nature must provide a greater tolerance for dissent and individual freedom.


Whether It's Bluejeans or Mini-Motors or Power Plants . . .: Applied Materials; A Big Comeback In Silicon Valley
Think globally . . .
Think globally . . .
Think globally.
This is the corporate executive's mantra for the new year.
With the North American Free Trade Agreement in place and a new world trade agreement moving smartly forward, companies are aggressively expanding beyond national borders and innovating at every turn to snare new business.
Caterpillar, for example, elbowed Japanese companies aside in China's coal fields by agreeing to establish a parts warehouse and fly in mechanics.
In Silicon Valley, Applied Materials came from behind by spending 15 percent of sales each year on research and development.
ABB Asea Brown Boveri is consolidating manufacturing and shifting production of components to take advantage of the free trade accord.
In Latin America, Bunge &amp; Born is betting that the region's rate of consumption will grow faster than its overall economies.
Levi Strauss, long a global visionary, sounds a sobering note.
It continues to turn its back on China's vast market for bluejeans because of human rights concerns.
Here, then, six companies and their global strategies:
A decade ago, Silicon Valley semiconductor chip equipment companies said they were being overrun by Japanese competitors.
Now, with Japanese high-tech companies in a deep slump, some American manufacturers are again in good shape.
Among American revival stories, Applied Materials Inc., since last year the world's largest maker of semiconductor manufacturing equipment, is the most compelling example of a company that has beaten its Japanese competition internationally by relying on traditional Silicon Valley principles.


Hornets Beat Knicks In Battle of 'B' Teams
The Knicks were neither healthy nor happy after last night's heartbreaking loss.
The Charlotte Hornets, without Alonzo Mourning (sprained ankle) and Larry Johnson (strained back), escaped Madison Square Garden with a pulsating 124-123 overtime victory.
It was an admirable effort by the short-handed Knicks, who played without Anthony Mason (sprained left ankle) and Tony Campbell (pinched nerve, left foot), joining the already injured Charles Smith, Hubert Davis and Doc Rivers.


Big Risk and Cost Seen in Creating Data Superhighway
Few things are really certain about building the fabled electronic superhighway, except this: it will cost a staggering amount of money.
How much?
Over the next five years alone, cable TV and telephone companies may spend as much as $50 billion building advanced networks that bring two-way voice and video services across the country.


Public School Leadership Fight Tearing a Hasidic Sect
The people of this Hasidic village are so passionately devoted to their Rebbe, or Grand Rabbi, that few will marry, change jobs, buy a house or undergo surgery without his blessing.
Yet for four years, the villagers, members of the Satmar Hasidic sect, have been responsible for running a public school system, which by its very nature must provide a greater tolerance for dissent and individual freedom.


Year-End Financial Tables
Mutual Funds, C31.
New York Stock Exchange, C35.
Nasdaq, C38.
Nasdaq Small Capitalization, C40.
American Stock Exchange, C42.
Closed-End Funds, C42.
Active Stocks, C42.
Tracking the Markets, C43.


Low Rates May Keep 1994 Bond Sales Sluggish
Treasuries were everything in 1993, but in 1994 they won't be.
And reversals of that stripe will keep heads spinning and returns down in 1994.
Mortgage-backed securities, which took a beating last year, may be back in vogue, as fewer people refinance higher-rate mortgages.
Municipal bonds, underperforming last year because of the oversupply of issues as cities took advantage of low rates, should also shine.
And if 1993 was the year of capital gains -- of double-digit total returns -- this will be the year of the coupon -- single-digit payoffs mostly from interest earned.


Outlook '94; Soundings
Southwest, the Pace-Setting Puddle-Jumper
They're puddle-jumpers, and they're proud.
Now that Southwest Airlines has also bounded into the Northeast, the Midwest and the Far West, the hulking airlines that mocked this Dallas upstart are taking off in frill-less imitation.
Continental started a short-hop, quick-turnaround service last year, with USAir, and possibly United and Delta, expected to follow this year.
They finally figured out that planes make more money in the air than on the ground, and fares with two figures attract more travelers than fares with three.
Attention passengers: For Elvis imitations on board by the C.E.O., stick with Southwest.
Washington's Minimalist Economists
Minimalist musicians perform extended drones.
Minimalist painters sell blank canvases.
At the White House, minimalist economists also have turned monotony into an art -- even though George Bush's failure to whip up the economy put Bill Clinton in the White House.
Mr.
Clinton promised maximal stimulus, but he soon began scaling back.
A yawning deficit and rebellious Congress left him with practically no stimulus at all.
By year-end, the economy was humming again anyway, letting Clinton minimalists take credit for whatever they did, or didn't, do.
Lots of luck finding a minimalist health care fix.
Driving Out of the Souk
One of America's most dreaded rituals is headed in the same direction as 8-track tape decks.
Detroit is granting car buyers deliverance from oily or pushy or plaintive salespeople.
G.M. has been selling Saturns at fixed prices for years, but cut back on haggling for Oldsmobiles only in 1993.
With sales up, G.M. expanded its program, and Ford experimented.
What if you're so fearful of being cheated that you insist on bargaining?
G.M. promises to keep salesmen around for you.
Flocking to Rotisserie Chicken
First it was rotisserie baseball.
Now everyone's betting on rotisserie chicken.
Companies count on us to flock to broiled chicken stands at every mall, forsaking the buckets of chickens that had the misfortune to be fried.
Boston Chicken and Clucker's Wood Roasted Chicken have had high-flying public offerings.
Kentucky Fried Chicken, owned by Pepsico, has put even its name on a diet, nagging the public and press to call it KFC.
Nutritionists and investment bankers praise slimmer chickens.
Investors with weak stomachs should buy the birds, not the stocks.
Paris and Mickey Don't Mix
Euro Disney's managers began by insisting that employees, mostly French, bathe regularly and wear "appropriate undergarments." Now, with debts of more than $3 billion and a $900 million-plus loss in the first full year, it's the balance sheet that needs dressing up.
To keep from closing, the managers are begging creditor banks and the Walt Disney Company for firmer support.
Disney has been looking elsewhere, including the home turf.
But are well-scrubbed Californians ready for a second Disney theme park?
Cooking With Gas
They're not about to rename Houston's football team the Gassers.
But oilers are fewer as energy producers turn increasingly to natural gas.
It's more abundant and cleaner burning, and its price has held fairly steady, even as oil prices have collapsed.
Heating oil dealers are striking back by cranking up the temperature of their radio ads (Gas in my house? No way! One Chernobyl's enough.).
Lopez: Saint or Sinner?
In efficiency and profitability, Volkswagen and General Motors still finish at the rear of the class.
Last year, they stayed there, shooting spitballs over the affections of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua.
Mr.
Lopez, a Spanish arrival given to bizarre pronouncements, cut billions from G.M.'s costs.
Then he vanished, only to pop up in the No. 2 spot at VW.
Furious about being left at the altar, G.M. complained to German prosecutors that Mr.
Lopez had run off with trade secrets and other top managers.
VW denies all.
Time to stifle the lawyers and learn to build better cars?
Press 1 for More Options
"We don't care," said Ernestine, the imperious Lily Tomlin character of the 1960's, cutting off a hapless customer.
"We don't have to. We're the phone company." The human operator is now the one in distress, as carriers, corporations and government automate and cut costs.
A.T.&amp; T., with 27,000 operators in 1984, plans to have fewer than 10,000 next year.
But there's no relief in sight from the latest telecom affront: voice mail Hell.


Saudi Arabia to Slash Its Budget As Oil Prices Continue to Plunge
After two decades of economic growth driven by vast income from oil exports, Saudi Arabia has announced that it is slashing its budget by 20 percent this year because of the decline in world oil prices.
King Fahd announced the move, viewed as a major policy shift, in a speech at a special Cabinet session that was broadcast to the nation late Saturday night.
The cuts were dictated by "changing world economic circumstances and a surplus of oil supplies that have brought a drop in prices," he said.


Huskers Left With Yellow Flags and Teardrops
What was left of the color in his face was ebbing as Nebraska Coach Tom Osborne stood in the dimly lit tunnel outside the visitors' Orange Bowl locker room early this morning.
He was ashen and his shoulders seemed to bend under the weight of what had just happened to his football team.
What had happened, of course, was that the Cornhuskers, who had taken a 16-15 lead over Florida State on a field goal with 1 minute 16 seconds left in the battle for college football's national championship, had just lost a game they thought they had won.
And the way they had lost it -- with 30 yards of penalties coming on Florida State's final and fitful drive to the 18-16 victory -- was particularly galling for a man whose teams are known for preparation and execution.


Review/Pop; On the Slippery Slope Between Jazz and Rock
Between jazz and rock is a slippery place to perch, and for the moment, James (Blood) Ulmer has stopped trying to find a middle ground.
Mr.
Ulmer is a disciple of Ornette Coleman who is also steeped in electric blues, and his recordings have veered from jazz to blues-rock to hard-rock to, on "Odyssey" (Columbia), a brilliant amalgam of country, Celtic music, jazz and rock.
But when Mr.
Ulmer began his annual New Year's engagement at the Knitting Factory on Thursday night, the category boundaries were back in force.
He opened and closed the set with jazzy pieces: asymmetrical melodies that led to skittering, slashing solos while Ronnie Drayton, on second guitar, played transparent high chords and the rhythm section of Amin Ali on bass and Aubrey Dayle on drums roamed from funk riffs to their own improvisational cross-currents.
Picking with his thumb, Mr.
Ulmer would fling a short phrase across the beat, play fast chromatic zigzags, pause, then rake a sharp, sudden chord on an off-beat.


Global Mutual Funds: Expectations Are High
International mutual funds, which set the pace among mutual funds last year, are expected to continue their strong performance in 1994.
Fueling the trend is a growing awareness among Americans that some diversification overseas is desirable and that many foreign markets offer the potential for returns far higher than what the domestic markets promise.
The big decisions for investors are how much money to allocate overseas and where to put it.
Many financial experts now recommend placing at least 25 percent in foreign investments, and investors appear to be moving in that direction.


Atop the Amex Charts in 1993
MOST ACTIVE ISSUES
Volume
1993
1993
Dec. 31
Change
(millions)
high
low
close
from '92
Echo Bay Mines
265.9
$14.50
$4.13
$12.88
+$7.94
Royal Oak Mines
234.6
7.00
1.44
4.75
+3.13
Energy Services
181.4
4.06
1.00
3.38
+2.25
Amdahl
83.7
8.50
4.38
6.00
-1.25
Cheyenne Software
69.5
40.25
16.41
27.88
+7.78
Atari
66.8
12.75
0.50
5.75
+4.56
Interdigital Comm.
60.3
11.38
4.63
5.25
-4.00
Hasbro
59.9
40.50
28.13
36.25
+3.63
Nabors Industries
58.2
11.00
6.13
8.13
+1.63
NTN Commuications
57.3
11.50
4.38
10.00
+5.06
Pegasus Gold
57.3
28.13
12.63
22.00
+7.13
New York Times "A"
53.0
31.25
22.38
26.25
-0.13
S.&amp;P. units-"Spiders"
51.7
47.16
42.81
46.59
+2.66
Ivax
50.3
29.75
19.25
28.75
-0.50
Weatherford Int'l
48.8
13.75
4.75
10.63
+4.75
WINNERS AND LOSERS Common stocks whose prices rose or fell the most in percentage terms, as calculated by Media General.
Stocks that begin the year under $5 are excluded.
Only one class of stock is included for each company.
BIGGEST GAINS
1993
1993
Dec. 31
% Change
high
low
close
from '92
Fibreboard
$35.63
$6.88
$33.75
390.6%
Bush Industries "A"
32.00
8.88
30.88
252.9
Rowe Furniture
23.25
5.51
21.25
235.2
Charter Medical
27.00
8.00
25.88
223.5
Cohu
22.50
6.56
19.13
183.4
Clear Channel Communications
48.13
16.20
46.00
182.2
Oriental Federal Savings Bnk
30.99
10.34
27.25
153.3
Income Oppor. Realty Trust
17.50
6.00
15.13
142.1
American Bilrite
49.63
18.50
45.50
137.8
Forest City Enterprise "B"
44.13
18.38
43.00
137.2
BIGGEST GAINS
Health Professionals Inc.
$13.13
$0.56
$1.13
-86.5%
Advanced Medical
9.75
0.88
1.44
-85.0
Angeles Mortgage Invst. Trust
16.88
1.13
2,75
-82.4
Rx Medical Services
24.50
5.00
5.38
-78.5
Cognitronics
18.38
3.88
4.31
-75.2
Phoenix Laser Systems
9.13
2.13
2.38
-74.3
Farragut Mortgage
7.50
1.25
1.38
-73.7
Rymad Mortgage Investment
5.38
1.00
1.38
-73.1
Clinicorp
10.00
1.88
2.13
-71.6
Cancer Treatment Holdings
5.63
1.50
1.75
-68.2


In America, an Economic Upswing Cheers the Forecasters
To Thomas H. O'Brien, chairman of the PNC Bank Corporation in Pittsburgh, the proof that business was feeling more bullish about the economy and intended to spend more was unmistakable: a $5 billion surge in the credit lines his bank extended to companies the last three months.
The revival of business borrowing at PNC is just one of many signs the economy, now in its 34th month of stop-and-go expansion, has gotten back on a moderate growth track.
Among the other indications: falling joblessness, consumers' improving mood, solid gains in spending on cars and other big-ticket items, rising industrial production and growing order backlogs.


...While a Sluggish Japan Sighs Amid Asia's Roaring Tigers: Japan; It May Be Time For a Rebound
Optimistic economic forecasts in Japan are as rare these days as billion-dollar takeovers.
Everyone, including Government officials, seems to have hunkered down, expecting the worst.
But the unrelieved pessimism may in itself be a favorable sign.
For contrarians -- who prefer to call themselves realists -- it is a classic signal that the unexpected may be coming in 1994: a rebound.
Rarely have Japan's economic prospects been gloomier.
Output is declining, unemployment is inching upward, and consumers are in deep gloom.
The recession drags on.
It is, in short, time to start thinking about the pending recovery.


...Today's Corporate Game Plans Know No Boundaries: Bunge &amp; Born; More Mindful Of Latin America
With low inflation and economic growth proving remarkably enduring in much of Latin America, there are new pressures for consumer manufacturers to pay more attention to their customers.
"Stability has made the consumer much more demanding and given him more time to shop around and make the spending decisions," said Ricardo Esteves, a director of Bunge &amp; Born S.A., South America's largest consumer products company.


No Headline
As of this moment, the expressions of cynicism -- New York is not governable, New York is not manageable, New York is not worth it -- all of these I declare politically incorrect.
Let's not use them anymore. -- MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI.  [ A1:6. ]


Outlook '94; The New Strategy: Take Risks, Think Globally
Trade Is the New Global Diplomacy  The policy is known as economic security, defined as harnessing America's diplomacy to the creation of jobs and turning a blind eye to certain things, like wars.
One in six Boeing airplanes is now bought by China.
Bosnia and Somalia don't buy many semiconductors.
So the Clinton Administration's focus is shifting southward to Mexico now that the North American Free Trade Agreement is in place and eastward to the Pacific, through a summit meeting of the 15-nation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
This trend will continue in 1994, pushing the ascendency of trade interests in global diplomacy.
What used to be called North-South trade, and might now be better termed inter-developmental symbiosis, has become the crucial issue for growth.
The symbiosis is between the cheap labor and fast-growing markets of the "South" and the technology and new job-creating exports of the "North." In foreign policy terms, it means less attention for traditional partners like NATO and more for the developing nations that can create jobs and wealth in America.
By Roger Cohen.
C3  One World, One Consumer
Alfred M. Zeien, Gilette's chairman, learned a seminal lesson during his years abroad for the company -- shoppers in Caracas or Bangkok want the same merchandise as those in Chicago or Boston.
Acting on this insight after he landed Gillette's top job, Mr.
Zeien has transformed the company from a multinational corporation into a global one.
The difference: While multinationals spend millions to alter products to suit the tastes of different countries, global companies try to sell the same razor or coffee maker to everyone.
Global marketing works often enough these days at Gilette and elsewhere to have come of age, changing the criteria for top executives.
By Louis Uchitelle.
C3  Business Be Nimble; Business Be Quick
Forging a global business strategy isn't easy, as companies large and small are learning.
The winners constantly adapt and innovate, both to change internally and to grab new customers.
For example, ABB Asea Brown Boveri, the Zurich-based industrial giant that operates 1,300 companies in 140 countries, overcame recession in Western Europe by using its global reach to shift into Asia and Eastern Europe.
For years Latin American companies hid behind tariff barriers and took consumers for granted.
But economic growth and low inflation led Bunge &amp; Born S.A., South America's largest consumer products company, to focus on consumers by selling businesses and concentrating on a handful of industries.
The common thread?
Be nimble and take nothing for granted.
C4&amp;5  At Home, Forecasters' Cheer
Five economists daring enough to climb out on a 1994 limb have assessed the prospects for growth, employment, inflation and interest rates and find themselves huddled together for warmth.
Their real gross domestic product forecasts range from 2.8 percent to 3.7 percent; unemployment by year's end from 6.0 percent to 6.5 percent; inflation from 1.9 percent to 3.3 percent; the yearend rate on the 30-year Treasury bond from 5.9 percent to 6.6 percent.
By Sylvia Nasar.
C6  Taking the World's Economic Pulse
Times correspondents assess local eocnomies. C6-9


Winners and Losers: Stock Funds
Funds primarily invested in stocks.
Limited to funds listed on Nasdaq with at least $30 million in assets.
Total Return for 1993.
BEST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
BEST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
PERCENT CHANGE Morgan Stanley Institutional: Asian Equity . . . 49.56% Fidelity Southeast Asia . . . 47.08 Morgan Stanley Asian Growth "A" . . . 43.71 Morgan Stanley Asian Growth "B" . . . 43.57 Merrill Lynch Dragon "A" . . . 40.93 Merrill Lynch Dragon "B" . . . 40.63 Fidelity Emerging Markets . . . 39.73 Eaton Vance Traditional: Greater China Growth . . . 39.14 Eaton Vance Marathon: Greater China Growth . . . 37.23 Lexington Strategic Investments . . . 37.07 WORST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
PERCENT CHANGE Trak Small Capitalization Value Equity . . . -10.06% Dean Witter Capital Growth . . . -9.01 Invesco Strategic Health Sciences . . . -8.41 Yacktman . . . -6.58 Pasadena Growth . . . -5.87 Flag Investors Quality Growth . . . -5.61 Reynolds Blue Chip Growth . . . -5.23 Rightime Growth . . . -5.15 Voyageur Growth Stock . . . -5.04 Invesco Strategic Environmental Services . . . -4.87 WORST-PERFORMING FUNDS . . .
PERCENT CHANGE DFA Japanese Small Company . . . -23.93% Equity Strategies . . . -20.73 Japan Funds . . . -14.32 T. Rowe Price Japan . . . -13.46 Fidelity Select: Natural Gas . . . -12.97 Fidelity Japan . . . -12.62 Invesco Strategic Energy . . . -12.47 Fidelity Select: Energy Service . . . -12.14 Putnam Energy Resources . . . -9.89 Fidelity Select: Energy . . . -9.56


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 MEXICO TAKES ON REBELS
Mexican troops pursued retreating peasants after an attack by the poorly armed group.
The death toll was at least 56 in the first significant guerrilla offensive in the country in nearly two decades.
A1 OUTLOOK DIMS FOR MIDEAST TALKS
The resumption of Israeli-Palestinian talks in the next few days seems less likely after Israel said it was prepared to let Palestinians "sweat" before reopening discussions of troop withdrawal and self-rule in the occupied territories.
A3 CZECH OFFER A QUANDARY FOR U.S.
The Czech Republic's invitation to become the new home of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty has raised delicate foreign policy questions for President Clinton.
A8 MAJOR WON'T BEND ON TALKS
Prime Minister John Major said today that an invitation stands for Republican hard-liners in Northern Ireland to join peace talks, but only if they accept unaltered the current proposal he and the Irish Prime Minister have presented.
A8 THREAT TO RIO'S YOUNG PERSISTS
The public outrage over the killings of the street children of Brazil has had little impact on the numbers of young people dying there.
A9 CROATIA TOUGHENS ITS STANCE
Croatia threatened to intervene directly to protect Croatian pockets of Bosnia and Herzegovina that are threatened by surrounding Bosnian Government forces.
A8 AFGHAN FIGHTING KILLS 70
Two days of heavy fighting between Afghan factions in Kabul have left about 70 dead and 700 wounded, most of them civilians.
A2 SAUDI ARABIA CUTS BUDGET
Falling world oil prices have forced Saudi Arabia to cut its budget by 20 percent this year after 20 years of economic growth.
A3 Cape Town Journal: Ringing in the new.
A4 National A10-14 WILL BLOOMIE'S BUY MACY'S?
Federated Department Stores, in a move that may be aimed at creating the biggest department-store company in the United States, announced that it had purchased a stake in R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
If Federated takes control of Macy, which some analysts said was doubtful, it would bring together some of the country's best-known stores: Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus, Macy's, Bullock's and I. Magnin.
A1 SENSITIZING SIGN LANGUAGE
Much as certain words are dropping out of polite usage, certain signs are being changed in American Sign Language.
Some are deemed offensive because they are visually provocative.
A1 TURNING NIGHTMARE INTO 'MIRACLE'
Eight months after white youths torched two black churches, volunteers from white and black churches in southwest Mississippi have united to rebuild, and lives have been changed.
A10 CLINTON'S PRIVATE WEEKEND
Reporter's Notebook: At the Renaissance Weekend, a gathering of public people that was officially private, even journalists insisted that President Clinton's comments had to remain strictly off the record.
A10 A NEW NATIONAL ARCHIVE
The National Archives plans to move millions of historical items, including tapes from the Watergate scandal, to a $250-million-research building in Maryland.
A11 FORECASTS FOR HEALTH CARE PLAN
Lawmakers, Administration officials and outside experts see the battle over health care as the biggest political challenge facing Congress in 1994.
But their expectations of the outcome differ widely.
A14 Federal investigators criticized the welfare bureaucracy.
A10 Federal scientists want a system to monitor tsunamis.
A11 A new area code in Detroit is causing confusion, ire and lost calls.
A14 Metro Digest A15 NEW YORK'S 107TH MAYOR
Calling for casting aside fears, Rudolph W. Giuliani, a former Federal prosecutor who cracked two decades of Democratic dominance of City Hall, was inaugurated yesterday as the 107th Mayor of New York.
A1 A LONELY CHIEF EXECUTIVE
As new Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who ran as a Republican-Liberal, looked up and down the front row of his inaugural platform, he saw face after Democratic face among his fellow top-office holders.
A1 Business Digest C1 Arts/Entertainment B11-18 "Less is more": a choreographer's dictum.
B11 Straight plays fare poorly on Broadway.
B11 Jeanne Moreau as herself.
B11 Theater: A Twelfth Night festival.
B12 Music: Hip-hop triple bill.
B11 James (Blood) Ulmer.
B15 Books: "Dance Dance Dance," by Haruki Murakami.
B18 Television: "Challenge to America." B18 "The Good Life." B18 Sports B1-10 Basketball: Knicks fall to Hornets.
B2 Nets upend Celtics.
B2 Columns: Anderson on the Cowboys game.
B5 Vecsey on Notre Dame.
B8 On Pro Basketball.
B2 On Pro Football.
B5 Football: Cowboys beat Giants in overtime.
B1 Jets say goobye to the season.
B1 Florida State voted national champions.
B9 Lions defeat Packers.
B6 Patriots upset Dolphins.
B7 Jets take favor from Patriots.
B7 Steelers beat Browns.
B7 Raiders overtake Broncos and make playoffs.
B7 Bills win home-field advantage.
B7 Nebraska's loss galling for Osborne.
B8 Olympics: Moe now top U.S. hope in skiing.
B3 Obituaries A24 Cesar Romero, a Hollywood and television actor.
Dixy Lee Ray, former Governor of Washington.
Henry A. Byroade, a career diplomat and former Ambassador to Egypt.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23 Editorials Mr.
Giuliani's dreams.
Modern maternity.
Happy new tax year.
Topics: Double dose for children.
Letters Anthony Lewis: Inside the Beltway.
William Safire: Art vs.
Artifice.
Dudley Clendinen: "I want to go to sleep." Donald Koblitz: Germany's poison chalice.
Neediest Cases A20 Chronicle A21  Bridge B14  Crossword B14


Atop the Big Board Charts in 1993


Outlook '94; High Tech Surges, But Are Consumers Ready?
Watching Orlando's Lucky 4,000
The big question for a promising technology is when, if ever, will it become more than a concept or a market-test.
The crossover -- when technological potential becomes market phenomenon -- is what experts call an "inflection point" or (dare we use the term?) a "paradigm shift." The much-heralded information superhighway could be one.
The project to watch begins in April in Orlando, led by Time Warner Entertainment.
It will bring information technology and state-of-the-art entertainment -- such things as video-on-demand -- into 4,000 homes.
Odds are that much of the reporting and commentary about it will be skeptical in tone, poking a hole in the digital balloon.
But such a dose of questioning could be healthy, while not weeding out any serious new-media players.
By Steve Lohr.
C11  TV's Behind-the Screen Scramble
Forget the 500 channels hype.
Barry Diller, right, who spent most of the year trying to acquire Paramount, considers the notion mostly whimsy.
For some time to come viewers will watch television pretty much as always -- specific programs on specific channels, available at specific times.
What will change will be relationships between program producers and distributors.
Paramount and Warner Brothers each want to create new networks because they expect CBS, ABC, NBC and Fox to produce more of their own programs and buy less from the studios.
One result: more news-magazine programs as a hedge against a shortage of entertainment programming.
By Bill Carter.
C11  That's Patented?
Computer software publishers were stunned when Compton's New Media received a patent for an information search technique used in multi-media databases.
Published on compact disks, the databases provide information by combining text, color pictures, sound, animation and video on computer screens.
Publishers are dismayed that the Government granted Compton's a virtual stranglehold.
The Patent Office has backed off, at least for now, but calls are growing for fundamental changes in intellectual property laws.
By John Markoff.
C16  Waiting for Advertising to Rebound
Ad-page Darwinism has thinned the magazine herd; the strong are well positioned.
By Deirdre Carmody.
C13  Hot Technologies to Watch in 1994
Times correspondents report on high tech goodies, from smart messages to ceramic superconductors.
C14-15  Who's in Line to Get Hooked Up?
Cable TV and telephone companies will spend vast sums upgrading networks.
By Edmund L. Andrews.
C17  First, Hire an A-List Star
After enduring more duds than hits last year, Hollywood has bottom-line jitters.
By Bernard Weinraub C18  Oh, the Fun of Working in Advertising
It was a tempestuous year of rancorous change, more cutbacks and interlopers.
By Stuart Elliott.
C19.


Books of The Times; Plagiarism as the Metaphor for a Litigious Era
A Frolic of His Own  By William Gaddis  586 pages. Poseidon Press. $25.
In "The Recognitions," his monumental first novel published nearly 40 years ago, William Gaddis used the story of a would-be priest turned master forger to explore the loss of authenticity in the modern world, and the shifting relationships between life and art, art and faith.
Those same themes -- so pertinent in this post-modern era of recyclings and regurgitations -- lie at the core of his long-winded, sometimes uproarious and often exhausting new novel "A Frolic of His Own." This time, however, plagiarism, not counterfeiting, serves as the presiding metaphor; and the action takes place not in the world of art, but in the world of law.


Corrections
Maps on Wednesday and Thursday with articles about negotiations for Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho labeled the Jericho area incorrectly.
The two sets of lines around that area denoted only the size of the sector proposed by each side for self-rule, not the actual border proposed by each side.


51 Saves Are Too Few for Vanbiesbrouck
John Vanbiesbrouck wanted to play a spectacular game in his return to Madison Square Garden.
He did.
He wanted to make save after save against his former Ranger teammates.
He did -- a remarkable 51 saves altogether, the highest total of his career.
What Vanbiesbrouck wanted most, though, was to lead his expansion Florida Panthers to a victory over the league-leading Rangers in the building he used to call home.
It didn't work out that way.


Clinton, Defending Health Plan, Attacks His Critics' Alternatives
President Clinton took the offensive today in the fight over his health care plan by casting his opponents as obstructionists who lack a commitment to universal health coverage and challenging them to defend their own plans.
After a weekend of increasing Republican criticism, Mr.
Clinton called in most of his Cabinet and all of his senior health care advisers, including his wife, Hillary, for a meeting that White House officials hoped would shift public criticism away from the health care plan the President introduced with much fanfare in September and onto the alternative plans that others have proposed.


Treading on Theologians' Ground, Physicist Wants to Weigh the Soul
BREATHES there the man, with soul so dead, that it lacks mass, velocity and something physicists call "spin?"
Spoofing an endless published debate as to whether religion and science can be reconciled, an English physicist proposes applying advanced laboratory techniques to measuring the soul and putting some theological ideas to a quantitative test.


Review/Music; A Mostly American New Year's Eve
Who dares imagine a New Year's Eve program without the Johann Strausses?
Leonard Slatkin, the conductor of the holiday concert at the New York Philharmonic for three years running, had previously presented an all-Viennese program and an Austrian-American blend, and this time around he toyed with the idea of going all-American.
On Friday night, however, a few tidbits of Strauss cropped up irresistibly.
They are, it seems, the inevitable cosmopolitan anthems of nostalgia.
Mr.
Slatkin should have followed his instincts; the Strauss pieces were, it turned out, the least satisfactory element of the evening.
The "Blue Danube" noticeably fizzled, progressing by fits and starts rather than flowing with a consistent dancelike motion.
There were flubs in the cellos and trumpets and a general absence of sparkle.


Review/Music; Sacred Works From Palestrina And His World
The torch has been passed; 1993 was the year of Monteverdi and Byrd for early-music followers, and 1994 shall be the year of Palestrina.
Four hundred years have passed since his death, and much remains to be discovered about the Italian master.
Fewer than 30 of Palestrina's 104 masses have come to light on recordings, and church choirs usually venture no further than his shorter motets.
One important corrective will take place on Feb. 2 at the Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, when the Tallis Scholars, matchless exponents of the Renaissance repertory, are to perform the "Missa Papae Marcelli" and other sacred works.
First off the mark in New York was the Choir of Corpus Christi Church, whose annual Festival of Lessons and Carols took place on Sunday afternoon.
Only two works by Palestrina were heard, but the overall selection of sacred music, mingled with the reading of scriptural texts, gave an intelligent picture of the 16th-century world over which Palestrina presided.
The earliest composer represented was Cristobal de Morales, who helped lay the foundations for the Palestrina style during his Roman period; the latest was Tomas Luis de Victoria, probably Palestrina's closest protege.


Sales Executive At Turner Departs
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. said yesterday that John Barbera, president of its Turner Broadcasting Sales unit in New York, had resigned, effectively immediately, "to pursue other interests." The abrupt departure of Mr.
Barbera, the top-ranking advertising sales executive at Turner, was unexpected.
Mr.
Barbera, who is 49, had been president at Turner Broadcasting Sales since June 1990.
He has worked for the company since its earliest days, joining in 1978 as an account executive in Chicago.
A telephone call to Mr.
Barbera yesterday was answered by a woman who said he was not in.


Shulas to Face Off
The Cincinnati Bengals' home schedule next season will include the first father-son coaching matchup in National Football League history.
The Miami Dolphins, coached by DON SHULA, are to play at Riverfront Stadium during the 1994 season.
DAVE SHULA just ended his second season as the Bengals' coach.
The date has yet to be announced.


Pierre-Paul Schweitzer, Ex-Head Of I.M.F. and French Official, 81
Pierre-Paul Schweitzer, a French official who survived internment in a Nazi concentration camp and served as managing director of the International Monetary Fund from 1963 to 1973, died on Sunday, his family said.
He was 81.
The cause and place of death were not disclosed.


Gay Candidate Making History In a State Race
America's first openly gay candidate for statewide office is an unlikely pioneer: a man who has never waved a rainbow flag in a Freedom Day parade and is a stranger in the political clubs of West Hollywood and the Castro District of San Francisco.
Yet the candidate, Tony Miller, who is running for California secretary of state, will be the standard-bearer for homosexuals here and around the country next year, when gay voters and financial donors are expected to be a significant electoral force.


New Fordham Coach
NICK QUARTARO, an assistant coach at Kansas State the last five years, became the head coach at Fordham yesterday.
Quartaro, 38 years old, replaces LARRY GLUECK, who resigned in November after Fordham finished 1-10 this past season.
Glueck compiled an eight-year record of 20-51-1.


New Mayors Inaugurated in Detroit and Atlanta


Mayor Names an Insider To No. 2 Post for Police
Stressing crime-related issues on his first workday in office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani promoted a top-level uniformed police official yesterday to be the second-in-command in the Police Department and strongly reiterated his intention to intensify the arresting of street-level drug criminals.
Mr.
Giuliani named Chief David W. Scott, the city's highest-ranking uniformed officer and a highly regarded administrator and commander, as the First Deputy Police Commissioner, serving under the incoming Commissioner, William J. Bratton.
Chief Scott, who is 58, has nearly 33 years' experience with the New York City Police Department, with two years before that as a transit police officer.


Chrysler Introduces the Viper GTS Coupe


Liege Journal; Gold in Streets (Some Call It Trash)
Along a quiet road in the Ardennes lies what William Wauters calls proof of the madness of the affluent society.
Every day, 25 tons of used clothing, bags and shoes come spilling into a great hall here, bounce from conveyer belts into baskets and, sorted and repacked, head for a new life on the other -- poorer -- side of the world.


No Headline
"Beware the anger of the legions. In moments of turbulence, military leaders have always proved to be strong leaders." -- GEN.
BENEDITO ONOFRE BEZERRA LEONEL, Brazil's army Chief of Staff, echoing Brazilians' anger at disclosures of corruption among members of Congress.  [ A1:6. ]


Bridge
The major event of the Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regional Championships at the Sheraton New York hotel ended Sunday night in a victory for Mitchell Hofing and Peter Bambrick, both of Manhattan, and Bob Gwirtzman of Brooklyn and Ed Swartz of Woodbridge, Conn.
They led the two-day Swiss team championships from wire to wire.


U.S. Details Fees Paid to Fight Radiation Suits
The Department of Energy has spent nearly $50 million over the last three years paying private law firms to defend its contractors against eight lawsuits brought by workers and civilians who asserted that they had been harmed by radiation from the nuclear weapons industry, according to an internal memorandum.
Payments to private lawyers in the eight cases accounted for more than half of what the department spent in that time on contractors' legal fees altogether, department records show.


Combating a Pocket of Crime
Six times in four years, bullets have blasted through the windows of Hope McGuire's apartment in the Cypress Hills Houses in East New York, Brooklyn.
Each time, she snatched her son and daughter in her arms and cringed in the back bedroom.
Ms.
McGuire, 28, a psychology major at the College for Human Services in Manhattan, says she has "no beef" with the young men of her neighborhood.
If anything, she makes every effort to "talk with the kids" outside.
She just happens to live in a second-floor apartment on Dumont Avenue, overlooking the green between the buildings of Cypress Hills.


Police Patrol Around Bronx School in Safety Bid
A dozen New York City police officers patrolled the streets around William H. Taft High School in the Bronx yesterday, establishing a high profile police presence in the first of the "safe school zones" that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani promised during the fall campaign.
Several Taft High School students questioned whether the bolstered police presence would bring any long-term reduction in the assaults and other violence that have made the school one of the city's toughest.
But other students and educators welcomed the stepped-up patrolling, expressing hopes that it would reduce the number of teen-age squabbles that escalate into bloody confrontations.


Elliott To Miss Playoffs For Surgery
Giants offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott has decided to have major back surgery, possibly as early as this week.
The surgery would end Elliott's season just as the Giants are entering the playoffs and prevent him from participating in any football-related activities until training camp next summer.
While Elliott was not available today for comment, several people familiar with the situation said he informed coaches and several players that he was in so much pain after the 16-13 loss to Dallas Sunday that he changed his mind about waiting until the end of the post-season to have the surgery.


Sports of The Times; The Respect Phil Simms Has Earned
IN the gathering dusk about an hour after the football game Sunday afternoon, with the last, orange ribbon of wintry light dissolving in the distant sky, the Dallas Cowboys had boarded their bus in the parking lot at Giants Stadium.
It followed their 16-13 overtime victory over the Giants, and in his front-row seat, the Dallas coach, Jimmy Johnson, eased back.
Suddenly he sat up.
He had noticed, under the lights from the stadium that illuminated the parking lot, a man in a brown leather jacket.
Johnson summoned the bus driver to spring open the door, and Johnson, in his long black overcoat, hurried out.


Chess
The 1993 United States Championship ended in a tie between two former Soviet grandmasters, 35-year-old Alex Yermolinsky of Highland Park, N.J., and 26-year-old Alexander Shabalov of Pittsburgh.
Each was awarded a $7,000 prize for his 8-3 score in the all-grandmaster invitational tournament in Long Beach, Calif., held Dec. 2 to 14.
FINAL STANDINGS  Player . . .
W. . . .
L. . . .
D. . . .
Pts.
Both Shabalov and Yermolinsky modified their accustomed styles to achieve their success: Shabalov tempered his Wild West risk-taking with a modicum of prudence; Yermolinsky added an important touch of aggression to his conservative approach.
Yermolinsky often skirts sharp opening systems, yet in his Round 2 game against Gregory Kaidanov of Lexington, Ky., he won with an attack that required a speculative queen sacrifice.
The Anti-Meran Gambit in the Semi-Slav Defense, 5 Bg5, features the acceptance of a pawn by Black with 5 . . . dc and a return of the pawn by Black after 6 e4 b5!? 7 e5 h6 8 Bh4 g5 9 Ng5 hg 10 Bg5.
It is dubious for Black to recover his material with 10 . . .
Be7?! because 11 ef Bf6 12 Bf6 Qf6 13 g3 Bb7 14 Bg2 Na6 15 Ne4 Qe7 16 O-O O-O-O 17 a4 gives White good attacking chances.
Moreover, after 10 . . .
Nbd7 11 ef, it is still shaky for Black to retake his pawn with 11 . . .
Nf6?! because 12 a4! b4 13 Ne4 Be7 14 Bf6 Bf6 15 Nf6 Qf6 16 Bc4 Rh4 17 O-O Qd4 18 Bd3 Bb7 19 Qf3 offers White superior opportunities for attack.
None of these considerations bothers Black; his aim is dynamic counterattack in the center and on the queenside.
Hurrying it with 12 . . . c5, however, is dangerous as indicated by the remarkable possibility of 13 d5 Nb6 14 de!?
Bh1 15 e7!?
Qd7 16 Qd7 Nd7 17 Nb5 Be7! 18 fe f6 19 Be3!
Ke7 20 h4 Bf3! 21 Bc4 Rhc8 22 Rc1, which gives White the upper hand.
While 14 . . .
Ne5!? creates a powerful threat of 15 . . .
Nd3, as well as 15 . . .
Qd4, it is known that 15 de!? is a queen sacrifice tricky to meet.
After 15 . . .
Rd1 16 Rad1, the outcome is unclear, yet White does well on the few occasions that this comes up.
It is not known whether Black has ever ventured 18 . . .
Qa2, but it is improbable that he could survive an attack such as 19 Ng5 Qb2 20 Nf7 Rg8 21 Bh3 c3 22 Be6 Kc7 23 Rab1 Qe2 (23 . . . Qa3? 24 Ra1 Qb2 25 Ra2 traps the queen) 24 Nd6 Rh8 25 Rb4 Bd6 (25 . . . Ba6? walks into 26 Ne8 Kd8 27 Rb8 Bc8 28 Rc8 mate) 26 ed Kb8 27 Bc4 Qe4 28 Rfb1 c2 29 Rb7 Ka8 30 Ka8 Rb8!
Rb8 31 Rb8 Kb8 32 d7 Kb7 33 d8/ Q.
Kaidanov was evidently counting on 18 . . . c3 to produce quick counterplay on the queen's wing.
But after 19 bc Ba6 20 cb Bb4 21 a3!
Ba3 (21 . . . Qa3? 22 Ra1 Qd3 23 Rfd1 Qc4 24 Rdc1 Qb5 25 Bf1 costs Black decisive material) 22 Rfe1 Bd3 23 Nd6 Bd6 24 ed, the white rooks had squirmed away from the pressure of the black bishops and Yermolinsky had gotten a nice passed d6 pawn.
After 31 h4, Yermolinsky was readying 32 Kh2 followed by 33 Bc6, so Kaidanov had to rush with 31 . . .
Re5 32 fe Qd4 33 Kh2 Qe5.
Still, after 34 Bc6 Bc6 35 Rc6 Qf6 36 R6c2!
Kd6 37 Ra2 Ke7 38 Rc6 Qf1 39 Rca6, the white rooks were stronger than the black queen in the end game.
Kaidanov should have tried the active 39 . . . f5!, which creates a chance for . . . f4! to expose the white king.
Instead, his passive play was soon ruined by Yermolinsky's 45 Rg5!
Kf8 46 Rg6!, threatening 47 Re6, and thus winning him time for 47 Rgf6!
After 58 Kg6, there was no perpetual check: 58 . . .
Qd6 59 R3e6 Qd3 60 Kh6 Qd2 61 g5 decisively threatens 62 Re8 Kf7 63 R6e7 mate.
Kaidanov gave up.


Wastelands Transformed
Since 1960, America has lost 10 million manufacturing jobs, leaving a wasteland of abandoned, contaminated industrial sites too expensive and numerous for local governments or private businesses to restore.
Our communities are scarred with dangerous, useless properties and abandoned factories, and jobs have been driven away -- to the suburbs, rural areas or abroad.
Last summer, I testified before Congress on proposed legislation to clean up abandoned industrial sites.
The legislation, which was sponsored by Representative Mel Reynolds of Chicago and is awaiting action in the House Ways and Means Committee, combines a package of Federal tax credits, private financing and local government incentives to get businesses to take a fresh look at the problem.


Cradle of Nazis Confronts Its Past
In the spring of 1913, an aspiring young artist and German nationalist named Adolf Hitler arrived in Munich.
For the next 20 years, he made the city his headquarters, the fertile ground where he nurtured Nazism.
Germany in the 1990's is more willing to confront its Nazi past than it has been before, and in the latest reflection of this attitude, the Stadtmuseum here has presented an ambitiously introspective exhibition called "Munich: Capital of the Movement." Through art and artifacts, it describes Munich's contributions to the rise of Nazism.


Christmas Arrived For Them in a Roar
To the Editor:
I wish to call attention to an extraordinary event that took place during the holiday season, which could not be publicized because of the need to protect the anonymity of the children involved.


Enduring Mystery Solved as Tin Is Found in Turkey
ARCHEOLOGISTS have discovered tin in Turkey.
No one is predicting a rush by miners to stake claims or any quick riches to be made on the world's metal markets, for the amount discovered is trifling.
But scholars are hailing it as a solution to one of the most enduring mysteries about ancient technology: where did the metalsmiths of the Middle East get the tin to produce the prized alloy that gave the Bronze Age its name?


Influential Computer Service Sold
The Well, a pioneering computer on-line service based in Sausalito, Calif., said today that it was being purchased by Bruce Katz, a California businessman.
Mr.
Katz, who had previously been a 50 percent shareholder of the Well, purchased the remainder from the Point Foundation, a nonprofit organization that publishes the Whole Earth Review magazine.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.


Patterns
Oldham on Wooster Street
Todd Oldham's spring runway show felt like an epiphany, a moment where shards of his ideas from the past -- of mirrors, gilt and decorated fabrics -- fell away to reveal the talent beneath.
Surreal, nostalgic and futuristic, the show signaled that Mr.
Oldham was ready to step forward.


Indian State Cuts Population Without Coercion
To the Editor:
"Preventing 'Inferior' People in China" (editorial Dec. 27) very rightly protests the announcement in China of a draft law to "avoid new births of inferior quality." You link this with China's coercive measures of population management.
While forced abortion in the cause of eugenics would draw almost universal condemnation in this country, the Chinese practice of forceful family planning has many admirers.
The fear of a population explosion is widespread, and there is considerable sympathy for the Chinese Government's philosophy that "population management is essential to China's economic development."


Asiatic Lions Thrive in India Park
FOR centuries, Asiatic lions roamed the wildernesses in a great belt sweeping from eastern Europe and central Asia through what is now Afghanistan, Pakistan and northern India.
Slaughtered by Indian hunters as well as European big game hunters, the species was perilously close to extinction at the beginning of the century.
Now the park at Sasan Gir, a settlement of farmers and foresters with two Government-run hotels for visitors, is the only place in the world where these lions can be seen in the wild.


Painful Change at G.M. Parts Plants
At a sprawling General Motors factory here, workers making a basic part of the steering system of Saturn cars use five different machines, which for years were scattered through the plant.
The workers would toss hunks of metal into bins, then wheel the bins from machine to machine, dodging unrelated assembly lines and machinery on a half-mile amble through the manufacturing process.
But as part of G.M.'s seismic shake-up, workers and managers came up with a revolutionary reform: putting the five machines next to each other.


Market Place; A Rush of Raised Dividends Ends a Long Drought
The long dividend drought is finally ending.
A rush of dividend increases in the final month of 1993 made December the best one since 1983 in terms of the number of companies raising payouts to shareholders and helped push the payout on the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index up significantly.


New Haven Mayor Pushes Property-Tax Issue
John DeStefano admits to having had qualms about campaigning for mayor last fall on a promise to sue the state.
He would sue, he told voters in New Haven, one of the nation's poorest cities, to overturn the property-tax system that pays for local government in Connecticut.
The system, he said, unfairly saddled the city with high taxes that were driving jobs and the middle class to the suburbs.


6 Haitian Refugees Still Detained a Year Later
More than a year after fleeing Haiti, six refugees seeking asylum sit in the Orleans Parish Jail here, neither accused of a crime nor free to leave.
Advocates for refugees say that all six have relatives who are willing to take them in while their cases are heard but that they are trapped by unreasonable bails.
Immigration officials say the bails are on par with those in similar cases.


U.S. Says Deal With North Korea On Atomic Site Inspections Is Near
American officials said today that the United States was close to reaching a deal that would allow international monitors to inspect seven nuclear sites in North Korea and end a tense standoff.
Building on progress made in talks last week, the two sides may complete an agreement by the end of this week if North Korea and the International Atomic Energy Agency settle a few remaining details, said a State Department official who insisted on anonymity.


Lotus Gets A Big Order For Software
In a significant endorsement of Lotus Development's business-office software, Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the big accounting and consulting firm, has decided to adopt Lotus's products for use on all of the company's personal computers.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, which has already purchased 28,000 copies of Lotus Notes and Lotus's suite of spreadsheet, word processing and other desktop applications, intends to put Lotus software eventually on every personal computer used by Coopers's 70,000 employees in offices in 120 countries.
The companies plan to announce the agreement this week.


Stray Elephants Head for Sanctuary in India


COMPANY BRIEFS
GTE CORP., Irving, Tex., said its GTE Telephone Operations unit had completed the transfer of 189,000 access lines in southern Idaho, Tennessee, Utah and West Virginia to Citizens Utilities Co., Stamford, Conn.


Change for Cardinals
The Phoenix Cardinals owner, BILL BIDWILL, yesterday fired the team's pro personnel director, ERIK WIDMARK, and its game scout, CARL HAIRSTON.
But the fate of Coach JOE BUGEL -- who despite an impressive finish by the Cardinals fell two victories short of Bidwill's 9-7 mandate -- remained unknown, though Bidwill promised a decision before the Super Bowl on Jan. 30.
Bidwill called the dismissals, three weeks after LARRY WILSON resigned as general manager, "part of the restructuring." Widmark had completed his sixth season as director of pro personnel.(AP)


National Archives Begins Dividing Itself


Christian Geelhaar, Curator and Writer On Art, Dies at 54
Christian Geelhaar, a former director of the Basel Kunstmuseum and one of the most respected art historians and curators of his generation, died on Friday at Bethesda Hospital in Basel, Switzerland.
He was 54 years old and lived in Basel.
The cause was AIDS, said his sister, Anna-Marie Schweingruber, of Bern, Switzerland.


Mitsubishi Dealers Choose Zimmerman
Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said yesterday that it had been awarded the accounts of four additional Mitsubishi Motors dealer associations, bringing the total it handles to five.
Jordan Zimmerman, chairman and president at Zimmerman, said that his agency had been awarded the accounts of dealer groups in Boston, with billings estimated at $3 million; Central Florida, with billings estimated at $1.2 million; Dade and Broward counties in Florida, with billings estimated at $2.5 million, and the Tri-State dealers association, in southern New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware, with billings estimated at $3 million.
Last month, Zimmerman was awarded the New York/New Jersey Mitsubishi Dealers Association account, with estimated billings of $5 million.


Childhood Asthma Seldom Outgrown
A NEW study on asthma adds to the evidence debunking a myth that children usually outgrow the common and sometimes fatal lung disease, which is an increasing public health problem in the United States and many other countries.
The incidence of asthma and deaths from it have risen sharply in recent years, but the reasons are not known.
For decades, doctors have told anxious parents that their children's symptoms of wheezing, coughing, chest tightness and difficulty in breathing were likely to disappear as the children grew older.


By Design; Crinkled and Creased
If you're traveling to a warm climate this winter, there's one thing you won't have to worry about: your clothes getting wrinkled in suitcases.
Wrinkled is in.
This season's resort clothes are designed to look as if they had been stuffed into a duffle bag on a round-the-world trip.
Linen comes pre-creased, cotton is crinkled and silk is distressed.


Prolonged Lyme Treatments Posing Risks, Experts Warn
Almost two decades after Lyme disease was detected in Old Lyme, Conn., health experts and officials are warning that overdiagnosis of the disease and complications from long-term antibiotic treatments may pose as great a danger to public health as the disease itself.
In one instance cited by the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 14 children had to have their gallbladders removed, and 22 suffered bloodstream infections because of complications from long-term treatment with intravenous antibiotics at the Jersey Shore Medical Center.
Though the children's doctor defends their treatment, the centers found no evidence that most of the children had Lyme disease. 'Obsessively Diagnosing'
In another case, a New Jersey doctor's license was suspended for "obsessively diagnosing late-stage Lyme disease" in patients lacking clinical evidence of the disease, falsifying records and collecting fees for referring patients to companies that provide intravenous antibiotics in the home.
The Board of Medical Examiners says it is investigating links between other physicians and such companies as well.


Coming Soon: Sports Fights. If Ryan Swings, Can a Sitcom Be Far Behind?
Thanks to TV, a select group of quick, sometimes nasty, but frequently absurd sports fights live on in our memory, often more indelibly than more brutal hockey fights, soccer and gridiron melees.
We now know, courtesy of ESPN, that Buddy Ryan, the Houston Oilers' defensive coordinator, is a lousy boxer.
Doesn't matter.
The outlandish sight of his quickie scrap on Sunday night with Kevin Gilbride, the offensive coordinator, will long survive in video purgatory, like other greats of the genre:


Pop Ballet Propels Joffrey's Recovery
Just five months ago, it looked as if the financially hard-pressed Joffrey Ballet might not be able to perform in April at the New York State Theater as planned.
But now the long-awaited engagement, the company's first appearance in Manhattan in more than two years, is a sure thing.
The reason can be stated in one word: "Billboards."
The full-evening ballet -- a suite of dances set to music by Prince and choreographed by Laura Dean, Charles Moulton, Peter Pucci and Margo Sappington -- opened in Iowa City last January and has been packing in audiences ever since.
The most recent performances, part of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in November, were sold out.


Rates Rise As Inflation Fears Grow
Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday and interest rates rose as continuing evidence that the economy was recovering at a firm pace heightened fears of resurgent inflation.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond fell $10 for each $1,000 of face value and its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose from 6.34 percent on Friday to 6.41 percent, the highest yield since mid-August.


Toys 'R' Us Reports Gains In Sales and Elevates Two
Toys "R" Us Inc., the nation's largest toy retailer, reported yesterday that its Christmas sales had exceeded analysts' expectations and that it was giving more responsibility to two senior executives as part of a management succession plan.
Michael Goldstein, 52, was named chief executive, effective on Feb. 1, becoming the heir apparent to Charles Lazarus, the company's 70-year-old founder, who remains chairman.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.85
3.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
2.99
3.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.29
3.19
3.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.44
5.33
6.27
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.41
6.34
7.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.40
7.32
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.54
5.52
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


BUSINESS DIGEST
Macy's Future
Macy reacted coolly to efforts by Federated to add Macy to its stable of stores.
Allen I. Questrom, Federated's chairman, met with Myron E. Ullman 3d, Macy's chairman.
But Macy said its plan to emerge from bankruptcy would not be altered by Federated's purchase of some of its debt and its possible new role as the largest Macy creditor.  [ Page A1. ]


Ancient City of Petra Is Yielding Its Secrets
THE 2,000-year-old tombs of Petra, streaked with white- and rose-colored Cambrian sandstone, have long been known to border the ruins of one of the greatest ancient cities in the Middle East.
But the metropolis of Petra, unlike Palmyra in Syria, has never been extensively excavated, and visitors might have had the impression that the site was little more than a giant necropolis.


Van Heusen Selects Weiss, Whitten
The Van Heusen Company said yesterday that it had selected Weiss, Whitten, Stagliano in New York to handle its account, which had been at Lintas New York for the last five years until a mutual decision last week to part ways.
Though billings in 1993 were $1.55 million, the maker of men's shirts and other apparel said that it planned to spend $10 million in advertising this year.
Weiss, Whitten was awarded the account after a review that also included 8 to 10 other New York agencies, though Van Heusen did not disclose their identities.
A television and print campaign to introduce Wrinkle-Free, a line of no-iron men's shirts, is expected to begin in July or August; the agency is creating the line's logo, packaging and point-of-sale materials as well as the advertising.


Who Controls Macy's Fate
For R. H. Macy &amp; Company to emerge from bankruptcy proceedings, the court must approve a restructuring plan that satisfies its various creditors, roughly in this order of priority.
The most senior creditors will likely get paid all of the principal they lent and perhaps the interest due.
More junior bond holders will likely have to take stock in the company instead of cash.
The previous stock holders will likely get nothing.
Currently, Macy's has the exclusive right to submit a plan to the bankruptcy court, but in March the court may allow other creditors to submit plans.
By buying $449.3 million of debt, Federated Department Stores now has the right to try to assemble such a plan.
It can achieve its goal of taking control of Macy's only by gaining the consent of most of the other creditors.
Dollar amounts are principal owed at the time of Macy's bankruptcy in January 1992.
Secured Debt
These creditors have the right to foreclose and take control of specific company assets, such as stores.
Their claims rank highest and they are most likely to be paid in cash.
Prudential Mortgages
Loans secured by mortgages on 70 of Macy's 110 stores, originally made by Prudential Insurance.
This is the most senior class of debt, with greater rights than other secured debt.
Federated bought half of this for $449.3 million, paying $109.3 million down and the rest - $340 million, plus interest - in three years.
Federatged has an option to buy the other half at undisclosed terms. 2.
Secured Bank Loans ACQUISITION FINANCING: $698.4 million
Two loans and a letter of credit from the 1986 leveraged buyout, secured by a variety of Macy's assets.
SWISS BANK MORTGAGES: $553.8 million
Morgages on 49 stores, originallyput together by the Swinn Bank Corporation in 1988.
CITIBANK FINANCING: $180.0 million
Loan secured by 10 stores.
These three groups of loans have largely been sold by the banks that originally made them and are now in the hands of speculative investors; they traded yesterday at 85 cents on the dollar.
It now looks like holders of these loans will be paid 100 percent of their principal and mayb e paid interest up to 15 to 20 percent of the principal.
Fidelity Investmetns, through a variety of its mutual funds, owns about $500 million of these loans, enough to control the fate of the restructureing; Fidelity paid 55 cents on the dollar for its position.
Trust Company of the West owns about $100 million.
No other investor owns more than $50 million, investors said.
G.E.
Warehouse Financing: $53.2 million
A loan from the GE Credit Corporation at 10.44 percent, secured by warehouse distributution centers; equal in seniority to the other secured loans above, but not presently for sale.
Unsecured Debt
In theory, these creditors get paid only after the secured creditors are satisfied.
But since they can try to block a restructuring, unsecured creditors often receive some equity or cash. 3.
Senior Subordinated Bonds
The most senior class of bonds.
Likelyto receive a substantial piece of the restructured company's stock.
Omega Advisors, Odyssey Partners and T. Rowe Price are all reported to hold significant stakes in this class.
Traded at 50 cents on the dollar yesterday, up from 42.5 cents Friday. 4.
Subordinated Bonds
Holders of these may also receive some stock.
Traded at 24 cents on the dollar yesterday, up from 19 cents Friday. 5.
Junior Subordinated Zero Coupon Bonds
More of a long shot for stock distribution.
Apollo Advisors inherited a large position in these from Executive Life.
Traded at 8.75 cents on the dollar yesterday, up a cent from Friday.
Stockholders
Stockholders' claims on a bankrupt company come last.
New stock in a reorganized company may be used to satisfy higher-ranking creditors' claims. 6.
Preferred Stock
Three series split between approximately 16 holders, the largest of which are GE Credit and Loews Corporation.
Preferred stockholders, along with management, make up Macy's present board.
They are not likely to receive any distribution. 7.
Comon Stock
Entirely owned by 325 members of management.
These shares are now worthless, but owners mayget something out of the bankruptcy distribution to retain their loyalty to the company. (Sources: The Delaware Bay Company; Bloomberg Financial Markets)


Interim Constitution Takes Power From South African People
To the Editor:
"Apartheid's Edgy Sunset" (editorial, Dec. 24) calls for American "conservatives" to urge me to accept the interim Constitution passed by the South African Parliament and to take part in the elections scheduled for next April.


Natural Weapons Against an Ancient Plague
LOCUSTS and grasshoppers, the stuff of Biblical plagues, still ravage the earth, stripping vegetation in their path and depriving millions of people of food.
But after decades of battling these insects with toxic chemicals, scientists are developing a new generation of natural pesticides that are expected to be less hazardous to the environment and more selective in reaching their targets.
Instead of spraying chemicals on marauding clouds of locusts, scientists are experimentally introducing fungi and other natural enemies to carry on the fight.


Time for a Special Prosecutor
Senior Republicans, after years of resisting the appointment of independent counsels to investigate suspected mischief in the executive branch, are now demanding that an outsider probe some Arkansas banking and investment deals that touch President and Mrs.
Clinton.
Why the switch?
Politics, of course.
Still, the Republicans are on the right track.
Independent counsels are sometimes necessary to keep government honest.
The White House sees only politics.
The President's aides insist that "no laws have been broken." Hillary Rodham Clinton still wonders why anyone is curious about the family's real estate partnership with a failed savings and loan operator.
And Attorney General Janet Reno argues lamely that no one would trust her to name a truly independent investigator.


David Ives's Quick-Hit Approach To Staging the Human Comedy
In the world of the playwright David Ives, situations float at the far edge of the social map and quickly drift off into uncharted territory.
A shy young woman with a stutter shows up for a language lesson and ends up speaking fluent Unamunda, an Esperanto-like tongue that, unbeknownst to her, she is making up on the spot.
Three monkeys with typewriters bicker over the problem of trying to write "Hamlet." A man offers advice to a friend who's stuck in "a Philadelphia," a perverse parallel universe in which basic needs, like cheese in an omelet, can never be satisfied.
The man tells his friend not to worry, to flow with it.
But then again, he would; he's stuck in a terminally laid-back state known as "a Los Angeles."


A Touch of Florida at Aqueduct
New York will usher in a new era in betting on horse racing today when Aqueduct Race Track and Offtrack Betting parlors across the state will take bets on seven live races at Aqueduct plus five that will be televised from Gulfstream Park in Florida, 1,100 miles away.
The format was approved last month by the Legislature and was signed into law by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as the alternative to closing down wintertime racing in New York for perhaps six weeks.


Allan Morrow, 53, Real-Estate Developer
Allan Morrow, a New York real-estate developer, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53 and also kept a home in Bridgehampton, L.I.
The cause was complications arising from AIDS, according to a spokesman for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, where he was a member of the board of directors.


NATO Plight: Coping With Applicants
As President Clinton and other NATO leaders prepare for a summit meeting in Brussels next week to try to define a new post-cold-war role for the alliance, the key question, according to many Western officials and diplomats, is this:
Will the United States proposal for a "partnership for peace" between the alliance and all the former Communist countries on the continent, including Russia, convince the leaders of Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary that the way is open for them to join as full members later, despite Russian objections?


To Please Judges, Boitano Adapts
A nervous guessing game precedes every international figure-skating competition.
What will please the judges?
How to navigate the turbulent waters of national bias?
Is a particular routine engaging enough to satisfy the audience and balanced enough in terms of jumps and spins and footwork to convince the judges?
There are no certain answers, only hints.
Brian Boitano, who continues his Olympic comeback at the United States championships, which begin today in Detroit, got a big hint from international judges in October at Skate America.
For the 1994 Lillehammer Olympics, Boitano had planned six triple jumps in the first 2 minutes 40 seconds of his four-and-a-half-minute long program.
It seemed a smart tactical decision.
He would entrance the judges immediately with his splendid, muscular jumps while getting most of the hard stuff out of the way, lessening the risk to his troublesome right knee with fewer difficult jumps late in the program.


A Cold-War Voice Fades From the Berlin Airwaves
One of the best known voices of the cold war fell silent at year's end when the Berlin radio station RIAS faded into history after nearly half a century of broadcasting to both sides of this once-divided city.
At a champagne party that lasted most of the afternoon at the station's offices, the mood swung from satisfaction to nostalgia.
One goal for which RIAS had worked so long, German unification, has been achieved, and everyone agreed that this was cause for joy.
But many celebrators had never lived in a Berlin without RIAS, and were not looking forward to the prospect.


Duncan Ballantine, Educator, Historian And Consultant, 81
Dr.
Duncan Smith Ballantine, an educator and historian, died last Tuesday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 81.
He had a brief illness, his family said.


A Place Where Mature Workers Are Invited to Check In
Hazel Rathbun talks and acts as if she were on a one-woman mission to break stereotypes about age.
And in a business world that continues to shun older workers, she has found an unlikely champion: her employer.
Mrs.
Rathbun, who is 73, began working six years ago as a desk clerk at the Days Inn hotel in Ledgewood, N.J.
She has mastered the computerized check-in and check-out system, the fax machine and the switchboard.
She stands for most of her seven-hour shifts and hardly misses a day's work.
Some Companies Are Eager
Although advocates for older workers say the corporate environment is overwhelmingly inhospitable to workers over 55, the Days Inn hotel chain is one of the few businesses that has seen the advantage in welcoming them.
Other companies include the Travelers Corporation, the financial service company based in Hartford; the Riese Organization, a restaurant concern in New York and Tiffany &amp; Company.


Susan L. Cullman, 79, Decoder and an Editor
Susan Lehman Cullman, a New York philanthropist who served as a Navy cryptographer in World War II, died on Sunday at her home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
She was 79 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


A Daring Move of a Personal Sort
In many aspects, the unexpected announcement by Federated Department Stores that it was seeking a merger with its rival, R. H. Macy &amp; Company, bears the hallmarks of a grand merchant, a marketing wizard, a shrewd strategist -- in short, an Allen I. Questrom.
From the mysterious calls Friday alerting reporters and industry experts to expect big news from Federated over the weekend to the courtesy call he placed to Macy's chairman, Myron E. Ullman 3d, early Sunday morning to inform him of the impending announcement, the way the deal was unfurled reflected the showmanship, savvy and political skills for which Mr.
Questrom, 52, is known.


Knicks' Deal Looks Done In: Thomas Says He Prefers Pistons
According to a person close to Isiah Thomas, the veteran point guard has decided to remain with the Pistons, ruling out a possible trade to the Knicks.
After meeting last night with the Pistons' owner, Bill Davidson, Thomas apparently will be accommodated financially in some way by Davidson, perhaps with a new contract featuring a one-year balloon payment.
Thomas has long expressed a desire to end his career with the Pistons, and he has numerous business interests in Michigan.
Thomas was intrigued by the opportunity of joining a contender like the Knicks, but apparently has decided it would be best to remain with the Pistons.


MACY COOL TO BID AS FEDERATED ACTS TO WREST CONTROL
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reacted coolly yesterday to efforts by Federated Department Stores, a longtime rival, add Macy to its stable of stores, which already includes two other New York mainstaysx Bloomingdale's and Abraham &amp; Straus.
Allen I. Questrom, Federated's chief executive, visited the flagship Macy's store in Herald Square yesterday to make a personal appeal to Myron E. Ullman 3d, Macy's chairman and chief executive, to keep discussions from turning hostile.


Star Sale Set In San Juan
The E. W. Scripps Company has completed an agreement to sell The San Juan Star to a group of investors, a Scripps spokesman said yesterday.
The Star is Puerto Rico's only English-language daily newspaper.
Scripps did not disclose the terms of sale for the 33,000-circulation newspaper, but The Star itself reported that the investors were believed to have paid $10 million to $14 million.


New Careers for Criminals
When Congress reconvenes on Jan. 25, it has a chance to do something meaningful about violent crime.
The crime bill the Senate passed before the holiday recess is a start; it would provide $22.3 billion over five years for a broad range of anticrime activities, including building new prisons and hiring more police officers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Named John Buckley executive vice president for administration.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Gardner and Willie Fraser, pitchers, on minor-league contracts.
Football National Football League  PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Fired Erik Widmark, pro personnel director, and Carl Hairston, scout.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Announced that George O'Leary, defensive line coach, resigned, to accept a position as defensive coordinator and defensive line coach at Georgia Tech University.
Hockey National Hockey League  PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Recalled Justin Duberman, right wing, from Cleveland of the International Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Recalled Steve Konowalchuk, center, from Portland of the American Hockey League.
Assigned Shawn Anderson, defenseman, to Portland.
Central Hockey League  DALLAS FREEZE -- Added Jim Ballantine, center, to active roster.
Colonial Hockey League  MUSKEGON FURY -- Signed Bob Janecyk, goaltender.
East Coast Hockey League  DAYTON BOMBERS -- Traded Steve Bogoyevac, left wing, to Richmond for Rob Hartnell, center, and Mike Vandenberghe, defenseman.
Activated John Roderick, defenseman, from the 14-day injured list.
Announced that Jason Downey, defenseman, has been recalled by Fredericton of the American Hockey League.


A Get-Tough Mayor? Tell That to Andrew
If the new guy at City Hall wanted a little attention, he got it yesterday.
If he wanted a curious New York to talk about him for a change -- his ideas, his character, his upbringing -- he could not have been more satisfied with the reaction to his performance on Sunday's inaugural stage.
Yes, Andrew Giuliani, the 7-year-old first son of New York, held the town in thrall with his antics, utterly eclipsing the earnest but somewhat less playful display put on by his father, the new Mayor.


Critic's Notebook; A Piano as Salvation, Temptation and Star
When an ax is taken to a 19th-century Broadwood in Jane Campion's haunting film "The Piano," the effect for a piano lover is almost as traumatic as the human violence that erupts a moment later.
The movie, too, loves this instrument (a replica, the credits reassure us); the camera focuses on the whorled surfaces of the ivory keys, the grain of the wood, the inlaid signature of England's most distinguished manufacturer.
We have, by the time of the assault, come to feel almost as much affection for it as Ada, the heroine, does.
Mute since the age of 6, she is lost without it; the instrument is literally her voice.
And when, early in the film, the piano is alone on a bare New Zealand beach, the white breakers swelling behind, the water lapping at its legs, its otherworldly beauty seems to protect it from forces that would have left an ordinary parlor piano in soggy, warped dissolution.
To review, for those who have not seen the movie: In the mid-19th century, Ada, in Scotland, is married off to a settler in New Zealand.
Left on the beach by coarse boatmen, she and her daughter are met by her husband-to-be, who refuses to have the heavy square piano taken on the long trek through the muddy forest.
But a thick-limbed Englishman, another pioneer who combines gentleness with strength, takes an interest in the mute, buttoned-up foreigner.
He acquires the piano to "study" with Ada.
He offers her the opportunity to repurchase it, key by key, by allowing him to act out his erotic fantasies as she plays.
Ada turns out to be the real student, as her passions are awakened.


On My Mind; Berlin '38 To Beijing '94
On Oct. 27, 1938, Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote a letter to President Roosevelt about Joseph Kennedy, then United States Ambassador to Britain.
Mr.
Kennedy had been using his post to fight publicly for the appeasement of Adolf Hitler.
He used the word proudly.
He said that the West could do fine business with Hitler, and in peace.
Only economics counted, he said, -- trade, finance, deals -- not how the Nazis chose to rule.


It's 1994. So Where Are Your Data?
IF your New Year's resolution did not include a plan to back up your hard disk regularly, there is still time to repent and make amends.
Hard disk drives are very reliable, at least when compared with other components of a computer system.
Manufacturers rate the reliability of their hard drives in terms of "mean time between failure," measured in tens of thousands of hours.
The numbers typically translate into 10 to 20 years of constant, round-the-clock use.


Q&amp;A
Platypus Imprinting
Q.
Does a young platypus, a mammal that hatches from an egg, imprint on its mother the way a bird does?


Corrections
The "At the Bar" column on Dec. 30 about the "Law and Popular Culture" collection at the University of Texas Law School misstated the name of the lawyer character played by Groucho Marx in "At the Circus." The character's name was J. Chee ver Loophole.


CHRONICLE
BETTY COMDEN and ADOLPH GREEN were too busy working yesterday to pay much attention to their 1994 milestone: 50 years together creating Broadway shows.
"You get up in the morning, and you do your work," Ms.
Comden said over the telephone from Mr.
Green's Upper West Side apartment, where they were cooking up yet another musical.


No More Bodies Found in Ruins of Gay Club
Fire officials were optimistic yesterday that no more victims would be found from a fire that killed one man and destroyed a gay men's club in Queens on Sunday, but they said a search would continue until they could be certain.
Patrons and workers at the club told officials that three other unidentified people were unaccounted for, but officials said yesterday that they had found no more bodies.
A crane removed debris yesterday as firefighters continued to comb through the remains of the club, the Northern Men's Sauna and Health Club.


New Campaigns
*
Digital Equipment Corp. introduces a broadcast and print campaign today for its personal computer business unit carrying the theme "Beyond the box." The campaign, which is intended to build a confident, aggressive personality for Digital's PC's, is the first work by Young &amp; Rubicam New York since it was awarded the estimated $30 million account in November.
A 15-second television commercial and a print ad assert: "We didn't sleep through the PC revolution. We took notes." The commercials will run on cable networks including CNN and CNBC, while the print ads will run in newspapers and computer trade publications.


Bombing Suspect's Boss Tells of Van Request
The World Trade Center bombing trial resumed yesterday after the Christmas break with prosecutors presenting several bits and pieces of evidence, most of them on the role of Mahmud Abouhalima, one of the four defendants in the case.
None of the individual pieces of evidence seemed decisive in the case against Mr.
Abouhalima.
The prosecution, however, is evidently hoping that an accumulation of many pieces will convince the jury that Mr.
Abouhalima had to have played the role of which he is accused in the bombing conspiracy.


2 Killed as Fire Destroys Shantytown in Brooklyn
A brief, intense fire incinerated a Brooklyn shantytown yesterday morning, killing two people, hospitalizing a third and effectively ending the fringe life of an encampment that had endured in Red Hook for more than a decade.
Luis Rodriguez, 45, who had apparently lived in the shantytown for as many as 12 years, and Michelle Johnson, Mr.
Rodriguez's girlfriend, were found at the door to their makeshift wooden shack, burned beyond recognition, and identified by other encampment residents.
Fire Department officials, who said there was no evidence suggesting the fire was anything other than accidental, said the couple were likely asleep or unable to escape.
At least four other residents of the shantytown on Columbia Street escaped unhurt.


Rancor Rises as Jordan Warns Arafat and Palestinians Squabble
Talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization appear to be caught in a thickening web of rancor and recrimination, not only between Palestinians and Israelis, but more vividly between Jordan and the P.L.O., among Palestinians themselves and, to some extent, within Israel's governing Labor Party.
Over the weekend Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel accused the P.L.O. of duplicity, wondering aloud whether any agreement with it is valid and saying he will suspend the talks to make Palestinians "sweat it out."


U.S. to Seek Rise in Fee for Gun Dealers
As part of a crackdown on violent crime, the Clinton Administration on Tuesday will propose a sharp increase in the Federal licensing fee for gun dealers and will seek better ways to monitor sales of guns and ammunition, Administration officials said today.
The officials, speaking on the condition that they not be identified, said the increase in the licensing fee, now $30, would be "significant," perhaps to $600 or more, and would be intended to reduce the number of permits to sell guns.


Don't Call It Journalism
The annual Renaissance weekend at Hilton Head, S.C., may be a tonic for the Clintons, but it has turned into a degrading spectacle for a number of journalists.
In order to be invited, they agree not to reveal what they learn from the President, the First Lady or Administration officials during seminars that deal with politics, public policy and a wide array of personal and societal issues.
There have always been off-the-record social events and confidential briefings in Washington.
But this contractual abandonment of professional obligation represents a particularly virulent strain of the Washington insider virus.


Clintons Continue to Gather Land Deal Files
Two weeks after President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, vowed to turn over all the personal records relating to their investment in a failed Arkansas land deal, their lawyers are still assembling the files before sending them to the Justice Department.
White House officials said today that the Clintons had authorized their personal lawyer, David Kendall, to give Justice Department investigators files that were kept in the office of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel who killed himself on July 20.


Rebels Determined 'to Build Socialism' in Mexico
As Government spotter planes buzzed circles in the gray sky and young policemen shivered in the local jail, soldiers of the peasant army that captured Altamirano and three other towns on Saturday morning swarmed over the squat concrete town hall today, smashing it apart with sledgehammers.
"The orders we have are to knock it down," said a leader of the rebels holding this rural town in southern Mexico, a thin 20-year-old who identified himself only as Jesus.
"Our thinking is that we have to build socialism."


Alomar News Good
ROBERTO ALOMAR, the all-star second baseman who broke his leg sliding in a winter league game last week, is to spend about five more weeks in cast and be ready when the Toronto Blue Jays start spring training.
Surgery was deemed even more unlikely following yesterday's follow-up X-rays.
An operation would have meant a further three weeks or so on the sidelines.
The three-time Gold Glove winner is scheduled to be examined again next week. (AP)


CHRONICLE
JULES FEIFFER is packing up his easel and taking it on the road tomorrow, to Brooklyn Heights.
He will talk to children at the Packer Collegiate Institute about creativity and cartooning.
The appearance at the private school will be an offshoot of what Mr.
Feiffer called "my new passion: writing children's books." After the publication in November of his first book for children, the novel "The Man in the Ceiling" (HarperCollins), Mr.
Feiffer began receiving invitations from schools.


Raptor Is Restored to the Skies


S O S! Help for Coslet May Be Coming
One day after the Jets dropped a 24-0 decision to Houston, blowing a great playoff opportunity and ending their season on a negative note, General Manager Dick Steinberg acknowledged today he was considering bringing in another offensive assistant coach to help Coach Bruce Coslet.
Sifting through the remains of an 8-8 season that included a 1-4 finish, Coslet wasn't ready to evaluate himself as a coach, talk about his contract status (he is signed through 1994) or dissect the team.
Steinberg took the same line, saying that Coslet's contract status hasn't been addressed.


Time to Hitch Up the Big Backs
The end of the National Football League regular season always reveals who's in and who's out, what's new and what's left to look for in the post-season.
Who's in?


Indian State Cuts Population Without Coercion; Gratuitous Advice
To the Editor:
China is the recipient of your gratuitous advice in "Preventing 'Inferior' People in China" (editorial, Dec. 27).
The People's Congress not only wants to solve the country's overpopulation problem, but also intends to prevent the birth of defective babies, using modern methods of interruption.
You call China's program "Leninist arrogance," adding that "Americans and others outside China should not hesitate to express their horror."


INSIDE
Criticism on Radiation Data
The Clinton Administration assailed its Republican predecessors for failing to take action after disclosures about research in which humans were exposed to radiation.
Page A10.
Big Push by Consumers
Consumers are fueling economic growth, and most forecasters say their spending should help sustain the economic expansion in 1994.
Page D1.
Clinton Asks Rise in Gun Fee
The Administration plans to propose a sharp rise in the Federal licensing fee for gun dealers and better tabs on gun and ammunition sales.
Page A8.


Is Game Still Football? Oilers Think It's Boxing
The Houston Oilers have had plenty of practice at damage control this season.
So today's public display of recriminations hissed through clenched teeth wasn't such a big deal.
During an 11-game winning streak that concluded a 12-4 regular season, the Oilers endured dual national controversies.
The first came in October when a player, David Williams, left the team without permission and missed a game for the birth of a child.
The second came in December when another player, Jeff Alm, committed suicide after a friend riding with him died in a traffic accident.


Principal Charged
The longtime principal of a Brooklyn elementary school was indicted yesterday on charges of criminally assaulting four students while trying to discipline or control them.
Harvey Possner, 50, principal for 18 years of Public School 154 in the Windsor Terrace neighborhood, pleaded not guilty in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn to four counts of assault and four counts of endangering the welfare of a child.
He was released without bail.
The indictment said that the assaults occurred between December 1991 and last March but gave no other details and did not identify the students.


Critics Name Spielberg Best Director
The National Society of Film Critics yesterday voted Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List" as the best film of 1993, and also named Mr.
Spielberg as the best director.
Previously, both the Los Angeles Film Critics Association and the New York Film Critics Circle had chosen Mr.
Spielberg's three-hour film of the Holocaust for the top award, but presented the best-director citation to Jane Campion for "The Piano" rather than Mr.
Spielberg.
The critics' votes are often considered bellwethers of the annual presentation of the Academy Awards, which will be made this year on March 21.
Although Mr.
Spielberg, 46, is commercially the most successful director in movie history, he has never won an Oscar.
In 1987, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences presented him with the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial award, in recognition of his collective body of work.


A Vast New Scandal Is Shaking Brazilians' Faith in Democracy
Joao Alves would like you to believe that he is the world's luckiest man.
To explain how he came to deposit $51 million in his bank accounts since 1989, the Congressman, whose annual salary is $84,000, told investigators recently that the answer was simple.
He had won 24,000 lotteries.


Mexican Guerrillas Wage War Against 'the Rich'


Sharing Life In Donating To Neediest
Of the thousands of people who have contributed to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund since it began its 82d annual appeal for contributions in November, most write that they give money because they feel fortunate.
For some, like Ludwig Klauber or Alexandra Werner, both of Manhattan, good fortune means reaching their 94th year in good health.
"I am grateful to just to be able to write a check, sign it and mail it in the box on my corner," Mrs.
Werner wrote.


Right-Wing Rally in Jerusalem


Ultraviolet Faces Revival To Fight TB
With drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis spreading in big cities around the country, researchers in New York will begin a six-city test later this year with a 50-year-old technology for killing the bacteria mechanically: ultraviolet lamps.
Using money from electric utilities, including the Consolidated Edison Company in New York, researchers plan to install the lamps near the ceilings in homeless shelters.
For the next six years, scientists will measure the spread of the disease among people who use the shelters and compare the data to the numbers at similar shelters without the lamps.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Federated's move on Macy's raises more questions than answers about the retailers' media buying.
FOR decades, New Yorkers had a catch phrase they delighted in using when asked to share a secret: "Does Macy's tell Gimbels?"
Gimbels, sad to say, has been closed since 1986.
Yet now Macy's might be telling Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Stern's.


Corrections
A report in the Music Notes column on Dec. 29 about publications of Meet the Composer, an organization that helps composers, misstated its telephone number.
The number is (212) 787-3601.


Turning Over New Leaves, Of a Sort
IT is not easy to say where a calendar program ends and a personal information manager begins.
In the world of paper, the thing on the wall is a calendar, even when you pencil in "lunch with Terry" in the Jan. 11 square.
But what about one of those desk calendars with padded covers and spaces for names and addresses, expenses and to-do lists?
What Are You Doing Today, Charlie Brown? from Individual Software of Pleasanton, Calif., is certainly a calendar.
It is enlivened by Charles Schulz cartoons of the title character, along with Linus Van Pelt, Woodstock, Snoopy and other perennials from the comic strip that someone once said has not been funny in 20 years.
Daily, weekly, monthly and yearly calendars may be viewed, marked with events that can be made to set off alarms and printed out.
There is a screen saver (Is there is no end to screen savers?) and a to-do list.
If you do not get everything accomplished, the program asks if you want the undone tasks on the to-do list moved to the next day.
Be brave; say no.


Death of North Bergen Basketball Player Still a Mystery
Before returning to classes yesterday after the holiday break, the 90-member student body at Hudson Vocational Technical High School in North Bergen, N.J., held a memorial service for Jackson Muamba, the 17-year-old junior who collapsed last Friday during a basketball game at Bayonne, and later died.
"Jackson's friends are very distraught," said Frank Gargiulo, the school's superintendent.


Observer; But Will It Fly?
The promises being made for the "information superhighway" are reminiscent of the oversell of atomic energy in the late 1940's.
With the atom's energy, we were told, it would cost only two or three cents to pay the monthly electricity bill.
A few pennies' worth of atomic energy would power the Queen Mary across the Atlantic, making luxury travel available to millions.


World Cup Update
Avoid Scoreless Ties
A decision by FIFA last June to reward teams three points for a first-round victory instead of two has increased optimism that teams will emphasize offense and produce a scoring spectacle in the World Cup.
Berti Vogts, the coach of defending champion Germany, said, "It could be positive as you can still get three points with one win in your last match and that would probably be enough to get through to the second round."
Clemens Westerhof, Nigeria's Dutch-born technical adviser, said: "I like it because it will encourage more attacking football. There will be no point playing for a draw and we will see more goals scored."
Alkis Panagoulias, the coach of Greece, agreed.
"It's a step forward after Italia-90 with those boring 0-0 games," he said.
"The two-point gain between a win and a draw forces teams to go forward."
Coach Bora Milutinovic of the United States said his team would need at least five points from the three first-round matches to have a chance of advancing.
Know Your Opponents
The Americans are in a group with Colombia, Romania and Switzerland.
They will open the World Cup with a game against Switzerland June 18 at the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., but they will get their first look at the Swiss on Jan. 22 in an exhibition match at Fullerton State College in California.
A game against Colombia on Feb. 20 at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami was changed yesterday.
The United States instead will play Sweden there.
The Americans, who will pay Bolivia on Feb. 18 in Miami, are also trying to arrange a match against Romania in a tournament at Hong Kong during the second week of February.
In the past, countries that qualified for the World Cup were not allowed to play in the host country 30 days prior to the tournament.
With most countries being unable to assemble their best players until early May, FIFA changed the rule and now allows games to be staged in the host country just five days prior to the tournament.
The Netherlands  Johan Cruyff, the biggest name in Dutch football, will not coach the Netherlands in the World Cup.
Cruyff, who played for Los Angeles and Washington in the North American Soccer League, failed to reach agreement with the Dutch federation.
The flamboyant Cruyff, who led a player revolt against the Dutch federation in the 1974 World Cup, has reportedly asked for $100,000 per month, a 10 percent cut of sportswear merchandising profits and a $200,000 payoff from Barcelona, the club that he coaches.
Jos Staatsen, the president of the Dutch federation, was quoted in European publications saying that Cruyff "has betrayed his country."
While Cruyff is out, Marco van Basten, one of the players featured at the final draw for the Cup last month, hopes to be at full strength despite a series of operations on his ankle.
A fixture at center for the Netherlands, van Basten hopes to rejoin Milan, his Italian Club, in March and be ready for the tournament in June.
Schedule Changes
The Italy-Norway game on June 23 at Giants Stadium has been moved from Game 17 to Game 16 and will have a kickoff time of 4 P.M. instead of 7:30 P.M.
Game 17 is now South Korea against Bolivia.
It will be played in Foxboro Stadium in Massachusetts and its kickoff time will 7:30 P.M.
The Saudi Arabia-Morocco game at Giants Stadium on June 25 becomes Game 22 and will be played at 12:30 P.M. instead of 7:30.
The Argentina-Nigeria game at Foxboro Stadium on June 25 becomes Game 23 and will be played at 4 P.M.
ALEX YANNIS


And Baby Makes 3, Even if You're Gray
Four years ago, my brother, then 62, announced he was going to have a baby.
His wife, in her 30's, was childless.
She'd long wanted a child, but my brother, who had a 26-year-old son, feared he was too old.
Now, he'd decided, go for it.
What I remember most clearly from our conversation was jealousy -- not the sibling rivalry kind that had dogged his days and mine but something larger.
A railing-at-the-gods kind: why should he still be able to make babies when I, half a decade younger and much more of a nurturer, was doomed to post-menopausal shutdown?


Rice High Rated No. 1 in U.S.
Rice High School of Manhattan (9-0) yesterday became the first New York City-based team in almost six years to be ranked No. 1 in the nation, according to polls by the ESPN cable network and USA Today newspaper.
The Raiders earned the top spot by defeating Simon Gratz of Philadelphia, 55-48, on Sunday night in the Beach Ball Classic final in Myrtle Beach, S.C.
Tolentine High, led by Adrian Autry, Brian Reece and Malik Sealy, was the last New York City team to be acknowledged as the top school in the country, in 1988.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-5  GLOOM FOR DEMOCRACY IN BRAZIL  One year after a corruption scandal forced Brazil's President from office, a new scandal involving dozens of lawmakers is shaking people's faith in democracy and is stirring reminders of military rule.
A1


Whitman Picks Outsider to Fill Treasurer Post
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman today picked Brian W. Clymer, a Bush Administration official who mailed in his resume with hundreds of others, as her state treasurer, the post most critical to keeping her campaign promises to shrink state government and cut state income taxes by nearly a third.
Mr.
Clymer, 46, is a Pennsylvanian with no ties to New Jersey politics, no friends in the political labyrinths of the statehouse.
He is the first of Mrs.
Whitman's appointees to come without either years of experience in the state's government or a background of personal and professional kinship with the Governor-elect.
Calls Whitman's Plan 'Doable'
Instead, Mr.
Clymer sought the job along with hundreds of other applicants after Mrs.
Whitman was elected, and he was selected after a series of interviews, said Carl Golden, Mrs.
Whitman's spokesman.
Mrs.
Whitman said today that she met Mr.
Clymer for the first time two weeks ago, and that he was the only person offered the treasurer's job.
At Mr.
Clymer's first public appearance, Mrs.
Whitman reaffirmed her determination to cut the state government and Mr.
Clymer several times called the Governor-elect's plan "doable."


Consumers Let Good Times Roll
As the American economy heads into the new year, it is consumers -- rather than business or government -- who are fueling growth.
But while most economists expect consumers to slow down at least a little this year, most forecasters say their spending should help sustain the economic expansion in 1994.
Despite white-collar layoffs, higher taxes and cuts in military spending, little has dampened Americans' eagerness in recent months to buy everything from washers to wall units -- as well as the houses to put them in.


For Carolina Herrera, Tranquillity Amid Success
In no way does she resemble a garmento (fashion-business jargon for a designer/ manufacturer of clothes, usually with headquarters on Seventh Avenue).
With her oval face and neatly coiffed hair, Carolina Herrera looks like a madonna in an Italian Renaissance painting.
She is efficient, soft-spoken and, well, ladylike.
Until recently, Mrs.
Herrera's best-known client was Jacqueline Onassis, though she never talks about her publicly.
Privately, she calls her a woman of innate elegance; she has a snapshot of Mrs.
Onassis wearing a striped Herrera suit tucked into a corner of the bulletin board in her office.


Times Names Editor of Week in Review
The appointment of Jonathan Landman as editor of the Week in Review section of The New York Times has been announced by Max Frankel, the executive editor of the newspaper.
Mr.
Landman, now the deputy Washington editor of The Times, will start his new job late this month, succeeding Daniel Lewis, who was recently named cultural news editor.


In First Day on Job, Giuliani Starts Settling In at City Hall
Rudolph W. Giuliani's administration settled in yesterday for the first full day at work at City Hall, searching for furniture and learning new phone numbers and new relationships.
And if proximity is power, the new office layout was, if not a map of influence, certainly one of the first hints about the inner workings of the new administration.
Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers, longtime friend of Mr.
Giuliani, settled in the most prestigious work space, the one First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel had, near the Mayor, and at the end of the main hallway with a view of all the comings and goings of City Hall.


Nets' Williams Is One of a Kind
According to the official National Basketball Association Register, Jayson Williams was waived by the New Jersey Nets back on July 20 during summer camp at the Doral Arrowwood in Westchester, N.Y.
Don't be confused.
It was another Williams, same spelling on the first name, who was waived by the Nets.
He was a 6-foot-7-inch, 205-pound rookie forward out of the University of New Haven.


METRO DIGEST
WINTER STORM MOVES INTO REGION
The fringe of what the National Weather Service said was a major winter storm moved into the New York metropolitan region from the south with a mixture of snow and rain.
Communities throughout the region were sanding and salting highways as the service predicted a few inches of snow turning to rain along the shore and from six inches to a foot north of the city.
Weather summary, page B7.
HAZARDS SEEN IN LYME-DISEASE TREATMENT
Health experts and officials are warning that overdiagnosis of Lyme disease and complications from long-term antibiotic treatments may pose as great a danger to public health as the disease itself.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SETTLING IN AT CITY HALL
Rudolph W. Giuliani's administration settled in for the first full day at work at City Hall, searching for furniture and learning new phone numbers and new relationships.
And if proximity is power, the new office layout was one of the first hints about the inner workings of the new administration.
A1.
A GET-TOUGH MAYOR? TELL IT TO ANDREW
Andrew Giuliani, the 7-year-old first son of New York, held the town in thrall with his antics at the inauguration, utterly eclipsing the earnest but less playful display put on by his father.
A1.
MACY IS COOL TO MERGER
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reacted coolly to efforts by Federated Department Stores, its longtime rival, to add Macy to its stable of stores.
A1.
Mayor Giuliani promoted a top-level uniformed police official to be the second-in-command in the Police Department.
B4.
A brief, intense fire incinerated a Brooklyn shantytown, killing two people, hospitalizing a third and effectively ending the fringe life of an encampment in Red Hook.
B3.
The World Trade Center bombing trial resumed with prosecutors presenting several bits of evidence, most of them on the role of Mahmud Abouhalima, one of the four defendants.
B3.
It has become a sort of New York City given that somewhere in Brooklyn is a place called East New York where mayhem reigns.
B6.
REGION
WHITMAN NAMES STATE TREASURER
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey named Brian W. Clymer to be state treasurer, the post most critical to keeping her campaign promises to shrink state government and cut state income taxes.
A1.
RETHINKING THE PROPERTY TAX
New Haven's Mayor, John DeStefano, has become a leading spokesman for a growing number of people who believe Connecticut's reliance on the property tax is harming not just the state's cities, but its entire economy.
B5.
BAIL IS DENIED FOR SUSPECTS IN BOMBINGS
Two suspects in bombings that killed five people in upstate New York were denied bail.
B7.
MATURE WORKERS WELCOME
Hazel Rathbun, 73, has been a desk clerk at the Days Inn hotel in Ledgewood, N.J., for six years.
The Days Inn hotel chain is one of the few businesses that has seen the advantage in welcoming workers 55 and over.
B6.
Neediest Cases B7
Chronicle B7


Players Looking Down the Road and Up a Level
For the 20th time in the last 25 years, the Jets cleaned out their lockers while other teams prepared for the playoffs.
Despite a collapse over the last month of the season when they went 1-4 and missed the playoffs, the Jets dutifully maintained optimism for next season.


A Dismal Recovery
To the Editor:
You are surely correct that President Clinton deserves neither full credit nor blame, yet, for the condition of the economy (news article, Dec. 20).
But is your article's underlying presumption, that the economy is humming, correct?


Frustrating Fight for Acceptance; For Older Job Seekers, a Sad Refrain: 'I'd Love to Hire You, but You Just Won't Fit In'
Despite a decade-long push by private and government organizations to market older people as reliable and mature workers, advocates for people 55 and older say their efforts have largely failed.
They say that employers continue to view age not in terms of experience or stability but as deterioration and staleness.
People who have worked to promote the older labor force say that 10 years ago they were confident that, through intensive public relations and educational efforts, American businesses would recognize and harness what they argued are the skills of older workers.
Although it is impossible to tally how much money went toward that end, people who work in the field estimated that tens of millions of dollars were spent nationwide on studies, job fairs, seminars for executives and advertising.


William Morris, Dictionary Editor And Word Columnist, Dies at 80
William Morris, a lexicographer and publishing executive who edited the American Heritage Dictionary and the Grolier Universal Encyclopedia, died on Sunday in Riverside Hospital in Columbus, Ohio.
He was 80 and lived in Old Greenwich, Conn.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Michael Weber, his son-in-law.


Eastern College Report
Vermont
Should he maintain his average of 24 points a game, sophomore guard Eddie Benton could reach the 1,000-point mark in his career by the end of the month.
At 18, he would be the youngest collegiate player to ever to do so.
Benton has 841 points in 35 games, mostly because he has hit 111 3-pointers in his career.
He has 12 games left in the regular season, including Colgate tomorrow, and he needs just 159 points before his 19th birthday, on Feb. 16.


Pentagon's Political War Against Pollard
To the Editor:
In a calculated effort to keep Jonathan Pollard, the American convicted of spying for Israel, imprisoned, Pentagon officials have made public a letter from the departing Secretary of Defense, Les Aspin, to President Clinton, alleging that Mr.
Pollard slipped classified information into 14 letters he sent from prison (front page, Dec. 28).
The implication is that this information might endanger United States security.
If there were any truth to this tall tale, it would show unparalleled stupidity by United States intelligence officials.


CHRONICLE
How could the history of ballet possibly be complete without mention of Barbra Streisand's portrayal of the Swan Queen from "Swan Lake"?
In the 1968 film "Funny Girl," Ms.
Streisand danced a Swan Queen that was light on Petipa's original choreography and heavy with creative liberties.
But only snippets of her tour de farce survived the editing process.


Howe Is an All-Star
MARK HOWE of the Detroit Red Wings and DAVE TAYLOR of the Los Angeles Kings have been added to the National Hockey League All-Star Game rosters under a special category created in 1991 to recognize career-long contributions by senior players.
Howe will play with the Eastern Conference and Taylor with the Western Conference in the game on Jan. 22 in New York.
Howe, the son of the Hall of Fame player, GORDIE HOWE, who will be honorary captain of the Western Conference squad, is 38 and the league's oldest player.
Taylor is playing in his 17th N.H.L. season. (AP)


The Other Mexico
There is another, older Mexico beneath the free-market, modernizing society being fashioned by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari -- a Mexico of subsistence agriculture, native peoples and Emiliano Zapata, the land-to-the-peasants hero of the 1910-to-1917 Mexican Revolution.
That other Mexico is epitomized by Chiapas, the poor southern state near the Guatemalan border where armed Indian guerrillas invoking Zapata took over four towns Saturday and where clashes between Mexico's army and the rebels have left scores of Indians dead.
Initial reports are sketchy, but most guerrilla fatalities appear to have been inflicted while the rebels were retreating.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN INDEMNITY FINANCIAL CORP., Galveston, Tex., appointed Phillip E. Apgar vice president, treasurer and chief financial officer.
ECOGEN INC., Langhorne, Pa., an agricultural technology company, promoted James P. Reilly Jr., president and chief operating officer, to chief executive.


White House Criticizes G.O.P. on Radiation Data
The Clinton Administration strongly criticized its Republican predecessors today for failing to take action in the 1980's after disclosures about Government research that exposed unwitting human subjects to radiation.
After a meeting of top aides from several agencies today, the Administration said it had formed a working group to determine how widespread the experiments had been in the decades after World War II, how often the tests had violated standards for human research and to what extent people who may have suffered harm should be compensated.


France Sends 2 Murder Suspects Back to Iran, Stirring Wide Protest
France timed the announcement for the eve of the long New Year's weekend, it gave "national interest" as the reason for its decision, and it promised no further explanation for its decision to send home two jailed Iranians who were wanted for murder in Switzerland.
But for all its efforts to keep attention away from the case, the deportation of the two men to Iran last week -- instead of their extradition to Switzerland -- has brought angry protests from French newspapers, opposition parties and Iranian exiles as well as from the Swiss Government.


Free Trade Era Begins, Uneventfully, at Border
He was only dimly aware of it, but Tomas Estrada helped make trade history this morning.
The young truck driver from Tijuana, Mexico, wheeled up to the United States Customs dock here with a white truck filled with 6,368 women's blouses, 1,657 pants, 3,910 shorts and 3,974 girls' head bands -- all assembled in Mexico and destined for Los Angeles.
They were among the first cargoes of merchandise to enter the United States at reduced tariffs under the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Bristol-Myers To Cut 5,000 From Payroll
Faced with slowing growth in worldwide pharmaceutical sales and growing pressure on drug prices, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that it would eliminate 5,000 jobs over the next two years.
The cuts will include 1,500 employees who accepted early retirement under a program announced last fall.
Bristol-Myers Squibb said it would cut 3,000 jobs from its worldwide pharmaceutical business, with the rest spread through the company, including its New York headquarters.
It has 51,000 employees, down from 52,600 a year ago.


Books of The Times; Exploring Modern Dance With Two Visionaries
Mark Morris
By Joan Acocella
Illustrated. 305 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $27.50.  Life Into Art
Isadora Duncan and Her World
Foreword by Agnes de Mille. Edited by Doree Duncan, Carol Pratl and Cynthia Splatt
Illustrated. 199 pages. W.W. Norton &amp; Company. $40.


First Storm of '94 Dumps Snow, Ice and Rain From West Virginia to Maine
It did not pack the punch of the Great March Blizzard of '93, but the first storm of '94 was a severe northeaster that hammered the East late Monday night and early yesterday morning, immobilizing millions of people from North Carolina to Maine.
Torrents of icy rain and very heavy snow, which drifted up to three feet in some places, kept families home from work and school, knocked out power lines, closed major highways and disrupted a good part of the region's air and train traffic.


Donyell Marshall Puts on a Show With 29
Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun said, "Our all-America played like an all-America tonight."
Calhoun was referring to Donyell Marshall, the gem of the 1991 recruiting class.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Fed harshly criticized the Administration's plan for handing over much of its power to regulate banks to the Treasury Department in a consolidation of regulatory agencies.
It proposed a new regulatory scheme of its own that some banking-industry officials praised as a way to limit possible abuses of power by the single agency the Administration seeks.  [ Page D1. ]


California Regulator Seeks A Halt to Prudential Deal
The biggest class-action settlement offered by Prudential Securities in the scandal involving investors in 35 oil and gas limited partnerships has run into a significant roadblock.
California's top securities regulator on Monday night filed a letter calling for a temporary halt in hearings on the company's $120 million settlement of the class action involving the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships, which raised about $1.4 billion from 130,000 investors.


MCI Plans to Enter Local Markets
MCI Communications, the company that pried open A.T.&amp; T.'s monopoly on the long-distance telephone business more than 20 years ago, announced today a $2 billion plan to invade the local telephone market.
MCI also announced a vaguely defined "vision" to team up with unspecified partners on a $20 billion effort to upgrade its long-distance network for an array of voice, video and high-speed data communications.


R. M. Ellsworth, 65, A Medical Specialist In Cancer of the Eye
Dr.
Robert Malcolm Ellsworth, an ophthalmologist who specialized in eye cancer, died on Sunday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 65 and lived in Englewood.
The cause was cancer, said Dr.
D.
Jackson Coleman, chief of the Department of Ophthalmology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Suicides, Then Mystery In Deaths of 3 Heifers
Gregory Wilcom, a prize-winning cattle breeder, sat next to his wife, Pamela, on the couch in their farmhouse in Ijamsville, Md., and took her hand, she told the police.
"Cows will come and go," he said, "but you and I are forever. Through good times and bad, I love you."


With a Balanced Cast, Sonics Rally in Phoenix
SuperSonics 112, Suns 106
Seattle's Kendall Gill scored 12 of his 19 points in the fourth quarter, and the SuperSonics came from behind to beat the Suns, 112-106, last night in Phoenix.


CHRONICLE
Just when you were, no doubt, beginning to wonder when in the new year there would be some news of royal romance, the royal family of Monaco took pains to deny that PRINCE RAINIER is planning to marry HJORDIS NIVEN , the Swedish-born widow of actor David Niven.
"One wonders how such a completely baseless rumor managed to spread," Jacqueline Berti, director of the principality's press center and a spokeswoman for the royal family, said, according to The Associated Press.


Raise in Rent Aid Would Curb Homelessness; The Shelter Error
To the Editor:
In "Where Should the Homeless Sleep?: Shelters Lead Nowhere" (Op-Ed, Dec. 19) Dennis Culhane argues that we must break away from stressing the use of temporary shelters for the homeless.
He contrasts this approach to the one supposedly urged by the New York City Commission on the Homeless, chaired by Andrew Cuomo.
Specifically, Mr.
Culhane characterizes the commission as urging the city to broaden the services offered at emergency shelters and recommending that temporary shelters be the first step toward affordable permanent housing.


Feud Ends in Killing Of a 10th Grader At a Brooklyn Home
A feud between two high school students in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn ended yesterday when one accused the other of harassing him and then stabbed him to death during a dispute over money and a music tape, the police said.
Witnesses said Kevil Johnson, 16, was helping his father, Vincent, clear away snow in front of their two-story town house at 671 Park Avenue when Larkaid Wallace, 15, approached, demanding money and a tape that the two youths had apparently exchanged.


Alvin James Ferro, 65; Led a Liquor Company
Alvin James Ferro, retired president and chief executive of the Paddington Corporation, a liquor importer and marketer, died on Saturday at Palm Beach Cardena Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., at the age of 65.
A former resident of Larchmont and Rye, N.Y., he lived in Tequesta, Fla.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


OFF THE MENU
Starting Over
The Gloucester House, at 37 East 50th Street, a fixture on the Manhattan dining scene since 1935, was known for simply prepared, high-quality fish and shellfish at astronomical prices.
But having failed to maintain the standards for which it was once known, the Gloucester House finally sank in 1992.
Since then, the spacious midtown site has attracted a number of salvage teams and suitors.
The lease is now owned by the Loft International Restaurant Corporation, a division of Aphrodite Restaurants in White Plains, which has a varied portfolio of busy, moderate-price pasta restaurants, diners, steakhouses and caterers in New York and nearby.
"We're trying to develop this with an exciting new theme," said Peter Skeadas, a partner.
"It will probably not be primarily a seafood restaurant because the more people we speak to, the more we find it might not be the wisest thing to do. It will have seafood, but also other foods. Right now we are feeling our way and trying to do this correctly."
Mr.
Skeadas refused to discuss other company properties, including Pasta Lovers in Manhattan and Queens and on Long Island.
"We are afraid some people might get the wrong impression and not consider us serious enough to be involved in a prime spot like this," he said.
To design the premises for whatever their concept turns out to be, the owners have hired Charles Morris Mount, the architect who created Canastel's on Park Avenue South and the two-story McDonald's on West 57th Street and who also enlivened the look of Montrachet in TriBeCa.
They are also talking with several restaurant consultants, among them Frank Valenza, who helped set up Colors, and Stephen Kalt, whose projects have included Fresco and Main Street.
With so many decisions to be made before a transformation of the restaurant can occur, the owners don't expect to open before fall.
A Big Fish in the Works
While the new owners of the Gloucester House may have decided against a seafood house, others thought differently.
The city gained several seafood restaurants in 1993, among them Eastern Seafood Company on the Upper West Side, City Crab and Seafood in the Flatiron District and Pisces in the East Village.
And it may acquire an especially noteworthy one before 1994 is out.
Jean-Georges Vongerichten, co-owner of Jo Jo and Vong, is working on a project for a seafood restaurant and fish market with Eberhard Muller, the former executive chef at Le Bernardin, who has been doing some consulting work in Germany since he left Opus, the restaurant he opened in 1992 in Santa Monica, Calif.
Neither Mr.
Vongerichten nor Mr.
Muller would divulge details about the project.
To Your Health
Some pundits say slabs of red meat are becoming more popular than ever, so a steakhouse might be a better idea than a seafood restaurant.
But those ascetics who still resolve each year to diet may want other dining choices.
No steakhouses are listed in "Dining Smart 1994" by Suzanne Ainslie (Dining Smart, $9.95).
This pocket-size book evaluates more than 200 restaurants in Manhattan, plus a few in Brooklyn and Queens, for the quality of their food and healthfulness.
The ratings of one to four hearts reflect not only the healthfulness of the choices on the menu but also the willingness of the chef or owner to accommodate special diets.
The book also tells how to order healthy foods in ethnic restaurants, offers tips for sensible dieting, explains nutrients and gives guidelines on consuming alcoholic beverages and artificial sweeteners.
"Dining Smart 1994" is sold in bookstores and is available by mail for $9.95 plus $1 postage (plus 82 cents tax for New York residents), from Dining Smart, Room 333, P.O.
Box 15073, Albany 12212.
Happy $19.94!
Those special lunches for $19.93 are now history.
The price has gone up to $19.94.
The latest Zagat Survey lists 27 restaurants serving prix-fixe three-course lunches for $19.94 and 11 with dinners at that price.
Some of the dinners are pre-theater only, but they are available all evening at the Brasserie, Le Bar Bat, Moreno, One Hudson Cafe, St.
Martin's, Snaps and Trois Jean.


Cuba Embargo Has Had Desired Effect
To the Editor:
"U.S. Companies Use Affiliates Abroad to Skirt Sanctions," your Dec. 27 front-page report on Cuba and Libya, misleads your readers to believe that the case regarding Cargill Inc.'s sale of Cuban sugar shows how American corporations seize on "porous laws" to use foreign subsidiaries and circumvent the United States embargo on Cuba.
This is not the case.


Studies Are Grim on Dialysis Outlook
A bleak long-term outlook for older patients on kidney dialysis emerges from two studies being published on Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
The head of the National Kidney Foundation said the new findings underscored the need to improve kidney dialysis therapy because Americans have the highest death rates in the world while undergoing the treatment.


Corrections
Production credits on Dec. 21 with a theater review of "A Community Carol," presented by Arena Stage and the Cornerstone Theater Company in Washington, omitted the name of the show's movement director.
She is Sabrina Peck.


C.I.A. Seeks Documents From Its Radiation Tests
Trying to help the Clinton Administration end the secrecy that surrounded the nation's use of human subjects in radiation experiments, the C.I.A. is searching for files on research it conducted during the cold war involving the use of radiation to alter or control behavior.
But due to secrecy, shredders and the passage of time, little is known about the nature of the tests, their number and the type of radiation involved.


Foreign Policy Nears a Peril Point
The foreign policy debate during the Clinton Administration's first year focused almost totally on secondary issues.
The country can ill afford such a luxury this year.
The only first-magnitude issue to get large-scale public attention and sustained Presidential focus (at the eleventh hour) was the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Other such issues -- Russia, the Middle East, North Korea, China, Japan, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- drew episodic high-level attention from an Administration preoccupied with domestic concerns.


Kraft Puts Account In Review
Kraft General Foods has placed in review its Crystal Light sugar-free powdered drink mix brand after only nine months at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.


'Red, Red Robin' Case Puts Songwriter's Heirs in Money
A music-loving Federal judge has ruled that the early bird gets the worm.
Or, more specifically, the early bird's heirs.
In a decision filed on Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Judge Richard Owen, who composes operas in his spare time, ruled that the heirs of the author of the 1926 hit song, "When the Red, Red Robin Comes Bob-Bob-Bobbing Along," are entitled to all royalties to the song.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DANIELSON TRUST CO., San Diego, has agreed to acquire Western Trust Services, a division of Grossmont Bank, also of San Diego.
FIRST BANK SYSTEM INC., Minneapolis, has signed a purchase agreement to acquire the domestic corporate trust business of J. P. Morgan &amp; Co.
The purchase price was not disclosed.


High School Equivalency Test Poses a New Question: Will Taking It Matter?
Robin Sigari crossed a threshold a year ago when she passed the General Educational Development test, long used as an alternative to a high school diploma for dropouts like her.
Now enrolled in the City University of New York, Ms.
Sigari, a 30-year-old mother, hopes to become a teacher.
But for Carlos Garcia, the promise of the G.E.D. has turned out to be hollow.
Mr.
Garcia, a 30-year-old construction worker who dropped out of the 10th grade in San Antonio, passed the test last year.
But he believes it has not improved his career prospects.


New $2 Billion Network Adapts Telegraph Tubes
For MCI, the path to what it calls "the information superhighway" may have to pass through turn-of-the-century underground telegraph tubes.
Parts of the MCI Communications Corporation's $2 billion planned alternative to the local phone networks will be built with assets the company bought nearly four years ago from Western Union.
The holdings include underground wooden, clay or plastic conduits laid by Western Union to hold telegraph lines.
Through these pipes, some dating to the 19th century, must run the high-capacity fiber optic lines that will make possible video conferencing, video-on-demand and other services.


Pistons Give Thomas Money and Power
By deciding to remain with the Detroit Pistons, Isiah Thomas has prolonged the Knicks' quest for a point guard.
The possibility that Thomas would be traded to the Knicks ended on Monday night after a meeting between Thomas and Bill Davidson, the Pistons' owner.


Lakers' Bowie to Be Out Indefinitely
SAM BOWIE, the Los Angeles Laker center, will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left knee today and will be sidelined indefinitely.
He has missed five games after noticing pain in his knee on Dec. 21 following the Lakers' game at Orlando. (AP)


LIKUD LEADER PUTS ACCORD IN DOUBT
Israel's main opposition leader, Benjamin Netanyahu, said today that if his Likud Party were to return to power he would feel no obligation to honor the current Labor Government's agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr.
Netanyahu stopped short of a firm promise to break the deal on introducing Palestinian self-rule to the occupied territories -- a position advocated recently by his predecessor as Likud leader, former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.


Hextall's Schedule Catches Up With Him
The Devils obviously were aware that Ron Hextall was making his 20th consecutive start in goal for the Islanders.
Hextall's fatigue was evident with 1 minutes 37 seconds left in the game when he allowed a very soft goal to Stephane Richer.
His fatigue was just as evident with 32.6 seconds left, when Bernie Nicholls scored another soft goal that sealed a 6-3 victory for the Devils.


Lukas Is Taken Off the Critical List
Although he is still in a coma, the health of the horse trainer Jeff LUKAS has improved to where he was listed in serious condition yesterday, the first time he was anything other than critical since being run over by a horse on Dec. 15 at Santa Anita.


Harold Mayer Weston, Lawyer, 82
Harold Mayer Weston, a lawyer who was an expert in labor-relations management and government, died on Sunday at his home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He was 82.
The cause was complications from cancer, his family said.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Dec. 23, about Omnicom Group Inc.'s acquisition of Interbrand Group P.L.C., reversed the names of the company that is to be formed in 1995 by merging Interbrand's American operations with an Omnicom unit, the Schechter Group.
It will be known as Schechter-Interbrand.


Retirement At Sara Lee
The president of the Sara Lee Corporation, Cornelis Boonstra, who directed the company's rapid growth in Europe, retired unexpectedly, the company announced today.
Mr.
Boonstra, who had worked at Sara Lee for nearly two decades, was named president only last July.
Sara Lee said Mr.
Boonstra, who will be 57 this Friday, cited "personal reasons" for his decision to retire.


Dr. Jacob Landers, 81, Educator in New York
Dr.
Jacob Landers, a teacher, principal and administrator at the New York City Board of Education for 34 years, died on Monday at New York University Hospital.
He was 81.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Jane Landers.


STATES REBELLING AT FEDERAL ORDER TO COVER ABORTION
Medicaid officials in many states have objected to a new directive from the Clinton Administration that requires states to help pay for abortions for low-income women in cases of rape or incest.
In a letter written on behalf of the State Medicaid Directors' Association, Ray Hanley, the chairman of the group, strongly objected to the Administration position.
Mr.
Hanley is also the Medicaid director of Arkansas.


Yanks Are Slipping on Benes
If the Yankees still want to acquire San Diego's Andy Benes to help strengthen their rotation, their next offer will to have to be significantly better than their last one, according to Randy Smith, San Diego's general manager.
Smith said yesterday that he last spoke with General Manager Gene Michael of the Yankees about three weeks ago, when Michael asked him if the Padres would trade the 26-year-old right-hander for the Yankees' Class AAA third baseman Russell Davis.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.15
3.33
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.10
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.29
3.25
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.37
5.44
6.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.35
6.41
7.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.35
7.40
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.55
5.54
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In U.S. Ads for TV, Condoms That Dare Speak Their Name
One television spot shows a condom that leaps from a chest of drawers just as a couple, whose sex is unclear, are about to make love.
Like a tiny superhero, the condom scurries across the room past a surprised cat and dives under the covers with the pair.
"It would be nice if latex condoms were automatic," an announcer says.
"But since they're not, using them should be."


Mitchell Takes a Shot At Reversing His Luck
Not having beaten up on the competition at the 1993 world figure-skating championships in Prague, Mark Mitchell decided to do the next best thing and beat up on his hotel room.
"I remember going back and saying, 'Here goes everything in the room. This is going to be a disaster,' " Mitchell said today as he prepared for Wednesday night's technical program at the United States championships.


U.N. General In Bosnia Quits
Just a week after he accused the United Nations of passing too many resolutions on Bosnia and sending too few troops, Lieut.
Gen.
Francis Briquemont of Belgium, the head of the peacekeeping forces, has asked to be relieved of his post.
Ahmad Fawzi, a United Nations spokesman, said General Briquemont, 58, who took over from Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France in July, would probably leave in January.


In America; Balance, Mr. Mayor
It's a good thing Andrew Giuliani was on hand throughout his father's inaugural address on Sunday.
The sustained antics of the uninhibited 7-year-old -- who made faces and parroted his father, and offered such unsolicited observations as "He's right, you know" -- provided the only real warmth and exuberance during the speech.
It'll be awhile before we see another successful politician as stiff and as chilly as New York's new Mayor.
By comparison, Vice President Al Gore is a regular vaudevillian.


Man Is Killed by Train
A young man lay in front of a train late Monday night in Stony Brook and killed himself several miles from where two teen-agers died in what was apparently a double suicide pact last month, the Suffolk County police said today.
The man, who had not been identifed, was described by the police as a dark-skinned Caucasian, possibly of Indian or Middle Eastern descent, about 6 feet tall and about 160 pounds.
The Suffolk County Medical Examiner's Office estimated that he was in his 20's or 30's.
Detective Sgt.
Edward Light said that there did not appear to be any connection between this death and those of the two teen-agers, Mili Subudhi, 15, and Ellen Liu, 16, on Dec. 2, a few miles to the east on the same railroad tracks in Setauket.
The police said they found a note on the man indicating that he intended to commit suicide.


Getting Even Tougher on Guns
Moving quickly to build on the passage of the Brady gun control law, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen now urges another important step to slow down the arms race in domestic gun traffic.
His simple, reasonable proposal is to make gun dealers cover the Government's cost of adequate regulation.
Mr.
Bentsen wants to charge licensed firearms dealers $600 a year.
That is a sizable increase from the roughly $66 charged now, but it is still a fraction of the fees commonly charged for liquor licenses and franchises to sell merchandise that is not dangerous to use or consume.
The citizen lobby Handgun Control, while praising the proposal, argues sensibly that still higher fees would be fair to the weapons industry and the public.
The Brady law, which requires a five-day waiting period for the retail sale of handguns, set the current fee of $200 for a three-year license period.
For many years the charge was $10 a year, enough to starve the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and force inadequate background and compliance checks.
That fee was so low that 284,000 dealers could afford it even if their only purpose in getting the license was to buy their own weapons more cheaply and sell them on black markets.
Firearms officials want to enable their agents to interview licensees, check to see whether they operate a store or trade from their kitchen tables or car trunks, and verify some of the information they gather with local police.
A pilot program involving a team of Federal and local officials in New York City recently resulted in the rejection or withdrawal of 216 of 227 Federal license applications.
According to the Treasury Department, a $600 license fee, besides financing a more trustworthy examination, would probably eliminate four-fifths of the licensees, leaving only serious retailers.
That's still 57,000 sources of personal weaponry in the United States -- far too many for a nation that is trying to combat gun violence.
Congress should therefore use the Bentsen proposal as a starting point for stronger legislation that exacts even higher fees, driving more marginal dealers out of the market and making sure that those who remain are doing business in legitimate, fixed locations.
Bolder legislation is feasible.
Legislators are gradually learning that voting against the wishes of the National Rifle Association is not automatic political death.
Witness the hard-won victory for the Brady law.
Witness, too, the willingness of the New York State Senate to consider restraints on assault weapons.
When Congress looks at the Bentsen proposal it will see that $600 is a modest fee that would make the firearms industry pay its way only in terms of regulation.
The industry doesn't even begin to repay society the cost of the homicides and maimings from too easily obtainable weapons.
Congress will need to think more imaginatively about higher fees and stricter standards, using Mr.
Bentsen's proposal as the catalyst to develop still other measures that promote domestic safety.


Anne Joers Firestone; Philanthropist, 70
Anne Joers Firestone, a philanthropist and civic leader in Bryn Mawr, Pa., died at her home there on Dec. 28.
She was 70.
The cause was lung cancer, said Bob Troyer, a spokesman for the family.


No Headline
The Rev.
John Francis Cronin, a Roman Catholic priest who was an expert on labor, race relations and social justice, died on Sunday at St.
Charles Villa, a Sulpician retirement home in Baltimore.
He was 85.
Father Cronin came to national prominence in 1945 when the National Catholic Welfare Conference, now the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, named him assistant director of its Department of Social Action in Washington.
He held that position for 22 years.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Loses in Hopman  Ivan Lendl's debut on a United States tennis team turned into a 73-minute defeat at the Hopman Cup last night in Perth, Australia.
Lendl lost by 6-3, 6-1, to Bernd Karbacher of Germany as the Americans were eliminated from the quarterfinals of the team event.
Anke Huber beat Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), in women's singles before Lendl lost.
The Americans rebounded to win the mixed doubles by 8-5 in a pro set, but it wasn't enough to stave off elimination.
Lendl, who is ranked 19th in the world to Karbacher's 54th, succeeded with less than a third of his first serves and his ground strokes lacked timing.
In desperation, Lendl tried to serve-and-volley, but even that tactic failed.  (AP) N.H.L.
Puppa Blanks Lightning  Pat Elynuik scored the game's only goal and a great job by goaltender Daren Puppa carried the Tampa Bay Lightning to a 1-0 victory over Toronto last night, extending the Leafs' streak of games without a victory to seven.
Toronto outshot Tampa Bay, 28-24, in the game at Hamilton, Ontario.
Puppa earned his second shutout of the season and made some of his best saves in the last six minutes. (AP) Red Wings 4, Blues 4: Brendan Shanahan capped a comeback from a four-goal deficit when he scored on a rebound with 4:18 left in regulation as St.
Louis tied visiting Detroit. (AP) Blackhawks 2, Stars 1: Dirk Graham's goal with 1:14 to play in overtime lifted visiting Chicago over Dallas.
Graham took possession near the blue line and fired a wrist shot through a screen that beat Dallas goaltender Andy Moog in the upper right corner for his ninth goal of the season. (AP)


'Shorelining,' Like Redlining, Is Discrimination
To the Editor:
Insurance companies should not be permitted to use their losses in Florida to justify "shorelining" in New York (front page, Dec. 28).
"Shorelining" discriminates against coastal property owners just as "redlining" once discriminated against building owners in inner city neighborhoods.


Cuomo: Miles to Go or Nearly Gone?; He Ponders Another Term, as Critics Assess First 11 Years
Six years after he first chose not to run for President and two years after he declined for a second time, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo no longer has quite the star quality that once bolstered his popularity at home.
A brutal recession and 11 years of incumbency have taken their toll on his approval ratings.
And the experiences of David N. Dinkins in New York City and Jim Florio in New Jersey serve as reminders that the record of just one term can be enough to convince voters to reject an incumbent.


Petitbon and Glanville Run Out of Downs
Less than 12 hours after the National Football League's regular season ended, the Sack the Coach Season began yesterday.
The first casualties were Richie Petitbon of the Washington Redskins and Jerry Glanville of the Atlanta Falcons.
When Joe Gibbs retired suddenly last March after 12 seasons as the Redskins' head coach -- an apparent victim of burnout -- the job went to Petitbon, who ran the Redskins' defense from 1978 to 1992.
Petitbon's team, racked by injuries that decimated the offensive and defensive lines, struggled to a 4-12 record.


Metropolitan Museum Shows the World's Art
To the Editor:
A Dec. 29 front page article reports that the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani may offer more support to New York City's premier cultural institutions.
You report further that John S. Dyson, the new deputy mayor for economic development and finance, said he found it unacceptable that the Metropolitan Museum of Art has had to close some galleries mornings or afternoons.


Raise in Rent Aid Would Curb Homelessness
To the Editor:  In these recessionary times, when even people with substantial work histories and job skills face reduced job security and people with few skills or handicaps are virtually barred from the work force, New York State must maintain its safety net for people unable to work.
County public assistance grants are often the last resort to which people with no income can turn.


Interest Rates Fall in Thin Trading
Interest rates on Government securities fell yesterday during a session that traders said was notable for its lack of liquidity.
Thin trading conditions often lead to big swings in prices, and yesterday was no exception.


Economists Trade Barbs Over President's Policy
No annual meeting of the American Economics Association would be complete without an assessment of current economic policy, but the one that took place today produced some unusual sparks.
Robert Barro, a Harvard professor and Reagan Republican, conceded that the Barro misery index had declined by half a percent during the first year of Bill Clinton's term.
The index, which is occasionally featured in The Wall Street Journal, measures changes in joblessness, interest rates and such.
"Less misery," he acknowledged.


Review/Opera; Lush French Rarity, Via Shakespeare
The sensitivity and gentle exoticism of Reynaldo Hahn's art songs have made them centerpieces of the modern recital literature.
But the operas, operettas and musical theater works he composed for the French stage in the first decades of this century have become footnotes in operatic history, scarcely mentioned in reference works and virtually never performed.
Hahn died only 47 years ago, so perhaps history's verdict is not final.
Granted, a real reconsideration would require full-scale productions and recordings of works that have been collecting dust, and given the costs involved in presenting opera these days, few major companies (or singers) are likely to commit their resources to uncertain payoffs.


An Oldsmobile Option For Self-Navigating Car
Where is the nearest hospital?
What is the best way to get from here to West Bloomfield?
How far is Tiger Stadium?
Today, a driver would have to roll down the window and ask.
But later this year the car itself will be able to answer, complete with maps and step-by-step directions -- at least if the car is an Oldsmobile Eighty-Eight LSS, with a $2,000 option called the Navigation/Information System.


New Gubernatorial Entry Gets Financial Backing
Amid a growing field of Republican gubernatorial hopefuls in New York, a Manhattan businessman, Evan G. Galbraith, entered the race yesterday and jumped to an early lead in celebrity endorsements when Henry Kissinger and William F. Buckley said they would throw their fund-raising weight behind him.
At a news conference, Mr.
Kissinger and Mr.
Buckley said they would be spokesmen for a group of 25 men, most of them Wall Street executives, who hoped to raise at least $2 million for Mr.
Galbraith.
They described him as a dedicated conservative.


Review/Theater: The Rez Sisters; Bingo as the Way of Escape, at Dismal Odds
It's Toronto or bust for the seven impoverished Indians whom the Canadian playwright Tomson Highway calls "The Rez Sisters."
That's where "the biggest bingo in the world" is about to be held.
As the raucous women envision it with mounting excitement and a feverish gleam in their dark eyes, hitting the $1 million jackpot is how they'll change their hardscrabble existence on the Wasaychigan Hill Indian Reserve in Ontario.
"When I win" is how they begin their wishful sentences.
No one says, "If I win."


U.S. Is Scrambling for a Strategy On Eve of Clinton European Trip
Less than a week before the NATO and Moscow summit meetings, the Administration is still groping for a coherent strategy as President Clinton prepares to embark on his most comprehensive and ambitious overseas trip.
On Russia, the Administration retreated from the position outlined by Strobe Talbott, its leading Russia strategist, just two weeks ago that American policy is now to find a way to de-emphasize rapid economic change in favor of maintaining living standards.


Jets Need Help; Count the Ways
On Sunday night, in the final game of the season, the Houston Oilers exposed everything that was wrong with the Jets for much of the season, and showed them just how far they have to go to reach the level of a top contender in the National Football League.
The Jets couldn't win big games against good opponents.
They consistently had breakdowns in one phase of the game or another.
In the case of the 24-0 loss to Houston, all three phases collapsed.
And the offensive coaches didn't seem to be able to make adjustments during the game to counter an opponent's strategy.


U.S. Now Seeks Just One Survey Of North Korea
Backing away from their previous insistence that North Korea accept frequent nuclear inspections, Administration officials said today that they were prepared to accept North Korea's offer of one full inspection of seven atomic sites now in the hope that more could be agreed upon later.
The officials said further that, under the terms of a tentative agreement with the North Koreans, the United States would urge South Korea to suspend joint military exercises with the United States if such an inspection is arranged and North Korea resumes talks with South Korea on guaranteeing the removal of all nuclear weapons from the Korean peninsula.


Metropolitan Diary
NEW YEAR'S MORNING  1994 peers at us through windows,
smiles warmly through strangers,
waves like an old friend.
All things begin and end
with Guy Lombardo,
confetti and balloons,
champagne, late-night snacks,
hearts purring like cats
and people wearing funny hats. ERNEST SLYMAN
. . .
Dear Diary:
On a recent Thursday at 6 P.M. on 57th Street right in front of Burberrys, a gust of wind brought tears to my eyes, and I felt one of my contacts popping out.
I tried to catch it but failed.
I stopped dead in my tracks under the bright lights and searched for my lens on the sidewalk.
The first person to ask what I was looking for soon joined me on the glittering pavement.
Another passer-by offered his assistance.
Then another woman.
A third sympathetic man.
Two more women.
Passer-by joined passer-by, one more and then another, all hunched over or, yes, crawling on all fours.
It was to no avail.
After a quarter of an hour of this whirlwind, the search was called off.
I thanked everyone, offered apologies and swiftly slipped into Hermes, where I began a thorough search for the tiny piece of plastic -- on my coat, in my purse or shopping bag -- and then, pulling myself together, I realized I was seeing everything perfectly clearly: the lens was in my eye!
To all those who gathered around me: thanks for helping to make New York City such a caring place, from the lady in the black coat with the temporarily lost lens.
EVELYN SOIFER
. . .
Dear Diary:
My telephone rang.
"Hello,' I said.
The voice of a charming woman: "Are you the Gerald who does the decoupage plates?"
"No," I said.
"Sorry," she said and rang off.
I used to get calls that said, "Are you the Gerald who does the omelets?"
So he's changed his job. GERALD HOLMES
. . .
NEW YEAR  The early easy sun
shuffles across the new-found new year
while last night's celebrations
disappear like wind-washed confetti.
And as quiet unmarked hours
highlight a silent sober morning
the cold clear dawning day
yawns at awakening potentials. ROGER GRANET
. . .
Dear Diary:
One night in early December I telephoned New York City information from my country house in Sullivan County.
Me: The number of Bulgari, the jewelry store on 57th and Fifth in Manhattan.
She: Doing your Christmas shopping?
Me: Yes.
She: Shopping there should score you major points.
Me: I hope so!
She: The number is (212) etc.-etc.
Me: Thanks. BRUCE D. VERSTANDIG
. . .
Rather than cash in my cans and bottles, I either toss my bag of empties into the nearest trash can or hand it over to one of the street people in the neighborhood (York Avenue and 80th Street).
The other afternoon I was off to exchange a Christmas gift at Eddie Bauer, carrying my bag of empties to give away.
The first street person was not one of the neighborhood regulars, but I handed him a bag anyway, saying that I would probably have lots more for him on Sunday when I was having a dinner party.
The fellow stared at the bag, then at me, and then he said goodbye.
I turned the corner, walked on a bit and then heard the jingle-jangle of empty cans.
It was then I realized that I had given him the Eddie Bauer bag with a turtleneck pullover, size large.
I headed back to where I had last seen him; he was nowhere in sight.
I saw him again the following night.
It was Christmas Eve, and he was collecting bottles from a trash can.
"Remember me?" I said.
"I gave you a shopping bag yesterday."
"Yes," he said, "I also have new pants, and tomorrow I'm wearing them with the sweater." Then he went back to sorting.
I know now what I'll do in Christmases to come.
And next year I'll gift wrap.
BUNNY FRANCO
. . .


Clinton Stalls Effort To Improve Welfare
The Clinton Administration is trying to plot a strategy that would allow it to appear to be pushing for improvements in the welfare system, even while it delays action on a welfare bill until the President's health care plan clears Congress.
Such a strategy would make it unlikely that a major welfare bill would pass this year, officials said.
At a Cabinet meeting on Monday, the President argued that health care required the Administration's full attention.
He also said the country would not succeed in moving people off welfare until it passed universal health care.
Article, page A13.


It Takes More Than Money To Get Holyfield to Fight
Evander Holyfield, a proud man who has earned $87 million in the ring, explained yesterday why he was passing up a $20 million payday with Riddick Bowe:
"I didn't come for the money. I come for the title."


David Kaplan; Rheumatologist, 64
Dr.
David Kaplan, a rheumatologist, died on Sunday at his home in Brooklyn Heights.
He was 64.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.
Dr.
Kaplan was a professor of medicine at the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn, where he had been head of the Division of Rheumatology and director of the Multipurpose Arthritis Center.
He was an expert on the mechanisms of rheumatic disease.


Times Co. Weeklies Sold
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it had sold two weekly newspapers in Georgia, The Winder News and The Forsyth County News, to Swartz-Morris Media Inc.
The terms of the sale were not disclosed.
The Times Company acquired the papers in 1987 along with The Gwinnett Daily News, whose assets were sold in 1992 to Cox Enterprises.
The Winder News has a circulation of 6,700, while The Forsyth County News has a circulation of 10,600.


It's a Night to Forget For the Nets in Miami
For Kevin Edwards, a Miami Heat original, tonight's game was his first at Miami Arena since signing with the Nets in the last off season.
He shrugged it off beforehand as "no big deal."
The way he and the Nets played, he was right.


Filmed Beating of Inmate Leads to Dismissal of 2 Prison Guards
A videotaped beating at a maximum-security prison -- in which two guards were filmed striking a handcuffed inmate as he grunted in pain -- has led to the dismissal of the two guards and the suspension of two others who filed a false report about the episode.
"The two were fired because it was an unprovoked, unjustified attack," said William A. Babiskin, an independent labor arbitrator who upheld a state decision to dismiss the guards.
"The inmate didn't do anything to deserve it. The force was unnecessary and excessive."


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday in the special Outlook '94 issue of Business Day, with a forecast of the year in Hollywood, misidentified the film in which Nick Nolte was shown.
It was Columbia Pictures' "I'll Do Anything."


John Stimpson; Insurer and Cook, 67
John H. Stimpson, who spent 36 years with the New York Life Insurance Company and then retired to become a professional cook, died on Sunday at his home in Irvington, N.Y.
He was 67.
The cause was throat cancer, said his wife, Valerie Stimpson.


Reviews/Television; Correctness vs. Content in Language
Tonight's "48 Hours" report plays catchup with the much disputed phenomenon of political correctness.
Something of a catchall, the program skips between amusement and concern over happenings on campuses, at newspapers and television stations and in show business.
"Politically Correct" leads off with the case of a Vassar man who was suspected of making threatening telephone calls to a homosexual student.
The suspect, a white heterosexual male, denied steadily that his was the voice on the nasty tape, but the pressure continued for weeks.
Eventually the Vassar administrators, who declined to talk to the "48 Hours" reporter, Erin Moriarty, decided there was "insufficient evidence" to take action against the student.
His defenders attribute his ordeal to an effort to placate a now-favored group.
His father, a liberal of the 1960's generation, calls the affair "a piece of propaganda theater."


Rodman Is Fined $10,000 by the N.B.A.
DENNIS RODMAN of the San Antonio Spurs was fined $10,000 for refusing to leave the court after he was ejected from a game against the Los Angeles Lakers last Sunday and for verbally abusing an official and throwing objects onto the court. (AP)


Center Aided by Neediest Helps Boy With a Problem
To the workers at the Children's Aid Society's community center in East Harlem, Felipe Ayala has long been a symbol of what makes their work worthwhile.
From the time he first came to the center at the age of 4, to attend a Head Start class, the stocky, bright-eyed boy thrived.
When he started grade school, he still could be found at the center every afternoon, seeking refuge from the noise of his family's apartment to do his homework.


New Criteria For Earnings
Beginning today, the listing of corporate earnings in Business Day will cover only companies that have at least $50 million in quarterly revenues.
Banking and insurance companies, which do not usually report revenues, will be covered in the listing if their total assets exceed $2 billion.


Campus Journal; Dartmouth Seeks Ethics for the Age of Computers
Somebody in Prof.
David Becker's course on Latin American politics did not want to take the midterm exam, so he or she used Dartmouth's innovative electronic mail network to impersonate a department secretary and cancel the test.
At 11 o'clock on the night before the test in the Government 49 class, a message flashed on students' computer screens.
Because of a family emergency, the message said, Professor Becker would be unable to administer the midterm.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 24, about the Monsanto Company's biotechnology business, misidentified the company's main fiber product.
It is nylon, not polyester.
The article also misstated the company's goal for growth, and its spending on biotechnology.
Monsanto is seeking a 10 percent annual increase in earnings, not sales.
It has spent more than $1 billion on biotechnology in general, not just on a cow hormone known as bovine somatotropin, or BST.


T.W.A. Ousts Chairman of 7 Months
Trans World Airlines, which is struggling to find a stable flight path after emerging from bankruptcy protection in November, yesterday replaced its chairman, who had been appointed only seven months ago.
It replaced William R. Howard with Donald F. Craib Jr., a T.W.A. board member and former chairman of the Allstate Insurance Group who has no airline operating experience.
The carrier also said that Glenn R. Zander, vice chairman, had resigned for personal reasons.


INSIDE
MCI Plans Local Phone Links
MCI Communications plans to build 20 local telephone networks to bypass regional Bell companies.
Page D1.
Last-Minute Policy Scramble
With NATO and Russia summit meetings looming, the United States lacks a cohesive policy.
Page A3.
Assessing Cuomo's Record
As the Governor weighs another run, politicians and others offer mixed reviews of his 11-year tenure.
Page B1.
Losing Coaches Are Out Richie Petitbon of the Redskins and Jerry Glanville of the Falcons were dismissed.
Page B11.
Auschwitz's Future Debated A debate over whether the Auschwitz death camp should become a museum or be allowed to decay raises historical and moral issues.
Page A6.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Harvard
It had been 10 years since the Crimson played Maine.
On Monday night, the first-place teams in the ECAC and the Hockey East leagues met in the Cumberland County Civic Center in Portland, Me., and a crowd of 5,409 turned out and saw 13 goals scored and 22 penalties assessed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  NORTH KOREA COMPROMISE NEAR  Softening its stance, the United States said it would accept North Korea's offer for a one-time inspection of seven atomic sites in the hope that additional inspections would be agreed upon later.
A1  REBELLION CHASTENS MEXICO  Rebels retreated from towns in southern Mexico.
But the guerrilla action exposed a weakness in y of the Government plan to lift Mexico out of the third world.
A1


Pine Chip Named Trotter of the Year
Pine Chip, who went from an unraced 2-year-old to the richest trotter in North America last season, was overwhelmingly chosen as 1993 Trotter of the Year yesterday in a vote by the United States Harness Association and the North American Harness Racing Secretaries Association.


Bridge
The strongest bridge game ever played in prison took place half a century ago in Bandung, West Java, where a large number of Dutch officers were confined by the Japanese.
The full story was described later by C. Th. de Booy, a Dutch lieutenant commander.
Scene: The open air in the crowded Chimahi camp.


No Headline
"I don't know of any jobs or any college where a prerequisite is a dialect. The problem with American education is we get caught up in fads and don't teach the basics." RAMON C. CORTINES, New York City Schools Chancellor.  [ D22:3. ]


Simulcast From Gulfstream Is Whited Out at Aqueduct
The great simulcasting experiment, intended to save New York horse racing from the ravages of winter weather by televising races from Florida, was foiled yesterday -- by winter weather.
The snow and ice storm that swept across the East Coast forced Aqueduct Race Track in Queens to cancel its inaugural program of seven live races plus the five that were scheduled to be imported from Gulfstream Park.
Racing officials and stewards decided at 8:15 yesterday morning that the track was too slippery for jockeys and horses to run the live races and that the roads were to hazardous for the public to travel to the track to bet on the Florida races.


Warren Abrams; Printing Executive, 65
Warren E. Abrams, a paper and printing executive, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 65.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Bobbie Abrams.


Moran Opener on 'Wide World of Sports'
JULIE MORAN, assuming a new role as host of ABC's "Wide World of Sports," will have to live with inevitable comparisons to JIM McKAY, who was host for the anthology program into the early 1980's.
"I'll be happy if I'm half as good as Jim," she said yesterday.
"But it's a new era. A new generation of kids doesn't know 'Wide World.' But I'll never replace Jim."


Reviews/Television; Cabaret, the East Room And a Matter of Context
White House image wizards are likely to shift into a cringe mode tonight if a certain television program is available in their area.
Curiously, or perhaps not so curiously, in the New York metropolitan area the scheduled PBS feed of the normally ballyhooed "In Performance at the White House" is being carried this evening only on the Connecticut outlet Channel 49 (the program will be shown on Channel 13 on Friday evening at 10).
This latest addition to the occasional series, taped on Nov. 29 with President and Mrs.
Clinton and invited guests in attendance, celebrates cabaret music.
A fine idea, but, between performance and broadcast, Mr.
Clinton has been fending off new allegations, none verified, about his personal life.
The inevitable headlines have put an unfortunate spin on the program's contents.


Gaza Journal; Where Arabs in This Time Can Play Many Parts
Gamal Abu Qomsan, the director of the Gaza Strip's only theater, is preparing his troupe for the day the Israeli forces withdraw.
But don't look for posters with visages of Palestinian leaders.
And don't expect plays that extol the wisdom and beneficence of the new Palestinian government or replay scenes from the Israeli occupation.


Heart Diseases Are Persisting In Study's Second Generation
NO anatomical or surgical study has revealed more about the health of the American heart than the four-decade-long project involving the people of Framingham, Mass.
Beginning in 1949, more than 5,200 Framingham residents have participated in a unique study that has shown how living habits like smoking and inactivity, and health factors like obesity and high blood pressure, influence a person's chances of developing and dying of cardiovascular diseases, the nation's leading killers.
For the last two decades, 5,100 of the children of the original participants have also been studied, carrying the Framingham work into an era when deaths from heart attacks and strokes have fallen sharply while the costs of cardiovascular care continue to soar.


The Decay of a 20th Century Relic: What Is a Fitting Future for Auschwitz?
An international debate fraught with deep historical and moral questions is under way about how Poland preserves the decaying remains of the Nazi death camp at Auschwitz for future memory.
The four main gas chambers and crematories here at Auschwitz, where approximately 1.6 million people, most of them Jews, were gassed and their ashes dumped in the surrounding ponds and fields, were blown up by the Nazis.
The remains have been largely left as broken slabs of lichen-encrusted concrete and brick.


2 Agencies Team Up In Washington Firm
Manning, Selvage &amp; Lee has agreed to merge its Washington office with Capitoline International, a Washington public affairs agency, creating a partnership called Capitoline/MS&amp;L.
The combined firm, with clients like the Dairy Coalition, Exxon and Allied Signal, will offer public relations and government affairs services.
It will be jointly owned by Manning, Selvage and Capitoline and will be headed by Charles R. Pucie Jr., managing director at Capitoline, who retains that title.


CHRONICLE
Yes, you can go home again -- if you're HENRY J. STERN and if the place you are going is the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
Mr.
Stern, once again the department's Commissioner, was clearly reveling in his return this week to the position he held for six years, 10 months and two days ("but who's counting," he said) under former Mayor Edward I. Koch.


Accounts
*
Unilever P.L.C., London, has consolidated Arabian Gulf media buying, with billings estimated at $15 million, at the Bahrain office of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide.
The assignment was previously divided among Middle East offices of Ogilvy, Lintas Worldwide and J. Walter Thompson. *
Sun-Maid Growers of California, Kingsburg, Calif., to Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, to handle its account, previously at Grey Advertising, Los Angeles.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Atlanta Watches Nervously As Corruption Trial Begins
On the first day of a Federal corruption trial that threatens to burrow deep into Atlanta's power structure, Federal prosecutors today began detailing charges that a program at Hartsfield International Airport designed to provide economic opportunity for minorities became a swamp of corruption that largely benefited white businessmen, politically connected blacks and black public officials.
The trial, expected to last a month, is certain to tarnish the reputation of a program that has been viewed for years as a national model for assisting minority-owned businesses.
And it is being watched with dread in local political circles in light of corruption allegations swirling around many of Atlanta's most prominent politicians.


Review/Film; Mixing Fiction and Fact From Antarctica's Past
Nowadays, when no behavior is too trivial to be captured by a video camera, it takes some effort to remember that the moving image once seemed a miracle.
"The Forbidden Quest," a new film punctuated by archival scenes of early polar expeditions, offers some striking, ghostly reminders of cinema's intrinsic magic.
Antarctica has been photographed more startlingly than it is here, and scenes of polar exploration have been staged with greater visual ingenuity.
But these authentic glimpses, shot between 1905 and the 1930's and found by Peter Delpeut in the Netherlands Film Museum, where he is a programmer, capture the daring of film making as an adventure in its own right.
Scenes of sailors as they battle the polar elements are doubly audacious, not only because of the sailors' courage but also because a camera was there at all.
The icy cliffs of the Antarctic are presented with straightforward awe, in scenes that really convey what the explorers' astonishment must have been like.


Fed Assails President's Bank Plan
In an unusual public attack, the Federal Reserve today strongly criticized a Clinton Administration plan for the consolidation of bank regulatory agencies that would hand over much of the Fed's regulatory role to the Treasury Department.
Saying that the Administration's plan would lead to neither an efficient regulatory system nor good government, the Fed instead proposed a new regulatory lineup that would preserve much of its own current role.


French Government Proposes Ban On Pregnancies After Menopause
Reflecting growing European concern about the moral issues posed by reproductive technology, France's rightist Government has decided to introduce legislation banning artificial impregnation of post-menopausal women, but some critics promptly charged that it was acting too hastily.
Defending the bill, Health Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy said artificial late pregnancies were immoral as well as dangerous to the health of mother and child.
He urged women not to be "egoistic" by trying to become pregnant after menopause.


Nuclear Guinea Pigs
There is no good excuse for some of the callous and cavalier radiation experiments performed on unsuspecting human patients in Government-sponsored studies from the 1940's to the 1970's.
Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary had good reason to declare herself "appalled, shocked and deeply saddened" after reviewing one such experiment.
The information now emerging makes it clear that many scientists lacked the commonsensical fairness, honesty and compassion that is supposedly a hallmark of civilized humans; they had no qualms about endangering their patients and lying to them about it, with the blessings of the Federal Government.
Even by the loose practices of the 1940's and 1950's, many studies clearly crossed the line into unethical behavior.


Giuliani Imposes Curbs On Hiring by Agencies
As he began to grapple with a $2.3 billion gap in next year's budget, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he was ordering city agencies not to hire any new employees unless the hiring was approved by his senior aides.
On the second workday of his administration, Mr.
Giuliani took the unusual step of putting a Deputy Mayor and his Budget Director in charge of scrutinizing all new hiring throughout the city government, which has 214,000 workers.


Book Notes
Hands Off Clinton Projects
Compromising positions, adultery in high office (and in cars), embarrassing personal details about the President of the United States: it sounds like a bankable book, at least in today's anything-goes marketplace.
But New York publishers, at least, haven't seemed at all interested in two possible sex-with-Bill Clinton projects.
No one is buying, at least not yet, the proposed autobiography of Gennifer Flowers, the sometime civil servant who almost derailed Mr.
Clinton's Presidential hopes when she declared in the 1992 campaign that she had been his lover for 12 years.
And no publisher is stalking the two Arkansas state troopers who said, in interviews described in an article by David Brock in this month's American Spectator, that they regularly helped Mr.
Clinton arrange and conceal sexual liaisons while he was Governor.


Gwynn Gets Extension With Padres
They have shed virtually every one of their other high-priced players in the last year, but the San Diego Padres made sure yesterday that they would keep TONY GWYNN around for two years beyond the two years left on his existing contract.
The Padres and Gwynn agreed to an extension for the 1996 and '97 seasons for $8.5 million.
The agreement provides a salary of $4 million each year, plus an option for 1998, also at $4 million, or a $500,000 buyout.
Gwynn, who batted .358 in 1993 but missed winning his fifth National League batting title because ANDRES GALARRAGA hit .370, can earn an additional $500,000 in both '96 and '97 if he has 500 plate appearances.
The remaining two years of his existing contract will pay the 33-year-old outfielder salaries of $3.25 million and $4.25 million.


Dillard Is Seen as Among Bidders for Macy
Federated Department Stores' bid for R. H. Macy &amp; Company appears to have put Macy into play, putting pressure on others that are interested in the retailer to come up with competing plans.
Chief among them is Dillard Department Stores Inc., whose past advances had been rebuffed by Macy.
But Dillard is now said to be planning to enter the fray with a bid.


Public &amp; Private; Little Girl Lost
The year ended with every parent's worst nightmare played out over and over and over again, in the suburbs of St.
Louis, in Petaluma, Calif., in the small town of Litchfield, N.Y.
Sara Anne Wood set out on the short bike ride between her home and the church where her father is pastor, then simply disappeared.
Polly Klaas was having a slumber party when a stranger entered the house and carried her away while her mother slept.
Cassidy Senter went to visit a friend and never came home.


Judge Delays Ruling in L.I.R.R. Shooting Case
Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train last month, is competent to stand trial, a court-appointed psychologist and psychiatrist have concluded.
But after their findings were announced at a hearing this morning in Nassau County District Court, Judge Ira B. Warshawsky postponed ruling on the matter at the request of by Mr.
Ferguson's lawyer, Anthony J. Falanga.
Mr.
Falanaga said he wanted time to review the findings and discuss them with a psychologist he had retained to observe the examinations.


The Pop Life
Along with "Auld Lang Syne" and fireworks, top-10 lists have mushroomed into a cottage industry around the first of each year.
Those who pay attention will notice that pop critics don't share anything close to the unanimity that movie critics often have in their selections.
Among the favorite albums chosen by the four New York Times critics who regularly cover nonclassical music, there is no album comparable to "Schindler's List" or "The Piano" in popularity.
Critical tastes, in fact, seem to diverge more sharply this year than in previous top-10 roundups.
Here are the best albums of the year in the views of Jon Pareles, the chief pop critic; Stephen Holden; Peter Watrous, jazz critic, and Danyel Smith.


Stern Reportedly Rules Out Late-Night TV Talk Show
Howard Stern has decided not to do a late-night television talk program, an executive associated with the radio performer said yesterday.
On Friday night, Mr.
Stern did a New Year's Eve special that is expected, when all the accounting is done, to take in the most revenue ever for an entertainment event on pay-per-view television.
The content of that program, which was criticized for its raunchiness, may have been partly responsible for some cooling in discussions between Mr.
Stern and the Fox network, said the associate, who asked not to be named, but far more significant were recent actions by the Federal Communications Commission.


Settlement In Harlem Suit Over Odors
On its last day, the Dinkins administration agreed to pay $1.1 million to help compensate for the smelly sewage treatment plant the city built in Harlem, and gave community and environmental groups legal leverage intended to insure that the new Mayor would keep the promise of the old to curb odors from the plant.
In settling a lawsuit filed by two groups and several Harlem residents, the city said it would put $1.1 million in a trust fund to address the community's environmental and health concerns.
The plaintiffs, who will control the fund, said the money could be used for anything from a clinic for the respiratory ailments they say are endemic in the area to tree-planting.


Raise in Rent Aid Would Curb Homelessness; Voucher Experiments
To the Editor:
I read with interest your Dec. 20 article on a West Side Cares program in New York City that sells vouchers redeemable for food and necessities to those wishing to help the homeless and other panhandlers.


Two Wings, a Prayer and Backstage Help
Ellen McLaughlin is just now working on a play about the aviator Amelia Earhart.
It was commissioned some time ago by the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles and is called "Flying Blind," a name the playwright laughs at now, given the turn her life has taken.
"It is ironic," she said. "But I love flying. I like heights."
Good thing.
As an actress, Ms.
McLaughlin is the angel in "Angels in America," Tony Kushner's celebrated two-part AIDS fable at the Walter Kerr Theater, and she spends a great deal of her time on stage actually above it, suspended in the air, sometimes as high as 25 or 30 feet.


Eating Well
THE Food and Drug Administration is trying to come to grips with one of the most difficult public health issues: how to balance the interests of the unborn with the interests of the elderly.
The agency must decide whether to fortify the American food supply with folic acid, which helps to prevent birth defects but, at the same time, can mask pernicious anemia, a problem prevalent among the elderly.
Opinions on how to proceed cover the spectrum.


Off the Menu
Off the Menu, a new weekly column charting restaurant news and dining trends, begins today on page C2.


Snowing Gets Tough And They Get Going
On Monday night at 8:30, almost two hours before snow, sleet or freezing rain had touched pavement or windshield here, John Miskulin had already had his fill of the first snowstorm of 1994.
Standing at the front of the cavernous A. &amp; P. he helps to manage and gesturing wearily at the empty bakers' racks, he underscored the obvious, "Most of that stuff is gone." So was much of the milk and bottled water.
The snack aisles had been raided, too.
Cashiers drooped, having survived a tidal wave of shopping that crested about 6:30 P.M.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; How to sell safe sex? A new campaign treats it as if it were a product.
IN producing a campaign that is the frankest, hippest and most provocative anti-AIDS effort ever by the Federal Government, the creative executives at Ogilvy &amp; Mather South approached the work as product advertising rather than as public service advertising.
The product?
The use of latex condoms to prevent the spread of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and other sexually transmitted diseases.


Clinton Puzzle: How to Delay Welfare Reform Yet Seem to Pursue It
The Clinton Administration is trying to devise a strategy that would allow it to appear to be pushing for change in the welfare system, even while delaying action on a bill until the President's health care plan has a chance to clear Congress.
The effort to delay welfare legislation so it does not interfere with the Administration's primary goal of health care, while not acknowledged publicly, has been evident in a number of recent Administration actions and was discussed at a Cabinet meeting on Monday, officials said.
They said the strategy would make it unlikely that a major welfare bill would pass Congress this year.


Ewing Goes In and Starks Goes Wild to Beat Magic
It was exciting, it was intense, and it was exactly what the Knicks needed.
John Starks equaled a career-high with 39 points and carried the offense at crucial moments.
Patrick Ewing (26 points, 19 rebounds) used guile, experience and determination to counter the overpowering strength of Shaquille O'Neal (26 points, 5 rebounds).
And Greg Anthony (13 points, 10 rebounds) continued to play steadily, despite the point-guard trade speculation surrounding the Knicks.


METRO DIGEST
BLACK DIALECT VS. STANDARD ENGLISH
More than a decade after educators first grappled with the issue, school districts in New York and elsewhere are still seeking the best way to teach standard English to students who usually use black dialect.
A1.
STORM DISRUPTS TRAVEL ALONG EAST COAST
A blast of snow, sleet and freezing rain closed major highways, disrupted air traffic and halted trains from Boston to Washington.
A1.


Food Notes
Greenmarkets in Winter
From now until spring, 18 of the city's Greenmarkets will remain open.
In Manhattan they are the markets at Union Square, on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays; 57th Street and Ninth Avenue and Washington Market Park, on Wednesdays and Saturdays; World Trade Center, on Thursdays; City Hall and Federal Plaza, on Fridays, and Intermediate School 44, on Sundays.
In Brooklyn, Cadman Plaza West will be open Tuesdays and Saturdays, and Grand Army Plaza will remain open on Saturdays.
For more information: (212) 477-3220.
Peanut Butter or Spread?
Peter Pan Smart Choice Peanut Butter, made with less fat than any other peanut butter, is starting to appear in supermarkets.
The new product has the same number of calories per serving as other peanut butters -- 190 calories for two tablespoons -- but has 12 grams of fat instead of 16.


Frank Belknap Long, an Author Of Science Fiction, Is Dead at 90
Frank Belknap Long, the author of "The Hounds of Tindalos," "The Horror From the Hills" and other works of fantasy, the supernatural and science fiction, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 90 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Long was born in New York City and attended New York University.
As an adolescent he published a story, "The Eye Above the Mantel," that caught the attention of the writer H. P. Lovecraft, who wrote to Mr.
Long in praise of the story, thus beginning a lifelong friendship.
Lovecraft helped Mr.
Long place his early stories in the magazine Weird Tales, which published many of Mr.
Long's tales over the years, including "The Ocean Leech," "The Dog-Eared God," "The Hounds of Tindalos," "A Visitor From Egypt" and "The Horror From the Hills." Work in Science Fiction
In the late 30's, Mr.
Long turned his hand to science fiction, writing for Astounding Science Fiction.
He also contributed horror stories to Unknown (later retitled Unknown Worlds).


Northeaster Rolls In, Shutting Down Services
Varnishing sidewalks and streets with a treacherous icy coating, a wintry blast of snow, sleet and freezing rain closed major highways, disrupted air traffic and halted trains from Boston to Washington yesterday.
New York City officials deployed a rumbling platoon of plows -- 360 in all -- and spread 16 tons of salt on the streets.
To make matters worse, a 115-year-old water main that burst before dawn flooded a Manhattan subway station and disrupted rush-hour service for more than 250,000 passengers.
One death was reported in the city yesterday, a 47-year-old contractor who slipped and fell on the ice and hit his head against his snowplow, the police said.


Quaker State Drops Grey From Account
The Quaker State Corporation said yesterday that it had consolidated its estimated $25 million lubricant products and services advertising account at Chiat/Day of Venice, Calif., by dismissing Grey Advertising of New York.
Grey had handled the motor oil portion of the account, with billings estimated at $17 million, since 1986.
"We needed something new and different," Robert Cohen, Quaker State's executive vice president of marketing in Oil City, Pa., said, adding that a 90-day review, involving only Grey and Chiat/Day, began after Chiat/Day approached the company about a motor oil project.


Market Place; Microsoft's hypergrowth could ease, some analysts say.
LAST year was not a great year for Microsoft stock.
The Redmond, Wash., software powerhouse rose above $92 during two months but ended yesterday at $80.50, up 37.5 cents.
Indeed, while Microsoft's chairman and co-founder, William H. Gates 3d, and Melinda French were being married last week in Hawaii, the company's stock faltered again slightly after several analysts said they expected the company's remarkable 48 percent earnings growth rate for the last four years to slow in 1994.


Personal Health
ALTHOUGH winter may be the prime season for falls, among older people falling is a year-round hazard that is costly, frightening, debilitating and sometimes even life-threatening.
As people age, the risk of falling rises linearly and the risk of injury from a fall rises exponentially.
One in three adults 65 or older falls each year.
Among those over 75 who live independently, a quarter of the falls result in a serious injury.
Falls are the immediate reason for 40 percent of all admissions to nursing homes, and they are the sixth-leading cause of death for people over 70.


Charles Scott Sykes; Lawyer, 87
Charles Scott Sykes, a New York municipal bond lawyer and a retired partner of Wilkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, died on Sunday in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 87.
His family said he had had a long illness.


Bohbot to Divide Business Into 2 Units
Bohbot Communications Inc., a marketing services company that specializes in advertising to children, said yesterday that it would split into two units, dividing its media and entertainment operations.
One unit, Bohbot Media Worldwide, will handle all media planning and buying services for the company's Chicago, New York and San Francisco offices.
The other, Bohbot Entertainment Worldwide, will be responsible for television program distribution, public relations, promotions, licensing and merchandising.


Administration Proposes Plan to Make It More Difficult for Criminals to Buy Guns
Asserting that some Federal regulations to control gun sales are so weak that they are "ridiculous" and even "reckless," Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen unveiled an anti-crime plan today that he said would make it "harder for the criminal to get guns and easier for us to find criminals who use them."
The centerpiece of the Clinton Administration plan, which was formulated in recent weeks after polls found a rapid rise in public concern about violence with guns, is a proposal that Congress approve a steep increase in the fee gun dealers must pay the Treasury for a license to sell firearms.


Mets Offering Coleman for McReynolds
The Mets, trying to resolve the Vince Coleman problem, are seeking to trade their all-but-banished player for yet another enigmatic outfielder, Kevin McReynolds, formerly of the Mets.
Talks between the Mets and the Royals were confirmed by Coleman's agent and a Kansas City Royals executive last night.
Herk Robinson, the Royals' general manager, refused to specify names, but acknowledged that the clubs were talking.
And, Robinson said, "We have had some conversations regarding players who could be characterized as left fielders."


Auto Makers' Sales Rose 8.4% in 1993
The American auto industry finished 1993 on a strong note with sales in December roughly 5 percent ahead of 1992 levels and overall sales for the year up about 8.4 percent.
Several foreign manufacturers, including Volkswagen and Mercedes-Benz, had not finished tallying their numbers late today, preventing an exact accounting.
However, sales analysts at the Ford Motor Company estimated total industry sales of 8.6 million cars for 1993 and 5.6 million light trucks for a total of 14.2 million vehicles, the best year since 1989 and up from 13.1 million in 1992.


Rams' Bettis Gets Rookie Award
JEROME BETTIS, whose 1,429 yards rank sixth in National Football League history for a rookie, was the overwhelming choice yesterday as the Associated Press Offensive Rookie of the Year.
Bettis, the first-round pick of the Los Angeles Rams (10th over all), rushed for seven touchdowns. (AP)


Wine Talk
DOES zinfandel go well with kudu? Or leopard? Elephant? And baboon, what about baboon?
Here in the far southwest corner of Botswana, in Southern Africa, zinfandel goes with any of a hundred different wild creatures


Report Sees a Recovery In New York's Economy
New York State's economy is recovering after a five-year slump that was far worse in the Northeast than elsewhere in the nation, Vincent Tese, director of the State Economic Development Office, said yesterday.
"We're not out of the woods yet, but the trail looks a lot smoother and wider now than it did a year ago," said Mr.
Tese, who is in charge of New York's programs to support business and retain jobs.


A Giant Recalls McMahon Heyday
David Tate of the Giants was asked about Jim McMahon.
"Which Jim McMahon?" he said.
"The offbeat one who likes everyone to think he is old and beaten up and has no arm? Or the one who is smart and tough and wins games?"


Executive Changes
GOODYEAR TIRE AND RUBBER CO., Akron, Ohio, named Hoyt M. Wells, its president and chief operating officer, vice chairman.
He will continue as chief operating officer, and the position of president will remain vacant.
MBIA INC., an insurer of municipal securities, said David H. Elliott, its president and chief executive, had also become chairman.
He succeeds William O. Bailey, who will remain a board member.


Sun Healthcare to Acquire Mediplex
The Sun Healthcare Group, a nursing-home operator, announced yesterday its intent to buy the Mediplex Group, a provider of varied medical services, in a cash and stock deal valued at about $320 million.
The proposed merger would create one of the 10 largest nursing-home chains in the nation, with particular dominance in the Northeast.
Cost pressure from insurers and Government reform efforts are driving a wave of such health care consolidations.


Check It Out: Bush Is Settling In


Lingering Conflict in the Schools: Black Dialect vs. Standard Speech
In the troubled East New York section of Brooklyn, Stanley Evans constantly corrects his students' English and lectures on the difference between the language of the office and the language of the streets.
Just a few miles away in a similar neighborhood, another English teacher, Cathie Wright-Lewis, refuses to fault her already overwhelmed students; instead, she concentrates on being a role model, using crisp diction and good grammar.


Sports of The Times; Shattering Shaquille's Slamfest
A NEW television commercial for a long-distance telephone service concludes with Shaquille O'Neal's father hanging up the line in a phone booth.
In a parody of his son's signature dunk, Phillip Harrison slams the receiver down.
The glass enclosure shatters.
"And you wonder," says Daddy Shaq, "where he gets it from."
Actually, we don't have to wonder why Shaquille O'Neal doesn't quite get it.


For Car Buyers, Smoking Is No Longer Standard
Having weighed Americans' vices, the Chrysler Corporation has determined that they prefer caffeine and sugar to nicotine.
The company's next new family sedan will be the first mass-market car since the days of wooden wheels and fold-down windshields to come without an ashtray.
In its place will be an additional cup holder.
Old habits may die hard, particularly in Detroit, but when the designers of the new Chrysler compact sedan tried to cram in all the doodads that buyers crave, they found themselves scratching their heads over that murky little compartment with a designation only an auto executive or a Pentagon analyst could concoct.


Jets' Thomas, Never a Star, Says He Didn't Get Roles
After four years of going nowhere with the Jets, Blair Thomas is looking forward to going someplace else to prove he's a good running back.
Thomas is an unrestricted free agent, and the Jets made their decision about their starter for the future when they gave Johnny Johnson a two-year, $5 million contract extension two weeks ago.


An Alice's Restaurant Chicken Dish, Updated
HERE is a chicken recipe inspired by Alice Brock of Arlo Guthrie fame.
Years after she had become the cult hero of "Alice's Restaurant," she was still a good cook and had a wonderful restaurant and inn in the Berkshires.
After interviewing her once and tasting her food, she gave me permission to use one of her many good dishes in a cookbook.
Leafing through the book the other day, I came across her Chinese chicken recipe and thought that, with a little adjustment, it would fit right into a column about food that tastes good, can be prepared quickly and is low in fat.


Viacom Seen Wavering on Paramount
With three days left for Viacom Inc. to raise its bid against QVC Network Inc. in the battle for Paramount Communications, Viacom sent out mixed signals about such a prospect yesterday.
Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone is "leaning against going forward," a person close to the company said yesterday.
But people close to Viacom and the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, an equity partner in the offer, acknowledged that talks about a possible capital infusion continued into last night.
No Firm Structure, Yet
Viacom still has no firm structure for a new bid, the person close to Viacom said, adding that several of Viacom's top executives had also opposed a merger because they felt it could deprive their operations of capital for expansion.


Mexican Rebels Are Retreating; Issues Are Not
The peasant guerrilla army that burst into Mexican life with the New Year retreated today from this town and others it had occupied in the southern state of Chiapas as army troops moved in.
Fighting continued around the city of San Cristobal de las Casas and the town of Ocosingo as rebels from the force, which calls itself the Zapatista Army of National Liberation, battled soldiers backed by planes and helicopter gunships.
Military officials said at least 93 people had been killed since the rebels seized the state's second-largest city and three sizable towns just hours after the North American Free Trade Agreement went into effect.


Officials Scurry To Keep Pats
The Patriots are still in New England, and Massachusetts officials are trying to keep them there.
Gov.
William Weld, House Speaker Charles F. Flaherty and Senate President William M. Bulger have agreed on a bill to pay for the nearly $700 million Megaplex, a convention center and domed 70,000-seat football stadium in downtown Boston.
They hope to have a vote next Monday.


No More Mr. President, Just a Texas Nice Guy
As Barbara Bush has told it, "George is the best little dishwasher in Texas." George Bush recounts it differently: "Barbara makes the bed. I make the coffee. And Millie does the dishes."
But however they divide domestic chores these days, the former President and First Lady insist that they and their famous dog are home in Houston to stay.
And nearly one year after an involuntary departure from the White House, they insist that they are utterly content to be here in their new red-brick house on West Oak Drive South.


With New Job, Official Is Merck Heir Apparent
Moving rapidly to adapt to sweeping changes in the prescription drug market, Merck &amp; Company named Martin J. Wygod yesterday to head its $5 billion prescription drug businesses in the United States and Canada.
Mr.
Wygod is a former Wall Street investor who sold his managed-drug- care company, Medco Containment Services, to Merck for $6 billion last year.
He became Merck's second- most-powerful executive and the favorite in the race to succeed Dr.
P.
Roy Vagelos as chairman and chief executive.


Funds Offered By B'nai B'rith
B'nai B'rith, the Jewish charitable organization, announced yesterday that it had started five mutual funds and that a portion of the profits would be donated to the organization.
Bankers Trust of New York manages the funds, which were started on Nov. 15, but announced yesterday.
Two invest in tax-exempt securities, two invest in Treasury issues, and one is a general money market fund.
Investors do not have to be members of B'nai B'rith.


Economy Dampens Ardor of Brazilians
In a tropical land soaked with sensuality, economic anxieties are tarnishing a point of Brazilian national pride: bedroom performance.
Harried by annual inflation of 2,500 percent, a national record, sexually active Brazilians are now having sexual relations 1.6 times a week, according to a survey of 2,631 adults conducted by the Brasmarket polling group.


California Regulator Seeks A Halt to Prudential Deal
The biggest class-action settlement offered by Prudential Securities in the scandal involving investors in 35 oil and gas limited partnerships has run into a significant roadblock.
California's top securities regulator on Monday night filed a letter calling for a temporary halt in hearings on the company's $120 million settlement of the class action involving the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships, which raised about $1.4 billion from 130,000 investors.


Clothes Make the Mayor a Hero to His Tailors
WHILE it has been reasonably propounded that no man can be a hero to his valet, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is clearly a great man to his haberdashers.
"Oh, yes," said Sue Haber, the fashion director of Bancroft, "over the 20 years that he's been coming here to shop we've seen that he is a very moderate man and a very tasteful man." Ms.
Haber, who also projects moderation and tastefulness, said that at times during this span Mr.
Giuliani would drop in to the chain's flagship store on Madison and 45th Street several times a week.
"You know the Republican County Committee is right upstairs in the building and maybe he stopped here on his way there," Ms.
Haber said.


Parking Rules
Because of the weather, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended today in New York City, including the Bay Ridge and Dyker Heights neighborhoods in Brooklyn.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Social Security Pays Its Way, and More
To the Editor:
Let me add a twist to "Elderly Paid Dues, but Get the Brushoff" (letter, Dec. 25) by Rachel M. Lauer.


Rhodes's Torrid Shooting Paces Kentucky
Kentucky 107, Vanderbilt 82
Rod Rhodes hit his first 7 shots of the second half as No. 4 Kentucky went on a 29-12 tear and coasted to a 107-82 victory over No. 22 Vanderbilt in a Southeastern Conference opener last night at Lexington, Ky.


California Regulator Seeks A Halt to Prudential Deal
The biggest class-action settlement offered by Prudential Securities in the scandal involving investors in 35 oil and gas limited partnerships has run into a significant roadblock.
California's top securities regulator on Monday night filed a letter calling for a temporary halt in hearings on the company's $120 million settlement of the class action involving the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships, which raised about $1.4 billion from 130,000 investors.


The Pop Life
Along with "Auld Lang Syne" and fireworks, top-10 lists have mushroomed into a cottage industry around the first of each year.
Those who pay attention will notice that pop critics don't share anything close to the unanimity that movie critics often have in their selections.
Among the favorite albums chosen by the four New York Times critics who regularly cover nonclassical music, there is no album comparable to "Schindler's List" or "The Piano" in popularity.
Critical tastes, in fact, seem to diverge more sharply this year than in previous top-10 roundups.
Here are the best albums of the year in the views of Jon Pareles, the chief pop critic; Stephen Holden; Peter Watrous, jazz critic, and Danyel Smith.
"Exile in Guyville," Liz Phair (Matador).
Sex and love, betrayal and revenge, hope and resignation from a matter-of-fact songwriter whose guitar riffs are sturdier than her relationships.
"Adventures in Afropea I," Zap Mama (Luaka Bop/Warner Brothers).
Women's unaccompanied voices ricochet across rhythms and continents, bouncing from pygmy polyphony to automotive sputters, full of playfulness, intelligence and ingenuity.
"Siamese Dream," Smashing Pumpkins (Virgin).
Collegiate rock melts into psychedelia with huge fuzz-toned guitar riffs, meticulous arrangements that surge and drift and stomp, and lyrics that question as much as they proclaim.
"Reachin' (A Refutation of Time and Space)," Digable Planets (Pendulum/Elektra).
Jazz vamps, rolling along on acoustic bass lines, carry smart, amiable raps from a group that welcomes everyone to the party.
"In Utero," Nirvana (Geffen).
Sickened by its own success, Nirvana drops the gloss of its multimillion-selling "Nevermind" and reverts to punky rawness, with blasts of guitar, howls of confusion and melody despite it all.
"Traffic From Paradise," Rickie Lee Jones (Warner Brothers).
Visions of angels and echoes of Van Morrison's "Astral Weeks" on an album so fragile and hopeful that it's completely unfashionable.
"Star," by Belly (Sire).
Transparent but steely songs that bend clean-lined folk-rock into elusive parables about female archetypes from daughters and sisters to witches and dolls.
"Zooropa," U2 (Island).
U2 confirms its metamorphosis, leaving behind anthem-mongering and shifting toward fractured, ambiguous, eccentrically textured, media-saturated riddles.
"Janet," Janet Jackson (Virgin).
A slick big-budget album that surveys dance-floor trends and current pop, held together not by a larger-than-life personality but by its determination to seduce.
"Live MCMXCIII," Velvet Underground (Sire).
The short-lived reunion of the definitive New York rockers showed why bands everywhere are still stealing ideas from their lean, unsparing, elemental tales of the urban demimonde.


AT LUNCH WITH: Michael Crichton; Scarier Than Dinosaurs: Men vs. Women
The waitresses and the owner of Takanawa welcome Michael Crichton enthusiastically as he walks in with a nod and a smile.
It's his favorite luncheon spot in town -- a small, unfancy Japanese restaurant less than a mile from his office in Santa Monica, Calif.
"In this restaurant, the then owner came up to me with a review of 'Rising Sun,' and said, 'Is this you?' and I said, 'Yeah,' and he said, 'People are saying I shouldn't be your friend,' and I said, 'I'd like you to read it,' " recalled the author of such best sellers as "Jurassic Park" and "The Andromeda Strain."


The Pop Life
Along with "Auld Lang Syne" and fireworks, top-10 lists have mushroomed into a cottage industry around the first of each year.
Those who pay attention will notice that pop critics don't share anything close to the unanimity that movie critics often have in their selections.
Among the favorite albums chosen by the four New York Times critics who regularly cover nonclassical music, there is no album comparable to "Schindler's List" or "The Piano" in popularity.
Critical tastes, in fact, seem to diverge more sharply this year than in previous top-10 roundups.
Here are the best albums of the year in the views of Jon Pareles, the chief pop critic; Stephen Holden; Peter Watrous, jazz critic, and Danyel Smith.


Sarajevo Family's Fate: Shell Kills 3 Generations
At No. 2 Omladinska Street today, the gurgling Miljacka River could be heard through the gaping hole in the Dragnic apartment's wall and the neighbors sobbed as they spoke of the dead, old and young, and family meals, New Year's parties and card games they would never share again.
On Monday afternoon at about 3:30, a howitzer shell fired by Serbian gunners on the nearby slopes of Mount Trebevic blew apart Mensur Dragnic's apartment, killing his wife, Nadja, 68; his son, Veseljko, 49; his daughter Dzenana, 42, and son-in-law, Adnan Tatarevic, 41; and their children, Nadi, 16, and Asija, 10..


Don't Cut the Hotel Tax -- Repeal It
Gov.
Mario Cuomo's budget for the coming year will propose cutting New York State's tax on higher-priced hotel rooms, according to officials in his administration.
That would be a smart move and a relatively inexpensive way to boost business in New York City.
But it is not smart enough.
The state tax should be repealed altogether, and quickly.
Taxes on Big Apple hotel rooms are the highest in the world, and by far the highest in America.
City and state taxes on an overnight stay average 21.25 percent.
That is more than half again as steep as the next-most-taxed cities -- Chicago, Atlanta, Dallas and Houston -- and roughly triple the average for the nation's 25 busiest hotel markets.


3 Lives Converge In a Killing
The gunman ordered the two 18-year-olds out of the 1993 Jeep Wrangler after a three-mile ride, and told them to lie face down in the snow, behind a pile of wood chips.
He put away the long-barreled pistol just before giving the instructions.
His words came in a calm voice, recalled Scott Nappi, one of the teen-agers, in an interview today from his bed in Nyack Hospital.


Needed: Democracy in New York
The swearing-in last week of Assemblyman Oliver Koppell as New York's new State Attorney General serves as a reminder of how very undemocratic the process of filling such vacancies is in the state.
The job became available because the duly elected Attorney General, Robert Abrams, resigned to go into private practice.
When vacancies occur in statewide offices, it would make sense to hold a special election.
But nothing's that easy in New York.
The State Constitution provides for a less open practice: selection by the State Legislature, instead of election by the people.


Civilian Life Begins With Unpacking, of Course


Giuliani? Forget It. Give Me Tuscany!
THE bulging waistline is a notorious side effect of time spent along the manic smorgasbord of political campaigns.
So it could have been folly to seek relief from the heartburn of covering the New York City mayoral election by retreating to cooking school in Italy, where long knives had a different meaning but eating and drinking produced equally predictable results.
Nevertheless, I began plotting just such an escape last October, too tired to think hard, yet awake enough to know I'd crave a change of venue after Election Day.
A solo vacation loomed as lonely, and organized tours, cruises or trips repelled.
As I pondered how to make a week of self-indulgence feel like self-improvement, inspiration dawned.


Let New Corporation Control Air Traffic, U.S. Says
In an effort to improve efficiency and reduce airline delays and confusion, the Clinton Administration plans to ask Congress to create a Government-owned corporation like Amtrak to operate the nation's air traffic control system, Administration officials said today.
Under the proposal, the Federal Aviation Administration, which now operates the air traffic control system, would continue to oversee safety standards and would promulgate and enforce regulation of controllers.


The New Art Appreciation, Parental Division: Hang It
AGENERATION ago, it would have been a candidate for the garbage can, but now it's matted and framed and hangs on a wall in the living room.
Children's art is being seen and heard about, with parents around the country treating finger paintings and watercolors by their offspring much as one would treat work by an Old Master.


Cost Analysis Doesn't Apply to Breast Cancer; Link to Animal Fat
To the Editor:
There is much debate about mammograms for women younger than 50 (front page, Dec. 27), but virtually no discussion of preventing this terrible disease.
Scientific studies have documented that breast cancer is strongly connected to fat, especially animal fat, in the diet.


Review/Television; 4 Weeks Probation for Police Drama
Barry Levinson's "Homicide: Life on the Street" is television's other great new cop show.
But while Steven Bochco's "N.Y.P.D. Blue," with its "viewer discretion advised" tag, has settled securely into its Tuesday slot on ABC, "Homicide," not especially interested in nudity, has had a shakier time on NBC.
Despite very favorable reviews about a year ago, "Homicide" had weak ratings and slipped into the limbo called hiatus.
It's now back for a four-week run that will seal its fate.
Don't miss it.
NBC is giving the series a strong time slot, Thursdays at 10 P.M., immediately after "Seinfeld" and "Frasier," in the "L.A. Law" slot.
And the producers of "Homicide" are clearly going for broke, with strong scripts and powerful performances.
The feel of the show is less jittery; hand-held cameras and microediting techniques are less intrusive.
There's more of a willingness to let the actors control the scenes, and, this being one of the strongest casts on television, they perform brilliantly as members of a police homicide unit in Baltimore.


Topics of The Times; Lost Berlin
Say "Berlin" and the immediate association is scarcely with classical grace, dreaming spires or Italianate charm.
But those were the visible qualities of the Prussian capital from 1815 to 1848, in good part thanks to an architect of genius named Karl Friedrich Schinkel.
This lost Berlin was overwhelmed by an imperial building boom and then battered by World War II air raids that leveled a third of the city.
Schinkel's Berlin is recalled to life in an exhibition at 18 West 86th street, the new Manhattan home of Bard College's Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts.
His Berlin and Potsdam, here portrayed on porcelain vases, are romantic visions, with villas and palaces set in verdant parks shaped by a gifted landscape designer, Peter Joseph Lenne.
Photographs document the present state of buildings that survived or were restored during Berlin's years of cold war division.


Disney Venture With Ziff-Davis
Hoping to exploit the growth in sales of personal computers to households with children, the Walt Disney Company and the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company are starting a magazine for parents who want to introduce their children to computers.
Titled Family PC, the magazine will combine Disney's experience in children's publishing with Ziff's expertise in computer magazines.
Scheduled for publication in the fall, Family PC is aimed at the 12 million families with children and personal computers.


Electric Fields Create Nebulous Peril but Real Fear on L.I.
When the State Attorney General's office reported last summer that electromagnetic fields from high-voltage power lines above the Woodmere Middle School were among the strongest recorded at any school in New York, anxious parents swung into action.
Petitions were circulated, school board members were grilled and meetings with utility company officials were organized, all in an effort to learn more about the fields and their links, if any, to cancer.
"You had a lot of angry parents," recalled Sherry Einaugler, president of the Parent-Teachers Association at the school, where a steel transmission tower sits in the parking lot, about 100 feet from the main entrance.


Outflanking G.O.P.
By calling for tax cuts, a crackdown on crime and a welfare program that emphasizes work, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, once the darling of liberal Democrats, sought today to outflank the Republicans who want to hang him this election year from the twin nooses of joblessness and crime.
Days before he may announce a bid for re-election, the Governor used his 12th State of the State Message to systematically shore up each of his most distinct political vulnerabilities.
In each case, he anticipated the criticisms capable of damaging him most severely and developed proposals to undercut them.


Board Appears Ready to Let Parents Make Call on Condoms
The New York City Board of Education appeared ready yesterday to give parents the right to prevent their children from receiving condoms in high school health programs set up to prevent the spread of AIDS.
No formal vote was taken on the measure, which has created a deep split among board members and divided much of the public over the last two years.
But during a lengthy public meeting it was clear that at least four of the seven members of the board favored the change, which is to be taken up at a formal vote, possibly as early as next week.


Borden Halves Its Dividend And Puts Units Up for Sale
Borden Inc. dropped the other shoe yesterday, but Wall Street may want its socks as well.
Three weeks after its directors replaced Anthony S. D'Amato, the chairman and chief executive, Borden said it would cut its quarterly dividend in half for the second time in six months to 7.5 cents a share and would sell operations, including several well-known brands, that produced $1.25 billion in revenue in 1993, nearly 20 percent of its total sales.


I.B.M.-Apple Partnership Adds Hewlett
The Hewlett-Packard Company will announce today that it is joining Taligent Inc., an I.B.M.-Apple alliance to develop a new generation of computer operating software.
Founded in 1992, Taligent is mainly an effort to prevent the Microsoft Corporation from ruling the market for powerful software used by corporations, as it already does in personal-computer software.
Recently, some industry executives have doubted the commitment of I.B.M. andApple Computer, both suffering from financial strains, to the project.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday, and in some late editions on Friday, about the literary and entertainment agent Irving (Swifty) Lazar attributed one business deal to him in error.
The sale of the movie rights to "My Fair Lady" was negotiated by Harold Freedman, a literary agent who died in 1966.


Review/City Ballet; Differing Perspectives on the Spirit of Romance
George Balanchine's "Haieff Divertimento" and Peter Martins's "Barber Violin Concerto," presented by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, are essentially examinations of the Romantic spirit.
In the Balanchine ballet, set to a jazzy, sometimes hauntingly melodic score by Aleksei Haieff, the princely Romantic seeker and his elusive muse are a thoroughly modern pair of youngsters who might have just arrived from a tennis game.
It is difficult to reconcile the mostly bouncy choreography for the corps with the extreme simplicity of the man's gestures and of the central pas de deux and woman's solo.


Basing Gifts To Neediest On a Custom
Of the thousands of checks sent to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund each year, the majority are for round sums -- $10, $50, $100 or $1,000.
But the parade of even numbers is occasionally interrupted by an oddity -- a check for $227.10, or $144, or some other amount that might well seem plucked from the air.
Many contributors, it turns out, have established unusual charity guidelines for themselves or their families, often based on their ages, important dates or other significant numbers from their lives.


Aqueduct Winter: Snow, Sand, Simulcasts
At Aqueduct in New York, it was 32 degrees and snow was swirling.
At Gulfstream Park in Florida, it was 65 and sunny.
This was the start of the new era of simulcast betting in New York, and it opened yesterday with seven live races at Aqueduct interspersed with five televised races from Gulfstream.
The idea is to provide work for the horses who spend the winter in New York, action for the people who bet on them and tax revenue for the state officials who authorized the widespread use of races on television.


Abner Greshler, 83, Agent and Producer
Abner J. Greshler, a talent agent and producer, died on Dec. 20 at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 83 and lived in Brentwood, Calif.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Violet.


Mace Is Sprayed in Class
A 12-year-old student at Junior High School 113, at 3710 Barnes Avenue in Williamsbridge, the Bronx, sprayed a can of Chemical Mace during a social studies class yesterday, sickening students and a teacher, said Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.
Fourteen students who complained of breathing difficulties and nausea were treated at nearby hospitals and released, she said.


New Levy on Parking Hits Taxers Themselves
When the time comes for senators and representatives to pay their income taxes this April, they will probably find they owe several hundred dollars more than they might have expected.
They will have no one to blame but themselves.


Actors In The Macy Drama
When Federated Department Stores became Macy's senior creditor Friday, it set in motion what may be the last of the spectacular fights over failed leveraged buyouts.
The alliances are still fluid, and there are many scenes left to play, but the leading characters are taking their places on the stage.
ALISON LEIGH COWAN MACY'S MANAGEMENT
Once part of the Federated team, Myron E. Ullman 3d, 47, has held senior posts at R.H.
Macy &amp; Company since November 1988, where he has struggled to live down doubts about his abilities as a financier-turned-merchant.
Now the chairman and chief executive, Mr.
Ullman has reacted coolly to Federated's keen interest in Macy; he wants credit for saving a beloved New York institution himself.
His aim is to convince creditors that he can draft a stand-alone plan of reorganization as good as any a suitor like Federated might offer.
Failing that, he might split off Macy's Northeastern stores as a separate entity, with him at the helm.


Review/Opera; Two New Leads (Almost) in 'Les Troyens'
The Metropolitan Opera tried to present new singers in two of the central roles in "Les Troyens" on Tuesday evening, but the change did not take.
After two of the three acts -- and with only one substantial scene left for Aeneas to sing -- the company announced that the tenor, Paul Frey, had a throat infection and could not continue.
Gary Lakes, who sang the role when the production opened last month, took over for Aeneas's farewell.
A singer whose voice is properly supported can sing through a sore throat, and in the dead of winter this is more common than audiences usually know.
The problems with Mr.
Frey's Aeneas could not all be ascribed to illness.
From the start, his sound was powerful enough to cut through Berlioz's hefty orchestration, but he sounded fuzzy, as though he were singing with a mouthful of cotton.
Persistent pitch problems and stiff acting also afflicted his reading, but it was undoubtedly the cracked notes in the passionate duet with Dido at the end of the second act that persuaded Mr.
Frey to abandon the effort.


Council Chief to Oppose Giuliani On Decentralizing of Government
City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, now the most powerful Democrat at City Hall, said yesterday that he would resist any attempt by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to give more power to borough presidents or turn over city work to private companies without proof it would save money.
The decentralization of government and the privatization of some city services have been cornerstones of the new Mayor's agenda.
But the Speaker drew the line on those issues, even as he laid out a legislative agenda that on some other fronts was striking for its appeal to the same middle-class voters that swept the Republican-Liberal Mayor into office.


Bucks Bring Out the Lackluster in the Nets
It is a good thing the Nets have two days off before they play the Bucks again.
New Jersey could use the rest after its lackluster 100-91 loss to the Bucks tonight before 12,319 fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Vin Baker, the Bucks' 6-foot-11-inch first-round draft choice out of the University of Hartford, poured in 29 points, grabbed 12 rebounds and blocked 4 shots, all career highs.


More Thoughts on Home
To the Home Section:  In response to Erica Jong's "No Place Like Home" (Dec. 30) in which she contends that "writers tend to be addicted to houses . . .  [ which ]  exist to be a steward for our dreams":
and some of us write  in out-houses --  Without houses  For our mind is  our castle  Our thoughts  are our rooms  Our visions bloom  Our insights soar  Not where shall  we write?
But -- we shall write  some more!
JOAN LANG


Calendar: Innovative Glasswork
Glass America, 1994  Heller Gallery, 71 Greene Street (Spring Street); (212) 966-5948.
A survey of new works by 40 American artists working in glass includes trendsetters like Stephen Powell, who has taken a classic Italian technique, blowing with bits of cane, over the top.
Starts Saturday and runs through Jan. 30.
Open Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
On Saturday, from 1 to 5 P.M., there will be glass-blowing demonstrations at the New York Experimental Glass Workshop in Brooklyn.
Free bus between the gallery and the workshop from 12:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Summer Plans  92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
Two camp fairs, each featuring at least 30 accredited camps, will be held on Sunday and on Feb. 6, from noon to 4 P.M.
No charge.
Design on Stage  Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street; (212) 685-0008.
Two exhibitions related to stage design start on Tuesday and run through April 10.
Drawings include an Erte design for the Ziegfeld Follies and a drawing by Jo Mielziner of a set featuring the Brooklyn Bridge for a production of Maxwell Anderson's play "Winterset." Open Tuesday through Friday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Suggested contribution is $5; $3, for those 65 and older, students and children 12 and younger.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday, about an effort by California's securities regulator to halt hearings temporarily on a $120 million class-action settlement by Prudential Securities, misstated the scope of the brokerage firm's limited partnership scandal.
It involves hundreds of partnerships that invested in real estate, oil wells and other assets, not just 35 oil and gas limited partnerships.


No Headline
If things go on like this, I'll be 20 in a few years time.
If it turns out to be another Lebanon, as they keep saying, I'll be 30.
Gone will be my childhood.
Gone my youth.
Gone my life.
And I'll die and this war still won't be over. - ZLATA FILIPOVIC, a young Bosnian girl writing in her diary.  [ A1:2. ]


Kmart Plan Reduces Profits in 1993
The Kmart Corporation announced today that it would reduce its 1993 after-tax earnings by $850 million for the cost of closing and relocating more of its stores.
It also said it planned public stock offerings for four of its specialty divisions.
Working to turn back inroads made by Wal-Mart, Home Depot and other mass merchandising chains, Kmart, the country's second-largest retailer behind Wal-Mart, had begun a $3 billion program in 1990 to renovate, expand and relocate virtually all its 2,200 stores in the United States.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 31
Dec. 24
Jan. 1
1993
1993
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.6
7.6
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.4
3.2
Gasoline stocks
224.4
224.5
215.2
Distillate stocks
145.0
143.0
141.3
Crude imports, daily
6.6
6.0
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.5
2.1
Crude stocks
341.6
347.9
322.0
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
92.0
90.4
86.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


National Endowment Cuts Theater Training
The National Endowment for the Arts, responding to a budget cut by Congress earlier this year, is eliminating its 20-year-old Professional Theater Training Program, which supports 16 of the nation's premier drama schools, including the Juilliard School, the Yale School of Drama and the New York University Tisch School of the Arts.
There has been no formal announcement of the endowment's action, but some schools have been informed by letter of the cutbacks and endowment officials yesterday confirmed them.


Vietnam: An Outdated Embargo
Put aside, for a moment, the emotional claims of a war a quarter-century ago that nearly tore America apart.
The best reason to end the U.S. economic embargo on Vietnam is that it no longer serves American interests.
With the rest of the world trading freely with Hanoi, the embargo punishes American businesses far more than it punishes the Vietnamese.
And if the embargo were effective, it would be perverse.
Present Vietnamese economic and foreign policies warrant encouragement, not punishment.


2 Men Plead Guilty In Illegal Alien Case
The two top-ranking figures aboard the Golden Venture, the freighter that ran aground off Queens last June with nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard, pleaded guilty yesterday to reduced charges in plea deals.
Lawyers in the case said the deals call for the two men -- the owner of record and the captain -- to cooperate with investigators seeking those who are believed to be the organizers of the smuggling operation, none of whom have been arrested or charged in the case.
Ten of the aliens died in their attempts to swim ashore after the ship struck a sandbar after a four-month journey from Southeast Asia.


Mr. Dinkins's Graceless Parting Shot
In the final hours of his tenure as Mayor, David Dinkins replaced the chairman of New York City's Campaign Finance Board, who had offended Mr.
Dinkins while doing his honest duty.
This spiteful act should be reversed.
The board, acting last fall to preserve the integrity of the city's voluntary public campaign financing system, fined the Dinkins campaign $320,000 for exceeding the spending limit for the 1993 Democratic primary.
Anticipating another adverse board ruling, Mr.
Dinkins agreed to pay for "independent" ads run on his behalf by the Democratic State Committee.


NATO CLEARS PLAN FOR TASK FORCES
NATO officials removed the final barriers today to an American-backed proposal that would change the military alliance's command structure to make it easier for NATO and former Warsaw Pact troops to combine forces to defuse crises both inside and outside Europe.
The plan calls for establishing multinational task forces of NATO and non-NATO troops that would conduct joint military exercises and be ready to rush into action on peacekeeping or relief missions.


Back Home, Senator Packwood Finds a Chilly Reception


Journal; David Brock's Women
To his fans, David Brock, the writer who ruined the Clintons' Christmas, is a hard-hitting investigative reporter.
To everyone else, he is a smear artist with a right-wing agenda.
But a reading of Mr.
Brock's oeuvre in the conservative journal The American Spectator suggests that his motives are at least as twisted as his facts.
It's women, not liberals, who really get him going.
The slightest sighting of female sexuality whips him into a frenzy of misogynist zeal.
All women are the same to Mr.
Brock: terrifying, gutter-tongued sexual omnivores.
Such caricatures are a staple of his latest expose and its predecessors, including the article that spawned his book "The Real Anita Hill."


Sports of The Times; Classic Cars and Coaches
CHANGING coaches in the National Football League is like buying a car.
Sometimes you simply want to try the newest model.
But sometimes you have the opportunity to purchase a classic, a coach with a proven record who's out there in the showroom.
As Bill Parcells and Dan Reeves were this time a year ago.
Maybe if Parcells were still out there, Bruce Coslet would be in jeopardy with the Jets.


Prudential Unit Selects New Counsel
Prudential Securities took its first step yesterday toward stabilizing its legal department after last week's decision to relieve its longtime general counsel of his duties.
The firm named Lee B. Spencer Jr., a former official with the Securities and Exchange Commission, to serve on an interim basis in the job while the firm searches for a permanent replacement for Loren Schechter, who had held the post since 1982.


A.M.A. Found to Donate More to Foes of Its Views
The political arm of the American Medical Association gives more money, on average, to Congressional candidates who oppose the doctors' positions on important public health issues than to those who support such positions, a new report says.
The report, published Thursday in The New England Journal of Medicine, concludes that the political action committee affiliated with the association "contributed more frequently and more heavily" to conservative lawmakers, despite the fact that they often opposed the association's positions on issues like tobacco exports and Federal restrictions on abortion counseling.


Essay; Foster's Ghost
What terrible secret drove Vincent Foster, the Clintons' personal lawyer, to put a bullet through his head?
When that question was posed in this space last summer ("Was dread of further scandal a triggering cause of the apparent suicide?") Clinton aides blamed Foster's state of mind on the cruel, mean-spirited Washington press corps, with its focus on "travelgate." Questions about a lawyer with a guilty conscience were denounced as ghoulish, the product of a conspiratorial mindset.


Lonely Watch in the Siberian Winter


Cost Analysis Doesn't Apply to Breast Cancer
To the Editor:
"Mammogram Debate Moving From Test's Merits to Its Cost" (front page, Dec. 27) goes to the heart not only of the breast cancer screening controversy, but of the health-care debate as well.
Health care planners acknowledge that they are not concerned with the individual, but with the bottom line cost to the system.
The "objectivity" of the health planner is evident in the analysis by Dr.
Larry Kessler of the National Cancer Institute that you cite.


Coleman Is Out and McReynolds Back In at Shea
The Mets, discarding remnants of the woeful 1993 season like so many bad memories, ended the failed experiment that was Vince Coleman by trading the outfielder to the Kansas City Royals yesterday.
In return, the Mets reacquired another enigmatic outfielder, Kevin McReynolds, who roamed Shea Stadium for five years before being traded to the Royals in the Bret Saberhagen deal after the 1991 season.


Invesco Dismisses a Mutual Fund Manager
A prominent mutual fund manager with ties to a controversial stock promoter was dismissed yesterday after he was accused of disobeying company rules on personal stock trades.
The portfolio manager, John Kaweske, 52, who had been responsible for investment decisions at three Invesco funds, was dismissed after he failed to supply his superiors at the Denver-based Invesco Funds Group with documents required by the company's code of conduct, said Jon Zeschin, an executive vice president.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DYNCORP, Reston, Va., a professional and technical services concern, has been awarded a five-year, $97 million contract from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to provide aircraft maintenance and modification services.


Roca, Ice Dancer, Breaks Arm But Comes Back to Skate On
In this season of broken arms and shattered dreams, Renee Roca and Gorsha Sur, the defending national ice dance champions, have collided with every obstacle imaginable.
Citizenship requirements.
Congress.
Today, Roca even collided with another skater during warm-ups and fractured a bone in her left arm.
Yet, she and Sur skate on, unbowed, with stubborn perseverance.
Instead of withdrawing from the national championships, Roca went to the hospital, had her broken arm set in a cast and returned to Joe Louis Arena in time to skate a sultry rumba.
The audience was impressed, and so were the judges.
Roca and Sur held onto second place, with a chance to repeat as champions if they win the free-dance portion of the competition on Friday.


Reproducing Classic Pieces Of Furniture
THE molded plywood folding screen, right, created by Charles and Ray Eames in 1947, is worth as much as $10,000 today.
But by the end of the month, consumers will be able to buy a reproduction from Herman Miller Inc., the original manufacturer, for less than $1,500.
The demand for such classic pieces from the 40's and 50's, along with the growing number of people who work and entertain at home, has lured Herman Miller back to the residential furniture market after a 30-year absence.


From Sarajevo, a Girl and a Diary on Fear
For two years, through the steady destruction of Sarajevo, the endless food shortages, the deaths of friends and the constant atmosphere of fear, Zlata Filipovic, now 13, kept a diary that recorded the life and feelings of a young girl trapped in a war she could not understand.
At times, she imagined the war would never end.
"If things go on like this, I'll be 20 in a few years time," she wrote.
"If it turns out to be another 'Lebanon,' as they keep saying, I'll be 30. Gone will be my childhood. Gone my youth. Gone my life. And I'll die and this war still won't be over."


Serbs' Artillery and Mortars Pound Sarajevo
Serbian gunners rained artillery and mortar shells on this besieged city almost without pause today in the heaviest bombardment in months, while Serbian and Bosnian Government forces clashed in the western suburbs and a hillside above the central city.
Today's shelling, which follows 48 hours of furious Serbian barrages, stretches the definition of the term "exchange of fire."


Prices Fall Sharply on Long Bonds
Prices of long-term Government securities fell sharply yesterday, with investors nervous over the inflationary implications of continuing economic growth.
The skittishness was heightened by a jump in oil prices, the Government's report that factory orders rose in November for the fourth straight month and comments by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen that he expected short-term interest rates to rise.


Mildred Wohlforth, 97, Journalist in the 1920's
Mildred Gilman Wohlforth, who wrote books and magazine articles and was a New York newspaperwoman during the Roaring Twenties, died on Monday at her home in Ridgefield, Conn.
She was 97.
The cause was a heart attack, said her husband, Robert M. Wohlforth.


Corrections
The year-end stock tables on Monday in the special Outlook '94 issue of Business Day carried inaccurate price-earnings ratios for most companies because of a programming error by Tribune Media Services.
Correct price-earnings ratios appear today in the stock tables.


Review/Dance; From Perfectionism to Pastiche In the Films of Herbert Ross
Dance and film, when taken seriously as art forms, would seem a perfect match.
Yet whenever it begins to look as if this marriage has finally been consummated in Hollywood, an annulment appears to be in the works.
No one could tell this tale better than Herbert Ross, the director and choreographer, who was honored on Tuesday night in the initial program of "Capturing Choreography: Masters of Dance and Film," a new monthly series presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center.


Fetal Ovary Transplant Is Envisioned
A scientist in Edinburgh has set off an international furor by suggesting that it might soon be feasible to transplant ovaries from aborted fetuses into infertile women who do not make viable eggs of their own.
Dr.
Roger Gosden, a researcher at Edinburgh University, said in a telephone interview yesterday that he had already accomplished this in mice.
He took ovaries from mouse fetuses, transplanted them into adult mice and showed that the ovaries produced eggs that could be fertilized and then could develop into normal mice.


Chrysler's Electric Race Car Has Turbine and Flywheel
The Chrysler Corporation, saying a "green" car does not have to be dull, displayed an electric race car it is developing today that mates a clean-burning natural-gas turbine engine with a flywheel battery.
The combination of the turbine and the flywheel provides 500 horsepower for extremely quick acceleration -- the car could reach 200 miles an hour -- and the flywheel recaptures the energy normally lost in braking.


How's the Weather? That's a Matter of Opinion


Composer Ensembles Are Focus Of Series
For young musicians of a certain stripe in the 1960's, getting a band together, setting up in a garage and hashing out some home-grown music was almost a cultural imperative.
Usually the music was rock-and-roll; at least, the rock bands got most of the attention.
But there was another kind of band scene coalescing at the time.
Composers whose tastes had led them away from both atonality and neo-Romanticism were putting together bands of like-minded players to explore the experimental visions that led to Minimalism and to the many hybrids of rock, jazz and concert music that flourish in the Downtown new-music world today.
At first, these bands were matters of practical and economic necessity.
They were laboratories for composers, who knew the capabilities of their players and often stretched them, and who were guaranteed performances that were entirely under their control.
And composers discovered that they could often earn larger fees as players -- particularly as the sole performers of their own music -- than through the more traditional route of publishing works for other musicians to play.


In Saskatoon, but With Eyes on Atlanta
She may be the most versatile female athlete to have graced the Summer Olympics, but JACKIE JOYNER-KERSEE still has a troubling memory of her very first appearance in the Games.
And that is why, the 31-year-old runner and jumper said yesterday, she is still competing -- "so that I can end my career in '96, on American soil."


France Presses U.S. for Stronger Stand on Bosnia
Determined that the war in the Balkans should not be overlooked at the NATO summit meeting in Brussels next week, France is pressing the United States to join Western Europe in a more direct military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Senior French officials have specifically urged the United States to help relieve Serbian pressure on the besieged Muslim enclaves of Tuzla and Srebrenica.
But they have also warned that the credibility of the United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is at stake in Bosnia.


Fare Cards Make Debut In Subways
The subway token has mingled with coins on dresser tops and in the purses and pockets of New Yorkers for 40 years.
But today it moves a bit closer to extinction as the Transit Authority begins to sell electronic fare cards in the first two stations of its sprawling subway system, the nation's largest.
The introduction of automatic fare collection, starting with the Whitehall Street station on the N and R lines and the Wall Street station on the 4 and 5 lines, both in lower Manhattan, brings New York City into the company of other major cities, from Washington to London, that have long used cards instead of coins or tokens.
Officials say it will eventually lead to fundamental changes in the transit system, making fare purchases quicker and more convenient and paving the way for discounts, monthly passes and other fare incentives intended to lure more riders. 69 Stations by April
Between now and April, 69 of the busiest stations in the system will activate the sophisticated new turnstiles equipped with fare card machines.
The remaining 400 stations will start offering the cards in phases, but not until early 1995 because officials say they need a year to work out possible problems in the technology.


La Silla Journal; Starry-Eyed but Resolute: Astronomers in Race
Here in the northern Chilean desert, where condors soar on the warm air currents and the mountains shimmer in the afternoon sun, a curious subculture exists.
Its inhabitants are creatures of the night, sleeping during the day, breakfasting at midafternoon and going to work in total darkness.


Review/Dance; A Showcase Puts Esthetic Unity Aside
Everything at the Joyce Theater these days is Altogether Different.
At least, that's what the dance attractions scheduled there through Jan. 23 are called.
Now in its ninth year, Altogether Different serves as a showcase for developing choreographers.
This year's presentations will feature seven groups.
And the series got off to a rollicking start on Tuesday night with a performance by the Doug Elkins Dance Company.
Mr.
Elkins loves to put wildly different types of choreographic phrases together without pausing to worry over stuffy concepts of esthetic unity.
His creations may have more glitter than substance, but their vitality is undeniable.


Cost Analysis Doesn't Apply to Breast Cancer; Randomized Trials
To the Editor:
Let's stop the argument about whether to screen all women younger than 50 (front page, Dec. 27).
No one believes that mammography works as well for younger women as for older women.
But we cannot abandon millions of women.
We simply do not know what works best in this age group because we have been unwilling to invest the money to find out.


Energy Chief in Spotlight As She Uncovers the Past
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary was in her office in November when Dan Reicher, a top aide, pulled her out of a meeting and told her he had disturbing news.
"I just found out about experiments you should know about," Mr.
Reicher said.
"People were injected with plutonium back in the 1940's. There's a newspaper in New Mexico that's about to lay out the whole thing."


Study Challenges Notions About the Common Cold
Medical researchers have brought out one of their heaviest weapons to study one of the most trivial but annoying health problems, the common cold.
Using CAT scans, they came up with some surprising findings that they hope will lead to better ways to counter the symptoms of sneezing, coughing, sore throat and stuffed head.
Common colds affect the sinuses as much as the nasal passages, researchers at the University of Virginia concluded from CAT scan studies of volunteers.
Their study will be reported on Thursday in The New England Journal of Medicine.


City Council Bill on Privatization Serves Taxpayer Interests
To the Editor:
You do your readers and all New Yorkers a great disservice in "Thank You, Mr. Dinkins" (editorial, Dec. 22), when you mislead them into believing that the City Council bill to require cost studies on privatization is a "destructive policy" and an "incursion on executive power."


N.C.A.A. Extends Aggie Cotton Bowl Hangover
Four days after Texas A&amp;M suffered its second consecutive Cotton Bowl loss to Notre Dame, the National Collegiate Athletic Association has spared the Aggies further embarrassment next year.
Wrapping up a yearlong investigation into a play-for-pay scam it attributed to a single Aggie booster, the N.C.A.A.
Committee on Infractions yesterday barred the school's football team from televised games or bowl appearances for the 1994 season and put the entire athletic program on probation for five years.
Unlucky Seventh
It was the seventh time that Texas A&amp;M had been cited for major rules violations, matching Southern Methodist and Wichita State.


A Bigger, Better Europe
America, trying to focus on domestic affairs, is only beginning to understand how much it lost in the cold war.
It needs a postwar reconstruction policy just as Russia does, and cannot succeed alone.
Foreign policy -- a concept for reliable security -- is as essential a component as it was after World War II.
The cost of the cold war must be included in order to grasp where the U.S. stands in the world and how to proceed.
A crucial element in Britain's rapid decline after World War II came from its attitude toward the outcome of the war.
The other countries knew they had been defeated, early or late in the conflict, and faced an enormous task of rebuilding and relaunching their societies.
Because it was never occupied, Britain believed it had won the right to relax.


Lament of Knicks' Anthony: Play Me and Then Trade Me?
Coming off his strongest performance since a season-ending injury to Doc Rivers made him the Knicks' starter at point guard, Greg Anthony admitted today that he was frustrated over all the recent reports about possible trades.
"Maybe to appease them, they should work to get rid of me," Anthony said.
"I've always been from the school of if it ain't broke, don't fix it. But it's kind of strange. Every time something happens, they want to make a move." Sparkling Against Magic
Anthony was sparkling in a satisfying 100-95 victory over Orlando at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night.
In 39 minutes, he scored 13 points, dished out 10 assists, had 5 steals and even added 3 rebounds, while forcing Scott Skiles of the Magic into 9 turnovers.
Skiles, Derek Harper of Dallas and Isiah Thomas of Detroit have all been mentioned in the trade rumors.
Thomas has since decided to remain with Detroit.


As Bosnians Reel, France Prods U.S.
As Sarajevo staggered through the heaviest bombardment in months, France pressed the United States to join Western Europe in military intervention to prevent the war in Bosnia from spreading.
The United States has shown no sign of wanting to become more involved.
But France, arguing that NATO's credibility is at stake, is insisting that the issue be discussed when leaders of the 16 NATO nations meet next week in Brussels.


Costly Mars Mission Failure Is Tied to Fuel-Line Rupture
The failure of the $980 million Mars Observer mission last August was most probably caused by a sudden rupture of the spacecraft's fuel pressurization system, investigators announced yesterday.
After a four-month inquiry, a board of engineers and spacecraft designers not associated with the space agency said that it could find "no smoking gun" pointing to the exact cause, but that strong circumstantial evidence supported the fuel-line hypothesis.
Nearly all other possible explanations were ruled out as improbable.


Giuliani Says Dinkins Erred On an Ouster
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday joined a chorus of critics assailing former Mayor David N. Dinkins for his last-minute replacement of the chairman of New York City's Campaign Finance Board, which had fined Mr.
Dinkins's mayoral campaign $320,000 for violating public finance laws.
An adviser to Mr.
Giuliani, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that either the Mayor or a deputy, Peter J. Powers, was expected to send a letter today to the new chairman, Thomas J. Schwarz, asking him to step down because of the controversy over how he was appointed.


Admiral to Visit Hanoi, as Relations Improve
In another sign of improving ties between Hanoi and Washington, Adm.
Charles R. Larson, commander of United States forces in the Pacific, will visit Hanoi this month, the highest-ranking American military officer on active duty to go to Vietnam since the war in Southeast Asia ended in 1975.
Admiral Larson, a four-star officer based in Hawaii, is to go to Vietnam on Jan. 16 for three days to review the work of American and Vietnamese specialists investigating the fate of missing Americans.
Admiral Larson is also expected to meet with high-ranking officials in the Foreign Ministry.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  CLINTON'S SLOGAN FOR RUSSIA  President Clinton plans to tell Russia that it needs tougher economic reform, not less reform, when he goes to Moscow next week, officials say.
But he also hopes to offer some ideas on how Western aid can be used to help those who lose their jobs because of the changes.
A1


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  CUOMO PROPOSES INCENTIVES FOR GROWTH Sounding election-year themes for a state recovering from a lingering recession, Governor Cuomo proposed incentives to encourage job growth, including cutting taxes on real-estate developers, corporations and hotels.
A1.
In his State of the State Message, Mr.
Cuomo sought to outflank the Republicans who want to hang him this election year from the twin nooses of joblessness and crime.
News Analysis.
B6.


New York Insurance Inquiry
Improper sales activities by life insurance agents, which have already led to a shake-up of executives at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, are increasingly common at other companies as well, Salvatore R. Curiale, Superintendent of Insurance in New York State, said yesterday.
At least five insurance companies, including "some big ones," are being investigated by the insurance department because of sales practices, Kevin Foley, a Deputy Superintendent of Insurance, said.
He added that more companies might soon be investigated but declined to name any companies, except Metropolitan Life, which has already admitted its problem.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THIS week and occasionally in the future, the Parent &amp; Child column will be devoted to answering questions that are often asked by readers, including those concerning elderly parents.
When Grades Start to Slip
Q.
My daughter's grades are slipping.
While she's not close to failing the seventh grade, she's definitely not doing as well as last year.
I've encouraged her to study more and have tried cutting down the amount of television she watches.
What else should I do?


Lessons Well Learned
To the Home Section:  Lisa M. Miller's interesting article on the boys in home economics ("Where the Boys Are: Home Ec, " Dec. 16) reminded me of my own experience.


New T.W.A. Chief Planning An Expansion of Capacity
Donald F. Craib Jr., the new chairman of Trans World Airlines, said yesterday that he would expand the airline this year.
Last year, it reduced capacity by 20 percent.
He also said that despite concerns among some Wall Street industry analysts about T.W.A.'s balance sheet, the airline had $163 million in cash at the end of 1993 and would not have to seek additional capital.


A View of the World
To The Home Section:  Your recent article chronicling how stars give their parents houses ("Thanks, Mom. Here's Your New House," Dec. 16) reminded me of a story.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Dec. 9, about the prospects for the stock of National Medical Enterprises, misstated the role of the company's ousted former management group in the company's legal problems.
Members of the group have not been held responsible for any practices that led to lawsuits against the company or investigations of criminal fraud charges.


IN MESSAGE, CUOMO ECHOES G.O.P. IDEAS
Sounding election-year themes for a state recovering from a lingering recession, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed today an array of incentives to encourage job growth, including cutting taxes on real-estate developers, corporations and hotels.
In his 12th State of the State Message, Mr.
Cuomo made three long-standing Republican themes -- improving the state's business climate, fighting crime and reforming welfare -- the centerpieces of his legislative blueprint for 1994, a year in which he and all 211 members of the state Legislature are up for re-election.
Mr.
Cuomo has said he will announce by the end of the week whether he will seek a fourth term, and he used his speech today to systematically shore up each of his most distinct political vulnerabilities.  [ News analysis, page B6. ] Allies and Skeptics Switch
In a political role reversal, Mr.
Cuomo's tax-cutting and welfare proposals got a frosty reception from his fellow Democrats who control the Assembly, particularly the Speaker, Saul Weprin, while receiving support from his usual nemesis, the Republican-controlled Senate.
Today, Senate Republican leaders praised Mr.
Cuomo's speech for embracing ideas they have proposed, even as they chided him for not going far enough.


CLINTON TO PRESS RUSSIA TO USE AID TO ASSIST JOBLESS
After a long internal debate on Russian policy, President Clinton plans to go to Moscow next week urging continued tough economic reforms, officials said today.
But they added that he will also offer some new ideas about how Western aid can be used to retrain Russian workers and cushion those left unemployed by economic change.


Words on the Wall And on the Plate
AT a loss for words when you sit down to that romantic dinner?
These days you can take a cue from your plate.
Your enamorata will surely be impressed if you warble, "Love Me Tender, Love Me True," before the entree is served.
But don't worry if she looks you in the eye and says, "My Heart Belongs to Daddy." Those and four other song titles decorate hand-painted dinner plates by aptly named Droll Designs ($88 each at the Adrian Linford stores in Manhattan).


In Praise of Craftsmanship
To The Home Section:  I could not be more pleased to see a major story on the American Craft Movement ("The Crafts Of America Find Recognition At the Top," Dec. 23).
To see such coverage is a breakthrough.
Blockbuster shows such as Tutankhamen and "Treasures of Dresden" were much reviewed, as if, when old enough, craft becomes art.
Not that all craft work is art.
To the still frequent question, is it art or is it craft? -- the answer must often be "neither." Too much is ambitious beyond the skills of the maker, or commercially oriented, or kitsch.
Still, for the increasing number producing craft, and for those of us who, with craft work, ameliorate bland, factory-made furnishings, there is a pleasure in perceiving how pieces were made, and craft's availability for every purse.
JACK LENOR LARSEN  Larsen Design Studio New York


A Vatican Tie With Israel
The formal recognition between the Vatican and Israel ends a diplomatic anomaly and takes some of the bitter sting from a troubled relationship.
Yet those troubles still unsettle, as is evident in the Holy See's decision to establish its embassy in Jaffa, which has an Arab identity though it is within Tel Aviv's municipality.
Church spokesmen insist that a Franciscan building there was chosen for economic and technical reasons, not to define a political distance between the Vatican and Israel.
It is a textbook example of diplomatic euphemism that nobody is expected to believe.
Few issues have caused harder feelings between the Holy See and Israel than the status of Jerusalem.
Successive popes have called, before and since Israel's birth in 1948, for territorial internationalization of the Holy City and its sacred shrines.
What rankled the founders of the reborn Jewish state was the Vatican's indifference to the political regime in Jerusalem so long as the city was governed by Arabs.
Only when Israel initially proclaimed Jerusalem as its capital, and when the Old and New cities were united by Israeli arms in 1967, did the Vatican emphasize the necessity of internationalizing Jerusalem.


Clay Tiles With a Folk-Art Message
HANGING from two soda-can pull tops in Alexa Grace's Manhattan studio are a set of portraits of men smoking pipes, concocted with house paint on plywood in an otherworldly style.
Signed "Mose T." (with a backward "S") and "Annie T.," the portraits by Mose Tolliver and his daughter, self-taught folk artists from Alabama, provide inspiration for Ms.
Grace's tiles.
"They just sort of talk to me," said the artist and illustrator.


Whitman Says Tax Reduction Will Hurt
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman began talking tonight for the first time about the pain as well as the promise of her campaign pledge to cut taxes and state government.
In the third of her appearances with voter groups the Governor-elect answered questions and took suggestions for an hour on ways to cut income taxes by nearly a third over three years.


Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. Dies at 81; A Power in the House for Decades
Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., an unreconstructed New Deal liberal from Massachusetts who rose to become Speaker of the House for 10 years, died last night at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 81 and lived in Washington and Harwich Port, Mass.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said a statement released by his family.


2 Bombs Left With Notes Fail to Go Off Near Offices
Two small bombs were left in front of two Manhattan office buildings in the early morning hours yesterday, but the devices failed to detonate as planned and no one was hurt, the police said.
The bombs were accompanied by rambling notes criticizing the Israeli Government.


Let's Throw Out the Murderers in Haiti
To the Editor:
The stalled negotiations to restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's ousted President, presents a genuine challenge to the Clinton Administration.
The Administration has indicated displeasure with Father Aristide because of his unwillingness to meet again with Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras of Haiti.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Craig Grebeck, second baseman, on a one-year contract, and Chris Bushing, Dennis Cook and Wally Ritchie, pitchers, on minor-league contracts.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Mo Sanford, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.


Man Enters Weapons Plea In Encounter With Youths
A Brooklyn man who used an unlicensed gun to kill two teen-agers he said were robbing him at gunpoint pleaded guilty yesterday to a weapon-possession charge, and the judge said he would most likely sentence him to probation.
The man, Arthur Boone, a 42-year-old sugar-refinery worker, entered his plea after Justice Thaddeus Owens of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn dismissed the more serious of two weapons charges that a grand jury filed against him in November, after it rejected possible charges of murder, manslaughter and assault against Mr.
Boone for his encounter with the teen-agers.
It occurred early on the morning of Nov. 14 on a street near his home in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Bowie Out Six Weeks After Knee Surgery
SAM BOWIE underwent arthroscopic surgery for removal of bone chips from left knee yesterday and doctors said the 7-foot-1-inch Los Angeles Lakers center would be out at least six weeks.
Bowie was placed on the injured list and his spot on the roster was taken by KURT RAMBIS, who had been waived by the Lakers on Dec. 14.


Luge Team Unafraid To Revisit Attack Site
On Jan. 17, a trial is scheduled to open in Oberhof, Germany, in which the German Government has charged two unnamed youths, neo-Nazi skinheads, with "attempting to inflict grievous bodily harm" on another person.
The person who was attacked in the brawl in a bar last Oct. 29 is, to be sure, named in the indictment.
It is Duncan Kennedy, a standout on the United States luge team that will compete in the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, about three weeks later.


Software Goes to Work as a Personal Shopper
Computer viruses are the scourge of modern computing.
But on Thursday, a small Silicon Valley software developer whose owners include A.T.&amp; T. and Apple Computer, will introduce a technology that acts like a good virus.
The microorganism can find its own way through the nation's computer networks to carry out useful tasks like automatically booking a flight on an airline's computer system or sifting through electronic retail catalogues to find the best price on a stereo -- and buying it without further intervention by the consumer.


Spanish Bank Rescue Plan Aims to Protect Stockholders
The early outline of a rescue plan for Spain's troubled Banco Espanol de Credito takes the unusual step of trying to preserve the interests of the bank's shareholders, including J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
The bank's new chairman, Alfredo Saenz Abad, who was appointed by the Spanish central bank last week after the Government seized control of the failing institution, is negotiating with central bankers to prevent an "accordion operation," in which the bank's capital, and thus the stockholders' equity, is either dramatically slashed or wiped out altogether -- typical results in a Spanish bank collapse.


After Years of Suing U.S., Hope for A-Bomb Worker
His voice was soft and a little bit raspy, and before answering some questions, Keith L. Prescott took long moments to consider just which words he wanted.
No sense rushing anything now.
It took him too long to get here, so long, in fact, that most of those who began this fateful journey with him are dead.
Now 67 years old and weakened by 24 years of bone marrow cancer, Mr.
Prescott is one of the few surviving plaintiffs in the last of a series of lawsuits that arose from the Federal nuclear test program of the postwar era.
Mr.
Prescott and the families of five other workers, now dead, have charged the Government with negligence in allowing them to be exposed to dangerous levels of radiation when they worked at the Nevada Test Site in the desert about 50 miles from here.


Market Place; Making a case for regional banks as an undervalued segment.
INVESTORS looking for value in the stock market might do worse than consider regional banks.
Shares in many of these stocks have been battered in recent months on fears that rising interest rates and a recovering economy will lead to a repetition of the bad lending judgments that got banks in so much trouble in the late 1980's.


Economic Scene; Is France's Cultural Protection a Handy-Dandy Trade Excuse?
"MARRIED WITH CHILDREN" is coming! To the barricades, Citoyens!
Of all the trade issues left hanging in the GATT deal, none, it is safe to say, aroused as much passion as France's insistence on continuing protection from America's entertainment juggernaut.
It is equally safe to say that no other excuse for protection elicits so much sympathy from analysts otherwise disposed toward open trade.


Mexican Copters Pursue Rebels; Death Toll in Uprising Is Put at 95
The Mexican armed forces pressed their counterattack on peasant guerrillas today, sending rocket-equipped planes and helicopter gunships into the hills after the retreating rebels.
Just outside San Cristobal de las Casas, the second-largest city in the state of Chiapas, military planes that had bombed the guerrillas on Tuesday attacked today with rockets and machine guns on a hillside where the only people in evidence were local peasants and journalists in well-marked vehicles, some of whom were nearly hit.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Bulls Are Cooled Down by the Magic  The Magic's Shaquille O'Neal and Anfernee Hardaway took turns wearing out the Chicago Bulls.
Hardaway helped Orlando build a 15-point halftime lead and O'Neal scored 16 of his 28 points after halftime as the Magic defeated the Bulls, 105-90, in Orlando, Fla., last night.
The loss was only the third in 18 games for the Bulls, who shot 28 percent from the field in the second period and never recovered.
Hardaway scored 12 points in the quarter.
O'Neal made 10 of 17 shots and finished with 12 rebounds.
Hardaway had 20 points, 10 assists and 4 steals. (AP) Suns 107, Jazz 91: In Salt Lake City, Dan Majerle scored 25 points, including six 3-pointers, and Phoenix outscored Utah by 40-16 in the first quarter to defeat the Jazz, snapping their 10-game home winning streak.
A 30-7 run by the Suns in the last 7:22 of the first quarter was led by A. C. Green with 9 points. (AP)


Omnicom Planning Acquisition in Britain
The Omnicom Group said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the WWAV Group P.L.C. in London, Britain's largest direct-marketing company, and merge it with its existing British direct-marketing operations, the Rapp Collins Partnership.
The terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
The merged company, called WWAV Rapp Collins London and WWAV Rapp Collins North, will be the largest single direct-marketing agency in Europe, with combined billings estimated at $135 million from clients like Renault and Sun Alliance.
Heading the company, which has more than 300 employees, will be John Watson, the chairman of the WWAV Group, and Brian Emsell, the chairman of the Rapp Collins Partnership.
It will become part of Rapp Collins Worldwide, Omnicom's network of direct-marketing agencies in 16 countries.


Seton Hall Coming Up Very Small In Big East
For Seton Hall the new year is going to be a long year on the basketball courts of the Big East.
The Pirates could not stand up to a punishing Providence team tonight at the Civic Center and were handed their third conference loss without victory, 85-61.
Seton Hall has not had an 0-3 record in the Big East since the 1985-86 season, when the Pirates lost their first seven in conference play.
Tonight's loss resulted in Seton Hall's overall record sagging to 7-3.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about a Hasidic sect in Kiryas Joel, N.Y., and the public school system it administers, referred incorrectly in some copies to the school from which 11-year-old Lazer Waldman was expelled.
It was the United Talmudic Academy, not the B'nai Joel School.


Beating Drum for Macy Bidding War
While the titans of department-store retailing are squaring off to battle for R. H. Macy &amp; Company's stores, the co-manager of an unusually brazen mutual fund is busy trying to line up their shots.
As a manager of the fund that wields the biggest stick among Macy's creditors -- Fidelity Investment's Capital and Income Fund -- Daniel Harmetz is being courted by rival retailers at the same time that he is wooing others to join the fray.


Hostetler, Despite Injuries, Has Raiders Healthy Again
Jeff Hostetler has been more stunt man than quarterback.
He has fixed flat tires, fixed a flat Los Angeles Raiders offense and has done so with screws loose in both knees.
"Hopefully, I won't make any trips to the sidelines this week," Hostetler said today.


'World News Tonight' Replaces Top Producer
In a sign of internal trouble at the nation's top-rated evening newscast, "World News Tonight," ABC announced yesterday that the program's executive producer, Emily Rooney, was being replaced after just eight months on the job.
Ms.
Rooney will be replaced by Rick Kaplan, the executive producer of ABC's "Prime Time Live." Mr.
Kaplan will be replaced by Phyllis McGrady, executive producer of "Turning Point," an ABC newsmagazine scheduled to have its premiere this spring.


Mistrial Is Declared in Mafia Murder Case
A mistrial was declared yesterday in the Federal racketeering and murder trial of three men accused of having participated in a murder for which a Mafia boss, John Gotti, was convicted in 1992.
A hung jury failed to find any of the defendants guilty, a prosecutor said.
The defendants -- Pasquale Conte, 68, Francisco Paul Graziano, 56, and Anthony Vinciullo, 58 -- were identified by prosecutors respectively as a captain and two soldiers in the Gambino crime family, headed by Mr.
Gotti.


Suicide by Caucasus Rebel Is Reported
Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, a President of Georgia who was driven from office and mounted a failed military campaign to return, was reported today to have died.
His wife, Manana, was quoted by the Interfax news agency as saying Mr.
Gamsakhurdia, 54, had shot himself on Friday in western Georgia, in a town that was surrounded by troops loyal to the Government of President Eduard A. Shevardnadze.


Bridge
There has been only one bridge enthusiast in the ranks of American Presidents, and that was Dwight D. Eisenhower.
President Clinton says that he played in college but has been too busy since.
The First Lady, he says, is the card player in the White House, and she and all the members of her family play bridge.
This information was forthcoming last summer when three bridge players, Debbie Melnick of Atlanta, Eleanor Onstott of New Orleans and Eva Scatassa of West Nyack, N.Y., were visiting the White House under the guidance of George McGovern, the former Senator from South Dakota.
They met and talked with President Clinton, who is known to have relaxed by playing hearts on his 1992 campaign train.


Philip H. Strubing 2d; Golf Executive, 86
Philip H. Strubing 2d, a lawyer who served as president of the United States Golf Association in 1970 and 1971, died Sunday at a nursing home in Memphis.
He was 86.
His family said he died after a series of strokes.


Robin Williams, Seriously Speaking
It's unusual that Robin Williams, the hottest movie comedian in America, appears as a guest star in a television series tonight.
More unusual, perhaps, is that his character, a tourist who becomes a victim of violent crime, does not have one funny line.
"I think I've done enough different parts now that people realize quickly, after just a few moments, that this isn't a role where I'm going to do the crazy thing," Mr.
Williams said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"Obviously on a subject like this, you're not going to do any comedy riffing."


Duncan C. Gray; Executive, 75
Duncan C. Gray, a former executive of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, died on Tuesday at his home in Pelham, N.Y..
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Jean.


Battle Among the Bhuttos: From Politics to Gunfire
A bitter political feud that has split Pakistan's leading family erupted in violence today as Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's national police surrounded the family mansion here and clashed with supporters of her mother, Nusrat Bhutto.
Gunfire rang out after a volley of tear-gas shells, and when the shooting subsided, one of Nusrat Bhutto's followers lay dying on the sidewalk and three others and a police constable were seriously wounded.


Trooper's 2d Tampering Charge
A New York State Police investigator who was charged last month with evidence tampering was arrested again yesterday on similar charges in a separate case.
Six troopers have been charged with faking fingerprints in a scandal that has rocked the State Police Department and led to new safeguards to prevent evidence tampering.


New Round in Revenue-Sharing Dispute
Last week, Richard Ravitch fished for snapper in the Florida Keys.
Today, he jumps into the water with baseball's sharks.
For the first time in nearly five months, Ravitch, the clubs' chief labor executive, will convene a meeting of the 28 major league club owners to try to produce a new agreement on distribution of their local revenue.
The owners have to agree on revenue sharing before Ravitch can try to induce the players to accept a salary cap as part of a collective bargaining agreement that would replace the one that expired last Friday.


Reporter's Notebook; See Mario Run. Or Will He? The Pundits Ponder.
The indecisive Governor of New York had them guessing again.
For years, the State of the State Message was listened to as closely for hints of Mario M. Cuomo's national ambitions as for the actual content of the words.
This year, with Mr.
Cuomo's Presidential aims apparently behind him, legislators, lobbyists and reporters simply tried to mine from today's speech whether he planned to run for a fourth term as Governor.


Paramount Stock Up on Blockbuster Rumor
Shares of Paramount Communications Inc. rose slightly yesterday as rumors circulated on Wall Street that Viacom Inc. had received a capital infusion from its equity partner, the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, that would allow Viacom to raise its bid for Paramount by the deadline tomorrow set by the media giant's board.
Paramount's stock rose 75 cents, to $78.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Executives of Blockbuster and Viacom declined to say whether a deal had been signed.


Kervorkian Ordered to Stand Trial


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Low-Light Lady Palm
Q.
I recently saw a plant called the lady palm that supposedly does well with little sunlight.
If this is true, where can I buy one?
Bill Kalkstein, Washington.


Cost Analysis Doesn't Apply to Breast Cancer; Radiation's Risks
To the Editor:
The debate on mammography reflects flawed science and misplaced emotionalism (front page, Dec. 27).
Despite more than three decades of large-scale experience in the United States and elsewhere, no study has shown any benefit for mammography in premenopausal, as opposed to postmenopausal, women.


9 Writers Get $105,000 Each To Help Promote Literature
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund announced that nine writers would receive its annual Writers' Awards, worth $105,000 each.
The winners will receive the money in three annual installments of $35,000.
A condition of the grant is that the writers work during the three years with a nonprofit organization to develop programs to increase public appreciation for contemporary literature.


Kentucky's Dent Is Lost for the Season
Center RODNEY DENT of Kentucky is lost for the rest of the season because of a knee injury suffered in Tuesday night's 107-82 victory against Vanderbilt.
Results of a magnetic resonance imaging test yesterday confirmed torn ligaments in Dent's left knee, ending the college career of the 6-foot-11-inch senior.
He will undergo surgery on Jan. 16. (AP)


Mayors in Florida Demand More State Help on Crime
Alarmed at what they described as the "explosive growth" of violent crime throughout Florida and the damage to the state's reputation, mayors and police chiefs from six of Florida's seven largest cities met here today for a "safe city summit" and called on the state government to mete out harsher punishment to habitual criminals.
"We have reached a point of exhaustion," said Mayor Ed Austin of Jacksonville, the host of the one-day conference that was also attended by officials from Fort Lauderdale, Miami, Orlando, St.
Petersburg and Tampa.


CHRONICLE
Some celebrities take security guards with them when they venture into department stores.
RICHARD GERE arrived at Harrods in London early yesterday morning flanked by two Tibetan monks.
He was there to open a semi-annual sale that draws hundreds of thousands of shoppers.
As Mr.
Gere drew up in a vintage Rolls-Royce, accompanied by horse-drawn carriages and Scottish bagpipers, few people were able to catch even a glimpse of him because their view was blocked by hundreds of news photographers.


CHRONICLE
"How to Make Love" is a one-act comic opera that's a family enterprise, and the family is that of CHEVY CHASE, the film star and comedian.
Mr.
Chase's stepfather, LAWRENCE WIDDOES, a contemporary composer and teacher at the Juilliard School, is the composer of the opera, and his mother, C. C. WIDDOES, is the librettist.
And their inspiration grew when they learned that they could put on a production of the work for as little as $30,000.
"We thought maybe Chev would want to take a flier," Mrs.
Widdoes said.
"He's the most generous person in the world."


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about former Mayor Edward I. Koch and others at Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's inauguration included a name erroneously in some copies among those shown.
Assemblyman Dov Hikind was not in the picture.
In some copies, the caption also misspelled the name of the Corporation Counsel.
He is Paul A. Crotty.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of Boston Corp. is selling $300 million of 6.625 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 priced at 99.48 to yield 6.696 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The 10-year notes are noncallable and are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $429 million of notes due in 1997 priced at 100 to yield 4 3/4 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in one year.


INSIDE
Furor Over Fetal Ovaries
A British scientist set off an international furor by suggesting that ovaries from aborted fetuses be implanted in infertile women.
Page A16.
A Deal With North Korea
Clinton Administration officials said the North Korean Government had accepted international inspections of its nuclear sites.
Page A12.
Higher Interest Rates Seen
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen predicted that short-term interest rates would rise.
Page D1.
Congress Taxes Itself
A 1992 energy law will leave members of Congress owing more taxes than they may think.
Page D20.


AT HOME WITH: Robert Wilson; The Clark Kent Of Modern Theater
IN Robert Wilson's loft in TriBeCa, everything is exactly in place: furniture, sculpture and artifacts from his operas and plays.
Bare light bulbs glare down on a carpetless concrete floor.
By his design, there are no doors in the apartment, only passageways 20 inches wide.
The effect is that of a post-modern museum.
Moving among his possessions and identifying them, Mr.
Wilson is a walking Acoustiguide, stopping longer before some displays for more extended commentary.
Years ago, when his father visited the apartment, he asked him how he could live there.
"It's like being in prison," his father said.
"None of the chairs are comfortable." His son replied, "Comfort is a state of mind."


Ross Roy Will Sell Another Subsidiary
Ross Roy Communications, in the second sale of a subsidiary in two weeks, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell Griswold Inc., its advertising agency based in Cleveland, to 22 to 23 of Griswold's senior management officials and employees.
The terms were not disclosed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.03
3.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.07
3.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.25
3.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.41
5.37
6.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.40
6.35
7.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.35
7.35
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.56
5.55
6.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Telecommunications Talks
Five days before the Administration discloses the details of its legislative goals for the so-called information superhighway, Vice President Al Gore met today for a two-hour brainstorming session with top executives from the telephone, cable television and entertainment industries.
But Mr.
Gore offered few clues about the Administration's plans, according to those who were present.
Instead, he and Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown spent most of the time listening to a debate on many issues surrounding an overhaul of the country's telecommunications laws.


U.S. Will Reassess Support For Haiti's Exiled President
President Clinton said today that the United States had decided to reassess its support for the exiled President of Haiti, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The remarks were Mr.
Clinton's first acknowledgement that the embattled Haitian leader has lost critical backing from the United States.
In an interview with columnists at the White House, Mr.
Clinton said he still believed that democracy was possible in Haiti, but that Father Aristide may no longer be its most effective messenger since his public quarrel with Robert Malval, the Prime Minister Father Aristide selected to lead a restoration of democratic government.


Nicklaus Not Fussy on Path to Lotus Land
So much has changed since Jack Nicklaus last came here to the La Costa Resort and Spa, a mecca for the monied wedged into the hills north of San Diego.
The hotel ownership is different, the spot on the schedule is different, the format is different, Nicklaus is different and the tournament is different.
It isn't even called the Tournament of Champions anymore.
The automobile company that assumed sponsorship of the event this year chose to drop that designation and call it simply the Mercedes Championships.


A New Bradhurst; Harlem Trades Symbols of Decay for Symbols of Renewal
On West 145th Street, opposite an uneven commercial row of boarded-up stores, a gas station and a thriving burger shop, four sand-colored buildings stand waiting for new occupants.
Their bricks are scrubbed clean, six stories of brand-new windows sparkle underneath sculpted moldings and green marble glows around the lobby entrances.
The buildings, vacant for years, are at the heart of Bradhurst, a 40-square-block neighborhood in north Harlem.
The neighborhood became a symbol of the decay that has blighted Harlem for decades, with some areas looking as if they were reduced to rubble by shelling.


Germany Seeks Suspect in '86 Disco Bombing
German prosecutors said today they were seeking the extradition from Lebanon of a prime suspect in the 1986 bombing at a Berlin discotheque that killed three people and led President Reagan to order United States air raids against Libya.
The suspect, identified in German press reports today as Youssef or Yasser Chraidi, has been in a Lebanese jail for more than a year awaiting trial on unknown charges.
Prosecutors said they learned of his arrest last summer and quickly filed an appeal for his extradition.
The appeal had been kept secret by both Governments, but was reported by German news organizations this week.


Hurley Undergoes Shoulder Surgery
BOBBY HURLEY, the Kings' rookie guard, had successful shoulder surgery in Sacramento, Calif., yesterday.
Hurley, who was in a near-fatal car accident Dec. 12, underwent a one-hour procedure at the University of California Medical Center to stabilize a fractured left clavicle.


Pittsburgh Is 24 Above, and Under as Many Inches
Snow clings to this city's Gothic towers and onion-domed churches, icicles form on beards as subfreezing temperatures sting cheeks.
It was 24 degrees Fahrenheit at noon today and 13 below zero with the wind chill.
But with the sun shining brilliantly and the city looking as wintry as Russia's St.
Petersburg, most people on the streets seemed to have a light step and an easy smile, even as some complained about having to dig out their cars after every passing snowplow.


Irish Protestants Are as Irish as Catholics
To the Editor:
"Irish Americans," James Michener's Dec. 19 letter, is shocking, for it implicitly equates Irish with Roman Catholic.
That most of Ireland's Protestants are of Scots ancestry does not make them any less Irish. (Some, by the way, are of English, German or French ancestry.)


Officials Say Alm Was Intoxicated
Jeff Alm, a defensive tackle for the Houston Oilers, was legally intoxicated and taking prescription barbiturates when he committed suicide last month, minutes after a car wreck that killed his best friend, medical officials said today.
A toxicology report said Alm had a blood-alcohol level of .14 percent, above the legal driving limit of .10, at the time of his death.
Sean Lynch, Alm's friend who was killed in the crash, had a blood-alcohol level of .30 percent.


Topics of The Times; Midnight Madness
Four ran in sync, as the wheels of the A train.
Others ran as police, waiters and wolverines.
But mostly, 5,000 New Yorkers -- pre-teens to septuagenarians -- ran as themselves over five miles of Central Park, starting at the first tick of the new year.
The midnight run, sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club, was part carnival, part athletic event.
And it was pure joy to most who took part.
With a ringside seat to a fireworks display in the center of the park, the runners started at Tavern on the Green on the West Side in the 60's, ran south, then north to 95th street on the East Side, turned around and ran back to the starting line.
Those who needed to be fiercely competitive ran hard; others didn't take matters nearly that seriously, and for good reason.
One anxious rookie, who hadn't run a competitive race since college almost a quarter-century ago, jockeyed for a good starting position -- only to find that it would take minutes to see, let alone pass, the starting gate.


Real African China Patterns
UNLIKE the generic ethnicity and exoticism that have marked many home-furnishing designs targeted to a mass market, the Africa Collection from Essex Enviro-Safe Fine China has clear, authentic references.
Two china patterns are based on 19th-century textiles from the Yorubas of Nigeria.
"This gives continued life to the patterns and richness of indigenous cultures," said Susan Bilenker, a painter and designer who specializes in home furnishings inspired by world cultures.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said he foresaw an increase in short-term interest rates.
But he refused to say when or whether the Fed or market forces would raise them.  [ Page D1. ]
The Administration wants to create a Government-owned corporation like Amtrak to operate the nation's air traffic control system.
It will also seek to increase to 49 percent the amount of voting stock that a foreign carrier can own in a U.S. airline.  [ A16. ]


Books of The Times; Sex, Power and a Workplace Reversal
Disclosure  By Michael Crichton  405 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
If you think Japan got a bashing in Michael Crichton's "Rising Sun," just wait till you see what happens to the cause of equal opportunity in his clever new novel, "Disclosure," about a sexual-harassment suit.


Jordan Going From Dunking to Bunting?
Yes, MICHAEL JORDAN has been in a batting cage at Comiskey Park.
No, his workouts don't mean the retired Chicago Bulls star wants a tryout, the White Sox say.
"Sure, he's been here," RON SCHUELER, the White Sox general manager, said yesterday.
"He's been taking some swings and playing catch. Basically, he's got three or four hours a day with nothing to do, so he's coming in here and working out. But he's never asked us about spring training."
The Chicago Sun-Times quoted an unidentified source as saying that Jordan, 30, was seriously considering reporting to the White Sox camp in Sarasota, Fla., when it opens Feb. 16.


White House Moves to Keep Clintons' Files Secret
Seeking to insure that documents related to President Clinton's role in a failed Arkansas real estate development remain secret, the White House has obtained a Justice Department subpoena placing the papers under Federal protection.
David Kendall, the Clintons' personal lawyer, advised the President to seek the subpoena after Mr.
Clinton decided on Dec. 23 to turn over records on the transactions to the Justice Department.


Five Words From Suspect and Phone Bill Are Focus of Blast Testimony
There was a single five-word sentence uttered by one defendant when he was arrested, some scraps of paper located by an F.B.I agent in his garbage and a travel alarm and some connecting circuitry.
All were the subjects of testimony in the World Trade Center trial yesterday and all concerned Nidal A. Ayyad, a 26-year-old chemical engineer accused of ordering the chemicals used in the trade center bomb and sending messages to news organizations taking credit for the explosion.
Mr.
Ayyad's turn came today as the prosecution seemed to be entering a mopping-up phase of its case against the four men on trial in the trade center bombing, with each day devoted to producing a few scraps of information about another of the defendants. 'I'll Talk'
The courtroom session yesterday focused on March 10, 1993, the day that Mr.
Ayyad was arrested by a team of F.B.I. agents at his home in Maplewood, N.J.
The agent that led the team, Eric M. Pilker, described how he arrived at the Ayyad home a bit after 6:30 A.M., told Mr.
Ayyad that he was being arrested in connection with the trade center bombing and informed him of his rights.


Review/Jazz; Strategies Of Passion And Silence
The saxophonist Chico Freeman waited until his second song to exhibit his improvisational wares, and then he did it with a small, quiet explosion.
Mr.
Freeman, who was one of the more important young musicians to arrive in the early 1980's, has more or less vanished as a concert draw.
The way he played in his first set at Bradley's on Tuesday night, however, his absence clearly has nothing to do with lack of ability.
On "No Greater Love," Mr.
Freeman, playing tenor saxophone, heaped on improvisational strategies.
Like a swing player, he hesitated a moment before each eight-bar phrase of the tune, leaving an open, dramatic space.
He used blues ideas as motifs and kept them running through his solo.
He used slurs, bending pitch to darken the texture of a line.
Chromatic lines, jiggling, dropped from above.
And Mr.
Freeman moved static ideas around in a cycle, forcing harmonies to bleed new colors.


Grand Central Cleanup
To the Editor:
The Grand Central Partnership, and groups like it, deserve to be applauded.
We were just in New York City on one of our many visits.
Staying at the Hyatt, we often walk the Grand Central area.
The cleanliness and silent pride there show that individuals joining together can change a seemingly impossible situation.


A Wave of 'goods for guns' programs tests consumers' tolerance for cause-related marketing
TOYS for guns.
Sneakers for guns.
Mattresses for guns.
Gasoline for guns.
Groceries for guns.
Such unusual exchanges of firepower for familiar consumer products have captured the nation's attention since last month, when Fernando Mateo, a carpet store owner, revitalized an almost moribund program sponsored by New York City that traded cash for guns.
Mr.
Mateo's innovative twist, inspired by his 14-year-old son, Fernando Jr., was to sweeten the offer by adding certificates worth $100 in merchandise from marketers like Toys "R" Us, Foot Locker, Dial-A-Mattress and Gaseteria.
The results so far: more than 1,100 weapons being swapped at the 34th Precinct station house in Washington Heights in upper Manhattan.
Similar programs, carrying catchy, slogan-like names -- "Guns for Butter," "Goods for Guns" -- are being introduced in Paterson and Hudson County, N.J., and in Los Angeles.


Will 2 Carters Be Too Much for Giants?
Safety Myron Guyton of the Giants thought back to the days when Minnesota's Cris Carter was playing for Philadelphia, and fair or not had a reputation for being, well, soft.
Guyton wasn't shy in talking about how both Cris and Anthony Carter, the Vikings' wide receivers, are supposedly allergic to tough, physical play.
While saying he had the utmost respect for both Carters, Guyton made it clear today he felt that if the Carters get roughed up a bit, they get rattled.
"We played against Cris before when he was in Philly," Guyton said.
"If we play physical against him, we can take him out of the game."


Francis Ferguson, Insurer's Chairman In 80's, Dies at 72
Francis Eugene Ferguson, retired chairman of Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Phoenix.
He was 72 and had homes in Scottsdale, Ariz., and Milwaukee.
He had had a long respiratory illness, the company said.


Error Is Claimed In Denial of Bail
A Federal judge's decision to deny bail to a defendant in a terrorist conspiracy trial was based in part on the judge's misreading of a Government memorandum about evidence in the case, lawyers said yesterday.
Judge Michael B. Mukasey ruled last week that the defendant, Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, could not be released on bail because in addition to charges involving assault, obstruction of justice and false documents, prosecutors had tape recordings in which Mr.
Elgabrowny discussed making bombs and helping a man escape from prison.


Bar Bouncer Gets 30 Years For 2 Slayings
A bar bouncer was sentenced yesterday to 30 years to life in prison for the execution-style murder of an off-duty housing police officer and the fatal shooting of another man after brawling with the two victims inside a bar in Bayside, Queens.
The 26-year-old defendant, Patrick Bannon, said he was "truly sorry" as he stood before Justice Robert J. Hanophy in State Supreme Court in Queens.


Dr. Hansskarl Bandel; Engineer, 68
Dr.
Hansskarl Bandel, a New York structural engineer who worked on such projects as Madison Square Garden and the United States Pavilion at the 1964 World's Fair, died on Dec. 29 in Carbondale, Colo.
He was 68 and lived in Canadensis, Pa.
He died, apparently of a heart attack, while skiing the slopes with his wife at Vail Pass, said Nils Olsson, a colleague in Tampa, Fla.


North Korea to Open Access To Nuclear Sites, U.S. Says
Clinton Administration officials said today that North Korea had agreed to allow broad inspections of seven nuclear sites, and they denied that they had backed down on their demands in order to reach an agreement.
If it is carried out, the deal could ease fears of a confrontation over North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons program.
But it was still unclear whether the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is responsible for monitoring nuclear installations worldwide, would be allowed to make inspections of sufficient thoroughness and frequency to allow the agency to certify that North Korea is not diverting nuclear material to make weapons.


MCA to Spend $1.5 Billion On a Theme Park in Osaka
MCA Inc., the Japanese-owned entertainment conglomerate, said today that it planned to spend $1.5 billion to develop a theme park on what is now industrial waterfront in Osaka, Japan.
The 140-acre park will be modeled after Universal Studios in Orlando, Fla., which cost $650 million when built in 1990 and has about 40 events or rides and operating studio facilities.
The Osaka park is expected to be completed in 1999.


Norway's Dream and U.S. Problem
When it comes to the Winter Olympics, Americans know about the Jamaican bobsled team and Eddie (the Eagle) Edwards.
Figure skaters? Sure.


Retirement? For 11 Friends It's Off to Camp
ARCHITECTURE in itself cannot defy infirmity or death.
But in building a 6,000-square-foot home spread over three large, rustic wood-and-metal buildings in a redwood forest, 11 people in their 50's and 60's have planned an enjoyable old age -- together.
The home is called Cheesecake, and its construction, on 20 acres about 100 miles north of San Francisco in Mendocino County, was largely completed in October.
It is an architectural retort to characterizations of later life as a time of isolation, loneliness and decline. (Its name derives from the Italian name of the turn-of-the-century owners of the property, Casatas, which, the partners said, very loosely translates to "cheese pie.")


WHERE TO FIND IT
WHAT EVER happened to reel-to-reel typewriter ribbons, mimeograph stencils and old blue ledger books with cream-colored pages from the pre-computer age?
"They're still made," declared Robert Feldblum, an owner of Northern Stationery Company in Woodside, Queens.
"A lot of people like typing on old Royal manuals and tracking their finances in column ledgers."


Rookie Stymies Rangers But Keenan Blames Ref
The Rangers' 16-game home winning streak came to a deadly dull end last night.
But Coach Mike Keenan came to life afterward as he attacked the officiating.
Though his team had 53 shots on goal, Keenan blamed Referee Andy vanHellemond for Calgary's 4-1 victory.
He said vanHellemond ignored penalties, including a slash that broke a bone in the hand of the Rangers' Steve Larmer.


Bentsen Foresees Rate Rise
After a year of touting lower interest rates as an Administration accomplishment that has stimulated the economy, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen predicted today that short-term rates would rise modestly.
Mr.
Bentsen refused to say how soon he expected an increase.
And he would not say whether he expected the Federal Reserve to move actively to raise them or simply allow the market to push them up, as it has already begun to do.


Experimental Drug Is Prize In a Highly Unusual Lottery
Last fall, Berlex Laboratories held a new kind of lottery.
The 67,000 people who entered were after a prize worth more than money: quick access to a new drug, Betaseron, the first medicine thought to slow the course of multiple sclerosis.


CHRONICLE
MICKEY ROURKE is almost as well known as a boxer as he is as an actor, but he managed to get himself arrested early yesterday morning without throwing a single punch.
The star of "9 1/2 Weeks," "Johnny Handsome," "Barfly" and other films was arrested at 3:23 A.M. outside his club and restaurant, Mickey's, in the trendy South Beach area of Miami Beach.
He was charged with resisting an officer without violence, a misdemeanor.


White House Defends Abortion Order
Rejecting the arguments of some state officials, the Clinton Administration insisted today that states must help finance abortions for low-income women in cases of rape or incest.
Bruce C. Vladeck, head of the Federal Health Care Financing Administration, dismissed pleas from state Medicaid directors that he reconsider the order for Medicaid to cover such abortions.


Workers Redirect Their Kindness to Help the Neediest
For decades, lawyers at the small Manhattan firm of Pulvers, Pulvers, Thompson &amp; Kutner celebrated the holidays by giving gifts to the people who helped make their lives easier, such as paralegals, court reporters and secretaries.
But since 1986, the firm's 11 lawyers have redirected the money they would have spent on scarves, cologne or liquor, and instead have written a check to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
This year they gave $700.


Jane Alexander Asks Arts Professionals' Help
In her first major speech to a New York audience since she took over as the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts in October, Jane Alexander yesterday called for a new partnership between commercial and nonprofit groups to counter what she called "the financial crisis in the arts."
"It's unrealistic to expect to get more public money in this time of widespread budget-cutting," she said, "so a practical partnership between the commercial sector and nonprofit groups is essential in the future."


U.S. PARES IMPORTS OF CHINA'S FABRICS IN A PUNITIVE MOVE
The Clinton Administration today cut by more than $1 billion the amount of clothing and fabrics China can export to the United States, retaliating for what it said were Chinese attempts to get around American limits on imports by shipping goods into the United States through other nations.
American apparel manufacturers quickly welcomed the Administration's punitive action, since it will slightly curb China's ability to compete with American-made goods and possibly save some jobs.
But some American retailers complained that consumers could face shortages and higher prices, particularly low-income shoppers who may depend on some of these illicit Chinese sweaters, knit shirts and cotton trousers.
The retailers urged the Administration to negotiate a settlement with Beijing.


On Stage, and Off
Highs and Lows
This is a time of both celebration and concern for the producers of "Angels in America." On one hand, Tony Kushner's two-part AIDS epic at the Walter Kerr Theater is an unqualified smash; receipts during the week ending last Sunday totaled $400,931, a Broadway record for a straight play, particularly remarkable for a theater with fewer than 1,000 seats. (Of course, the ticket prices -- the usual $65 top was $75 on New Year's Eve -- are record-setting as well.)
On the other hand, the show has entered a time of transition.
Ron Leibman, who won a Tony Award last year for his portrayal of Roy Cohn, is leaving.
His final performance will be Jan. 16, the first Sunday matinee of Part 2 of the play, "Perestroika." That performance will also begin a new, permanent schedule for the show, which has been juggling performances since "Perestroika" began rehearsals over the summer. (Beginning the week of Jan. 16, Part 1, "Millennium Approaches," will be seen on Tuesday and Friday nights, Wednesday and Saturday afternoons, and "Perestroika" on Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday nights, as well as Sunday afternoons.)


Clinton's Mother Dies of Cancer at 70


New Jersey Communities Get on the Gun Swap Bandwagon


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Japan's standard of living misstated the circulation ranking of Mainichi Shimbun, the daily newspaper that described the indignities suffered by Tokyo commuters.
It is the third-largest daily; the largest is the Yomiuri Shimbun.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KIWI INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES, Newark, said it would begin service between Chicago and Atlanta with continuing service to San Juan, P.R.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Administration cut the amount of clothing and fabrics China can export to the U.S. by more than $1 billion in retaliation for what it said were attempts by China to get around American limits on imports by shipping goods through other nations.
The punitive measure will not take effect until Jan. 17, so there is a chance that the two countries will come to an understanding.  [ Page A1. ]


Prosecutor Absolves State Police Who Shot Hijacker and Hostage
State troopers who forced a hijacked school van to the side of a highway a year ago and fatally shot the armed hijacker and wounded a hostage were justified in their use of deadly force, a state prosecutor said today.
The shooting of the hijacker, Dwight Pink, a 42-year old East Lyme man with a long criminal history in Connecticut and California, ended a daylong series of events on Jan. 11, 1993, that became what the Middletown State's Attorney, John T. Redway, called a "nightmarish problem for the Connecticut State Police."


Books of The Times; On the Road Across the Alarming 90's Landscape
Going Native
By Stephen Wright
305 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
Stephen Wright's impressive first novel, "Meditations in Green," published a decade ago, offered a hallucinatory vision of the Vietnam War as seen through the eyes of an intelligence adviser turned heroin addict.
Mr.
Wright's second novel, "M31: A Family Romance" (1988), effectively brought the war home, creating a frightening allegory of American life through its portrait of a ghoulish family cult.


Abroad at Home; Crisis of Credibility
President Clinton flies to Brussels this weekend for a North Atlantic Treaty summit meeting that poses a dual test of credibility: NATO's and his.
The issue is Bosnia.
The aggression and slaughter there, growing worse at the turn of the year, raised dark questions for the hope of peace in a Europe facing new strains after the cold war.


Canadian Test Case: 'Pornography' vs. Imagination
A painter in Toronto has become the first artist to be charged under a new child-pornography law because his renderings are about sexuality and children.
Civil libertarians say the case is likely to test the new legislation, which was enacted in the closing months of the last Conservative Government, on the ground that it is too sweeping.


Moscow Memo; Russia's Government Moves, But Seems Unsure of Its Path
With the Russian Orthodox Christmas on Friday and President Clinton's visit next week, not to mention the opening of a new and volatile Parliament next Tuesday, this hardly seems the time to move the Government of Russia.
But in a show of unaccustomed efficiency, moving trucks this week pulled up at the back of the old Russian Parliament building -- again living up to its White House nickname after being blackened by fire in October when it was shelled by army tanks -- so Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin and his Cabinet could set up shop in time for the new political season.


Collins Injured And May Miss Playoff Game
Mark Collins, one of the best cornerbacks in the National Football League, sprained his left knee in practice today and could miss the Giants' playoff game on Sunday against the Minnesota Vikings.
"We'll see," Collins said when asked whether he could play.
"I'm not sure. I'll try it but it doesn't look good."


Russians Can Teach Us About Packaging
To the Editor:
"Russian Company Tests New Bankruptcy Law" (Business Day, Dec. 25) reports that the managing director of a Russian knife factory is looking at sleek German boxes for ideas on more attractively packaging his products, now sold in "wrinkled cones" of twisted brown paper.


Sting Nominated To Receive 6 Grammys
The British pop star Sting received the most nominations -- six -- for the 36th annual Grammy Awards.
He will compete with the singer and songwriter Billy Joel for record, album and song of the year.
The winners will be announced on March 1 in a CBS telecast from Radio City Music Hall.
More than 400 nominations in 81 categories were announced yesterday by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences at a news conference at the Apollo Theater in Manhattan.


The Spoken Word
"GUYS ON FILM," the Poetry Project, St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village.
An independent film maker, Nick Zedd, and Geoffrey O'Brien, the author of "The Phantom Empire," discuss film.
Tonight at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $6.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
"MODERN JAPANESE WOMEN POETS," Tenri Cultural Institute, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
A lecture and a reading by Kimiko Hahn from her work.
Tonight at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $7.
Information: (212) 925-8500.


CHRONICLE
SANTI VISALLI, a magazine and book photographer, is the first photojournalist to be elected president of the Foreign Press Association in its 75-year history.
The professional and social organization has 400 members from print and broadcast news organizations in 60 countries.


Knighthood And Wenches In New Jersey
TOO bad Alfonso VI, who ruled the kingdom of Leon from 1065 to 1109, never lived to see Medieval Times.
Doubtless he would have enjoyed the cash bar and its disco ball, the cardboard crowns and the cheering mobs from Ortho Biotech and New Hampshire Telephone.
Four years ago, a castle was raised in Lyndhurst, N.J., its crenelated tower just a bowshot from the Garden State Parkway.
Inside its walls, visitors revel and make merry with plastic tankards while knights from West Orange and Tenafly battle to the death five times a week.
More than a million have made the trip already.
Many of them, mostly bloodthirsty schoolchildren, have visited more than once.


Art in Review
'Roma-New York,  1948-1964'
Murray and Isabella Rayburn Foundation  41 East 57th Street  Through Jan. 15
The late 1950's and early 60's in American and European art are ripe for study.
Much attention has been paid to the effect of immigre artists on New York art during the 40's, but what happened later when the flow of artists between America and Europe became more fluid?


Review/Film; Basketball As a Bridge Between 2 Cultures
Film making is not an exact science, but you might think otherwise watching "The Air Up There," Disney's latest sports clone.
Parts of it recall at least three other recent Disney efforts, and those weren't exactly original in the first place.
From "The Program": a college coach, doing his best to beat the system.
From "The Mighty Ducks": a chance for that coach to train unlikely athletes, redeem himself spiritually and restore his own reputation.
From "Cool Runnings": a shift to a third-world setting, nominally exotic but thoroughly Americanized, showing particularly strong signs of American sitcoms.
It's a small world after all.
In this film, as in "Cool Runnings," black athletes are trained by a white coach who would look like a terrible know-it-all if he weren't so darn raffish and cute.
And from "The Program" again: a party game that definitely should not be copied by the fans.
Instead of lying down in traffic, two of this film's characters submit to an African tribal ritual that involves a knife incision in the lower abdomen, just above the groin.
Anyone who thinks this will make him a better basketball player should sit down and watch "The Mighty Ducks" until the urge passes.


Review/Dance; Creatures Who Share The Stage
In the 32d section of his monumental poem, "Song of Myself," Walt Whitman says, "I think I could turn and live with animals, they're so placid and self-contain'd." Ann Carlson might agree.
She revived "Animals," a 1988 work, on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater as part of the Altogether Different series.
With choreography and texts by Ms.
Carlson and a cast of dancers and four-legged and finny creatures, "Animals" remains an eloquent creation.


About Diner's Journal
Starting today, Diner's Journal will be written by Ruth Reichl, the chief restaurant critic of The Times, who will discuss her first impressions of new restaurants and offer updates on older ones.
Off the Menu, a new weekly column by Florence Fabricant charting restaurant news and dining trends, appears on Wednesdays in The Living Section.


Guatemala Begins a New Round of Talks With Leftist Rebels
After months of delays and mutual recriminations, the Guatemalan Government and leftist rebels who have been fighting it for more than 30 years began new talks here today aimed at ending Central America's longest and most violent civil war.
The meetings, which had been suspended for eight months by political turmoil in Guatemala, are the first since President Ramiro de Leon Carpio, a former Government human rights ombudsman, took over from Jorge Serrano Elias.


Adobe Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Knight Is Unshod
The 14-year relationship between Adidas and BOB KNIGHT was ended by the shoe manufacturer yesterday because the Indiana basketball coach failed to wear the company's apparel as required under his contract.


Coach of Year A Vindication For Reeves
Earlier this season, Dan Reeves talked about how he felt after being dismissed by the Denver Broncos.
It was an ugly scene that left him wondering whether the coaching philosophy that took him to three Super Bowls was the right one.
When the Giants hired him, he said, it reinforced his belief in himself.
When he went 11-5 this season, the confidence was back.


Art in Review
George Bellows
Berry-Hill Gallery  11 East 70th Street  Through Jan. 15
Anyone for whom the name George Bellows (1882-1925) means boxing matches will be disappointed with this show.
There are no fight scenes among its 30 paintings (though Jack Dempsey and John L. Sullivan do make an appearance in the suite of accompanying lithographs).
Instead, there is a perplexing variety of other subjects and evidence that Bellows's sensibility is in some ways far closer to 19th-century American art than to that of his teacher Robert Henri and the Ashcan school.


Review/Film; Innocence Aboard A Ship Of Oddballs
"Come on over here, honey," coos Ann Magnuson as a six-armed vamp with sapphire-blue skin.
"You've managed to charm me with your moronic innocence." Well, we've all got our weaknesses.
Hers is Chris Elliott as a pampered rich kid who accidentally wanders onto a ramshackle ship and becomes a cabin boy.
During his adventures, he has climbed the side of a mountain to find the seductive Calli.
He is bound to return, as he puts it, "a cabin man."
Mr.
Elliott knows how to play moronic innocence.
He did it as a 30-year-old paperboy on his former television series, "Get a Life," and most successfully in a series of running characters on "Late Night With David Letterman." But there is a limit to how much charm, and how many laughs, he can wring out of deadpan idiocy.
What's comic in a skit becomes labored over 81 minutes.
The hero's tongue-in-cheek encounter with Calli is one of the few effective scenes in "Cabin Boy," a film as messy as the ship that Nathanial Mayweather stumbles onto.


G.M. Forms China Joint Venture on Engine Parts
The General Motors Corporation has formed a joint venture with a Chinese business and a Chinese Government-owned enterprise to make and sell engine-management systems in China, a G.M. executive said today.
G.M. already runs a $100 million joint venture to produce pickup trucks in northeastern China and is exploring a joint venture to build mini-vans there.
Its parts division has already joined in ventures and signed licensing agreements with Chinese businesses to make and distribute spark plugs, wiring harnesses and other components.


Kenwood Chooses Citron Haligman
The Kenwood U.S.A.
Corporation in Long Beach, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San Francisco to handle its Kenwood auto and home audio systems account after a review that also included other, undisclosed West Coast agencies.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $6 million.
The account has been handled for the last seven years by Kresser/Craig in Santa Monica, Calif., which did not participate in the review.


Virginia Clinton Kelley, 70, President's Mother, Is Dead
Virginia Clinton Kelley, an indomitable nurse and sometimes single mother who endured the deaths of three husbands, survived family drug and alcohol abuse and raised a firstborn son who became President of the United States, died of complications from breast cancer early yesterday at her home in Hot Springs, Ark.
She was 70.
Mrs.
Kelley, who underwent a mastectomy in 1990 and had suffered a recurrence of cancer last year, died in her sleep after watching the University of Arkansas-University of Mississippi basketball game on television, Clay Farrar, her husband's son-in-law, told The Associated Press.
The Garland County coroner's office said the cause was complications from cancer.


A New Entry in the Transit Fare System


In East Harlem, an Addendum to Christmas Celebration


U.S. Balkan Expert Resigns Over Job and Policy Disputes
A leading Clinton Administration expert on the Balkans is resigning after more than three decades as a Foreign Service officer, the State Department announced today.
State Department officials said the official, Warren Zimmermann, 59, told his staff on Wednesday that he is leaving his post as the head of refugee programs and offered two reasons: personal frustration that he had not been appointed to a new job, and as a protest against a Balkan policy he was no longer able to help shape.


Two Sterling Runners Enter N.F.L. Draft
Two of college football's best runners, tailbacks BYRON (BAM) MORRIS of Texas Tech and GREG HILL of Texas A&amp;M, yesterday made themselves available for the National Football League draft.
Morris ranked first in scoring this season with 22 touchdowns and second in rushing with 1,752 yards.
Hill gained 3,262 yards in his three years with the Aggies. (AP)


Editorial Notebook; There Was Only One Bobby Wagner
They came, 900 strong, leaders of the great city's public sector, to "A Celebration of the Life of Bobby Wagner" in the historic Great Hall at Cooper Union.
"Bobby," not Robert F. Wagner Jr., a friend insisted, because three generations of Robert F. Wagners have enriched New York politics "but there was only one Bobby."
Bobby Wagner died of a heart attack Nov. 15.
He was only 49, so it was all the more remarkable that he engendered such devotion without climbing as high as the earlier Robert F.'s -- father, thrice Mayor, and grandfather, the Senator whose name is stamped in history by the Wagner Act, the New Deal's landmark labor law.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $60 million of notes due in 1999 priced at 100 to yield 5.41 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is callable in two years. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $200 million of medium-term step-up notes due in 1999 priced at 100 to yield 4.32 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is callable in a year.


Cherry Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Family Dollar Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dow Rises 5.06 to Reach Record Close of 3,803.88
The Dow Jones industrial average eked out another record high in hectic trading yesterday, closing above 3,800 for the first time.
Helped by a drop in interest rates, the Dow rose 5.06 points, to 3,803.88, eclipsing Wednesday's record of 3,798.82.


Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., a Democratic Power in the House for Decades, Dies at 81
Democrats and Republicans today bade a warm farewell to Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., the gregarious and irrepressibly liberal Bostonian who symbolized the Democratic Party through much of the 1980's as Speaker of the House.
Mr.
O'Neill, 81, died Wednesday night of cardiac arrest at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
Since his retirement from the House in 1987, he had lived in Washington and Harwich Port, Mass., on Cape Cod.


Stan Carter; Journalist, 69
Stan Carter, a former foreign correspondent for The Associated Press and a retired Washington correspondent for The Daily Newsin New York, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 69.
The cause was complications from hepatitis, said his wife, Patricia Peters Carter.


Viking to Run Head-On Into a Giants Weakness
Just as the Giants' defense is trying to recover from two consecutive lapses against opposing runners, a small, unheralded back named Scottie Graham is returning to Giants Stadium as the man to be stopped.
Graham was ringing up sales at a pharmacy in Columbus, Ohio, last September, while writing a master's thesis at Ohio State about himself and how he overcame adversity.
Then he was picked up by the Minnesota Vikings, sat out most of the season and became, in the last month, one of the most important runners in pro football.


CHRONICLE
JANE FONDA, a good citizen, dutifully reported for jury duty in Atlanta on Wednesday, only to be excused because she had prior commitments.
Perhaps it was just as well.
Her mere presence in the Fulton County Courthouse, where she sat quietly reading a book, caused a fuss.
When it was her turn to be interviewed for a murder trial, she was dismissed from consideration "due to some meetings she couldn't rearrange," Sgt.
Nola Henderson, a bailiff, told The Associated Press.


Art in Review
Artists 'Select' Part I
Artists Space  38 Greene Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 15
Long of TriBeCa, Artists Space, the venerable alternative exhibition space, has returned to SoHo, where it began life in a loft above the Paula Cooper Gallery on Wooster Street nearly 20 years ago.
Its new home, a 7,000-square-foot loft on Greene Street, is being inaugurated with a two-part group show of 100 artists, each of whom has been selected by another artist.
At least as far as the first 50 artists are concerned, the selection process makes for a rollicking free-for-all.
The show has bright spots and low points in about equal amounts, introduces many new names while providing updates on some more familiar ones, and suggests that painting, even the abstract kind, is as alive as anything else these days.
Especially noteworthy are the efforts of Michael Bergt, Charles Yuen, Ellen Gallagher, Merrill Wagner, Kuozhong Lee, Maria Lino, Robin Kahn, David Krueger, Joseph Letitia, Janet Stein, Renee Cox, Kevin deForest, Holly Sumner and James Elaine.


Results Are Mixed Locally In N.H.L. Court of Justice
Crime and punishment, as well as insult and injury, were the subjects that unfolded off the ice in the National Hockey League yesterday:
*Brian Burke, the N.H.L. vice president for operations, held a hearing to determine whether Mick Vukota, an Islander right wing, should be banned for 10 games and his coach, Al Arbour, for 5 because Vukota left the bench to join a brawl with the Devils Tuesday night.
Burke, who could also fine the Islanders $10,000, said he would have no decision before today.


Hints of Viacom-Blockbuster Union
There was intense speculation on Wall Street yesterday that Viacom Inc. had found a surprising solution to its need for further financing in its quest for Paramount Communications Inc.: a combination with the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation.
Several people in the entertainment industry said last night that they had heard from Viacom executives that the company would make an announcement this morning.
Yet they cautioned that there was no certainty of what the announcement would be.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  BENEFIT ART SALE, Leo Castelli Gallery, 420 West Broadway, near Prince Street, Soho.
Works by 200 artists will be on sale to benefit the Foundation for Contemporary Performance Arts, which awards annual grants to artists and arts organizations.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 431-5160.


Czech Dissident Also Translated War Novel
To the Editor:
May I add a note to your Dec. 31 obituary article on Rita Klimova ("Rita Klimova, 62, Czech Dissident Who Became Ambassador to U.S.")?


Couples Clears His Mind and Cleans the Slate for New Year
Fred Couples was smiling through a slight case of the flu today.
His head ached.
He had some chills, and he felt a little weak.
But he wasn't complaining.
To hear him tell it, in his curiously fragmented fashion, he might never complain again.
After a season that he calls "a wasted year," Couples, 34, wants to rebound in 1994.
He wants revival.
This is not to say that '93 was a waste from a monetary standpoint.
After all, he did win more than $1.5 million around the world.
But personally and emotionally, Couples struggled.


Resourceful Library
To the Editor:
If Ranjit Singh Janjua of Astoria, Queens, could not find the origin of Christmas trees at his local public library (front page, Dec. 26), perhaps he failed to ask a librarian.
The librarian I spoke with at the Astoria branch of the Queens Borough Public Library found the information in "The Book of Holidays" by J. Walker McSpadden. (Briefly, the custom of decorating evergreen trees at Christmastime began in late 16th-century Germany and became popular in France, Britain and the United States in mid-19th century.) Mr.
Janjua could also have used our telephone reference service.
MIMI KOREN  Director of Public Relations Queens Borough Public Library Jamaica, Queens, Dec. 29, 1993


2 Admit Importing Heroin For Mafia Crime Family
Two brothers whom prosecutors described as the chief heroin smugglers for the Gambino crime family in the New York area have pleaded guilty to Federal charges of narcotics trafficking, murder and other crimes.
The two men, John and Joseph Gambino, entered the pleas late Wednesday night in Federal District Court in Manhattan after prosecutors agreed to recommend maximum sentences of 15 years without parole for each defendant.
The two men also pleaded guilty to charges of jury tampering, illegal gambling and loan sharking.


To Every Advertisement, Turn, Turn, Turn
Somewhere, Bart Giamatti is scowling.
The late baseball commissioner proselytized regularly about the pure ball park experience, where the sport was the thing, not canned music, insipid mascots or scoreboard worm races.
One can imagine that advertising behind home plate, for him, in the category of odious stadium inanities foisted on fans as entertainment during a game's dull stretches or concocted to increase income.


Heiress Dies After Beating and Spouse Is a Suspect
An heiress to the Scripps newspaper fortune died yesterday, almost a week after the police say she was bludgeoned by her estranged husband in their home in the Westchester County community of Bronxville.
The woman, Anne Scripps Douglas, 47, had an order of protection against her husband, Scott, the police said, and a warrant has been issued for his arrest in the attack.


Republicans Consider Weapons Curbs
Worried about a renewed public outcry over violence, State Senate Republicans are for the first time considering a proposal to restrict, and possibly ban, various rapid-fire assault weapons.
They have apparently made no decisions but find themselves torn between their traditional opposition to gun control and the sense that the public demands something to control crime.
They are also under political pressure this election year, in part because the Democratic Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, has made crime a top priority and has called for a special legislative session on violence on Jan. 17.


No Dent and No Letup for Kentucky
Kentucky 84, Notre Dame 59
Gimel Martinez scored 8 points in a 16-5 run over the final 6 minutes 21 seconds of the first half last night that carried No. 4-ranked Kentucky to an 84-59 victory over Notre Dame in Lexington, Ky.
Kentucky (11-1) won its ninth straight game and tied a school mark with its 30th consecutive victory in Rupp Arena.


I.R.S. Will Distribute Tax Forms in Spanish
The Internal Revenue Service will widely distribute tax forms in a language other than English for the first time, raising objections from some English-advocacy groups and members of Congress.
The agency will make 500,000 of the 1040A forms available in Spanish in Southern California and South Florida beginning on Friday, officials said.


Yen Slide Cheers Business in Japan
After a year in which "endaka" -- the rise of the yen -- struck fear into Japan's leading industries, the Japanese currency is now in retreat.
The strengthening of the dollar against the yen since the dollar's historic low point in August, amounting to a rise of more than 12 percent, could lead to improved profits for Japan's automobile and electronics giants and help pave the way for a slow but eventual recovery of the stagnant Japanese economy, company officials and economists suggest.
Toyota Now Sees Profit
Last summer, for instance, when currency rates had fallen to just above 100 yen to the dollar, the Toyota Motor Company said it might report its first operating loss ever.
But with the dollar having risen, Tatsuro Toyoda, the company's president, recently reaffirmed that the company now expects a small operating profit in the current fiscal year ending June 30.


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 28 about the former Teamsters Union leader Dave Beck misstated the amount of time served in prison by his successor, James R. Hoffa.
It was 4 years 9 months 16 days of a 13-year sentence, which was commuted by President Richard M. Nixon in 1971.


Inside Art
Doughboys in the Bronx
Here's a story with a happy ending.


Special Counsel in Clinton Deals Depends on Congress, Reno Says
Attorney General Janet Reno has decided to ask a court to appoint an independent prosecutor to investigate President and Mrs.
Clinton's Arkansas land investments as soon as Congress enacts a law enabling her to do so, senior Justice Department officials said today.
While Ms.
Reno still refuses to name a special prosecutor under her own authority, she herself suggested today that she would be willing to ask a panel of judges to make such an appointment under legislation now making its way through Congress.
Awaiting Congressional Action
The Clintons were partners in the real estate venture, the Whitewater Development Company, with James B. McDougal, the proprietor of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association, a failed Arkansas institution, and his wife, Susan.
The Justice Department is investigating whether Madison improperly funneled money into Whitewater or into Mr.
Clinton's 1984 campaign to be re-elected governor of Arkansas.


Guides for the Information Highway


Kerrigan Attacked After Practice; Assailant Flees
Nancy Kerrigan, the United States' best female figure skater and one of the gold-medal favorites for the 1994 Olympics, was attacked after practice today by an unidentified man who struck her on the right knee with a blunt object and escaped.
The attack jeopardized Kerrigan's chances of qualifying for the Winter Games next month in Lillehammer, Norway.
Kerrigan, who is 24 and lives in Plymouth, Mass., had just completed a practice at Cobo Hall in preparation for Friday's competition at the United States championships.
A witness said the attacker, described as a white man about 6 feet 2 inches and 200 pounds, hit Kerrigan with a club-like instrument resembling a tire iron, a crowbar or a nightstick.


O'Neill's Constituents Remember a Regular Guy, Not a Politician
Frank the barber, as Frank Minnelli is known here, was clipping sideburns this afternoon, but it was hard to keep his mind on his work.
All he could think about, all the people who kept stopping by could talk about, was the man who had been his customer, their friend and a regular guy from the neighborhood for more than 40 years -- Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr.
Mr.
O'Neill, 81, who was Speaker of the House from 1977 to 1987 and who represented parts of Cambridge and Boston for four decades, died on Wednesday night of cardiac arrest at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.


Whitman's Right-Hand Woman in Trenton; Hazel F. Gluck, Lobbyist, Friend and Political Pro, Has No Office but Plenty of Power
In the summer of 1992, two old friends, both political pros, finally found time for a long-promised lunch together.
"Right away I asked Christie, 'Are you going to run for governor?' And she said, 'Yes,' " Hazel Frank Gluck recalled the other day.


Fuller (H.B.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Gulotta Is Sworn In to a Second Term as Nassau County Executive


Texas Senator Indicted Again On Felony Misconduct Count
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison was reindicted today on a felony misconduct charge of misusing state employees and computer equipment during her time as Texas State Treasurer.
Amended indictments on three other charges are expected on Friday.
Mrs.
Hutchison had been indicted twice.
The first charges were dismissed on a legal technicality.


2 Suspicious Items Found
A section of the concourse at 4 World Trade Center was closed off and two stores evacuated for about 45 minutes yesterday afternoon after two suspicious packages were found in the building.
One of the items turned out to be a handbag left near a security work station, the other a bag of clothing near a bank of phones, said Gwen Williams, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the complex.
The two stores, Mrs.
Fields Cookies and the Athlete's Foot, the stores nearest the items, were shut down during the incident, which lasted from 2:15 to 3:03 P.M., Ms.
Williams said.
The building, in the southeast plaza of the complex, houses the Commodities Exchange.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a campaign to build its 'brand character,' ESPN is playing a provocative new game.
IN the fledgling realm of cable television, ESPN, which began presenting its sports programming in 1979, is the equivalent of a venerable consumer product brand like Ivory soap, Good &amp; Plenty candy or Fig Newtons.
ESPN is America's largest cable network, reaching 63.1 million homes.
But with the television universe becoming increasingly fragmented -- one can almost hear the couch potatoes wondering what's on Channel 343 tonight -- even ESPN must develop methods to burnish its brand identity among viewers and advertisers.


Carnival Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Word for Word; A Talk With Ginsburg On Life and the Court
New Supreme Court Justices customarily introduce themselves to the Court family -- the 300 or so people who work in the building -- by granting an interview to the Docket Sheet, a newsletter published for Court employees.
It was a relaxed and reflective Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg who answered questions from Toni House, the Court's public information officer, and Kathleen L. Arberg, the editor of Docket Sheet.
The result was a lively, informative interview, in some ways more revealing of the new Justice's approach to work and life than her days of cautious testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee last summer.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FINANCE OFFICIAL IS URGED TO RESIGN
Mayor Giuliani demanded the resignation of the new chairman of the New York City Campaign Finance Board and threatened to cut off the board's financing.
The chairman, Thomas J. Schwarz, refused to step down, offering instead to delay the beginning of his term for a few months so that the former chairman can complete his review of campaign spending in last year's mayoral race.
A1.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.46
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.05
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.24
3.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.34
5.41
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.34
6.40
7.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.32
7.35
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.55
5.56
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Wake Up, Mr. Schwarz
Thomas Schwarz still doesn't get it.
Mr.
Schwarz, an attorney, was appointed to replace the Rev.
Joseph O'Hare as chairman of New York City's Campaign Finance Board in an obvious act of score-settling by David Dinkins on his final working day as Mayor.
Mr.
Dinkins and his campaign aides were angered when the board fined the Dinkins campaign for exceeding the campaign spending limit in the 1993 mayoral primary.
For the good of the city, and to preserve the board's integrity and independence, Mr.
Schwarz should step aside.
Yet he still clings to the job despite calls from the new Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, several major civic groups and two board members asking him to resign.


Doner Is Selected By Musicland Stores
The Musicland Stores Corporation said yesterday that it had selected W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., to handle the creative portion of the national television advertising account for its Musicland and Sam Goody stores, previously handled in-house and on a project basis.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $8 million.


Giuliani Instructs Agencies To Cut Spending 1 Percent
Facing a gap in next year's budget estimated to exceed $2 billion, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has ordered most New York City agencies to cut spending by 1 percent immediately.
And to insure that he wrestles spending under control, Mr.
Giuliani has imposed what he called "a strict monitoring system" that requires agency heads whose spending goes over budget to meet with the budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, or Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers to explain why.
Anyone whose agency's spending rises more than 2 percent will have to explain the reasons to the Mayor himself.


Macy's Board Members Likely to Discuss Offer
As analysts up and down Wall Street debate the future of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, some members of the company's board are scheduled to meet this morning.
The 9:15 A.M. meeting had been scheduled to provide an update on holiday sales for board members who missed an earlier gathering on Dec. 17, but they are virtually certain to talk about the play that Federated Department Stores made earlier this week to merge with Macy.
Federated took a first step toward merging the two companies by buying $449.3 million of Macy debt, a stake that gives it a say-so in how and when Macy emerges from bankruptcy.


Art in Review
'Extended Relations'
Andrea Rosen Gallery  130 Prince Street  Through Jan. 15
It's a bit soon to start thinking about candidates for the best small group show of the year, but this elegant display of works by Dennis Balk, Mel Bochner and Nicolas Rule should be a strong contender.
Organized for the gallery by the collectors Alice and Marvin Kosmin, it glows with the light of mutual illumination.


Sounds Around Town
Improvisational Piano
Tommy Flanagan, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, near Sheridan Square, Greenwich Village, (212) 255 4037.
The master of effortless improvisation has just released a gorgeous album of the music of Thad Jones.
Mr.
Flanagan, a pianist, has some of the best repertory in jazz, and he usually performs music by Thelonious Monk, Tadd Dameron, Bud Powell and more; he's always an experience.
Shows tonight through Sunday night are at 9:30, 11 and 1; no third set on Sunday.
There is a $15 cover and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS New and Bluesy
Roland Hanna, Down Beat, 70 Grove Street, near Sheridan Square, Greenwich Village, (212) 620-4000.
Mr.
Hanna may be one of jazz's more underrated pianists, somebody who can execute a blues with real authority and take a ballad in a sympathetic direction.
He's helping to break in a new club, a welcome addition to what is already the jazz capital of the world.
Sets tonight through Sunday night are at 10 and midnight.
There's a $10 cover and a one-drink minimum.
P.
W.
Ballads on Sax
Pee Wee Ellis, Visiones, 125 McDougal Street, at West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 673-5576.
The tenor saxophonist will be leading a group that includes Will Boulware on organ, Rodney Jones on guitar and Grady Tate on drums.
They will be recording an album of ballads.
Mr.
Ellis, though he is best known for his years with James Brown, is a big-toned player who knows the saxophone tradition, the sort who will find an emotional feast in ballads.
Shows are on Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There's a $5 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.


Giving Alternatives To the Visible Poor
Morning came early, two hours before dawn, to residents of the homeless encampment along the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive esplanade between 38th and 40th Streets.
Members of a group dedicated to helping homeless people had come to wake them up and offer them a chance to move from one of the city's newer shantytowns.
"Don't run over no garbage bags," a team member said jokingly to the driver of the crowded van as it glided to a stop.
"You'll catch a vehicular manslaughter."


Amazon Dolphins Winning Badly Needed Friends
Besides the occasional boatload of tourists and a rambling two-story barge filled with pigs and other provisions, the Ticuna Indians who inhabit this tidy fishing hamlet on the Amazon River have little contact with the outside world.
An electric plant generates four hours of light a day.
Rain provides drinking water; when it doesn't rain, water from the river is boiled.
The town had one bicycle until a week ago, when two new children's bikes arrived.
There are no cars or trucks


Allwaste Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Women's Coach Loses
A Federal appeals court in San Francisco refused yesterday to order MARIANNE STANLEY reinstated as women's basketball coach at the University of Southern California, saying she failed to show she should be paid the same as the men's coach.


Restaurants
The last time I left Spain, a guard was pointing a rifle at me.
I never did figure out why.


A Mutual Rescue: Knicks Acquire Harper From Dallas
The Knicks' frantic search for a point guard ended yesterday when they rescued Derek Harper from pro basketball's Titanic, the Dallas Mavericks.
To acquire the 32-year-old Harper, the Knicks surrendered swingman Tony Campbell and a conditional 1997 first-round draft pick.
If the pick turns out to be in the top five, the Mavericks would receive the Knicks' No. 1 pick in 1998 instead.


Art in Review
Bill Jones
Lipton/Owens Gallery  53 Mercer Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 22
Old eyeglasses serve as lenses in Bill Jones's latest photograms, made without negatives.
Mr.
Jones dangles the eyeglasses above photo paper that he then exposes, recording negative images of the glasses, with light passing through their lenses causing different optical effects.


Ad Out for Women: No Sponsor, No Accord
Having come a long way with the help of a much-maligned sponsor, Philip Morris and its Virginia Slims subsidiary, women's tennis is going it alone, but far from unanimously, in 1994.
Not only does the Women's Tennis Association Tour have no sponsor besides itself, but it is also in the throes of an internal reorganization aimed at empowering a chief executive officer, a move that could drastically reduce what some perceive as already-dwindling player autonomy.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Brady An derson, outfielder, to a three-year contract extension through 1996.


Market Place; Investors in America West's stock are taking a big risk.
AMERICA WEST AIRLINES, by all appearances, is inspiring faith among many investors.
With news of a change in top management and a potential big investment from the Steinhardt Group, the stock has traded up more than 50 percent since late December, closing yesterday in Nasdaq trading at 117/32 , down 1/32 .


Argonaut Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; A Good Call on NATO
President Clinton is making some of America's best friends very unhappy -- Europeans who lived under Communism, fought it, and helped bring down the Soviet empire.
Next week he will make them even unhappier when he tells them face to face that the U.S. will not agree to their becoming members of NATO.
Face to face, he will have to deal with people like the Czech writer Vaclav Havel, who went from a Communist jail to the presidency of his country, and President Lech Walesa of Poland, the electrician who created a freedom movement that bound together workingman and intellectual.


King World Productions Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Charles P. Noyes, 82, Diplomat and Lawyer
Charles P. Noyes, a retired lawyer and diplomat, died yesterday in Huntington (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Syosset, L.I.
He had had Alzheimer's disease for some time, his family said.


Oneok Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


People
*
James V. Ficco 3d, executive vice president and chief operating officer at Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh, was named president, succeeding Jan Hedquist, who was promoted to vice chairman of advertising operations at the agency's parent, Ketchum Communications Inc.


Treasuries Up on Reich's Jobs Remark
Prices of Treasury securities traded sharply higher yesterday, and interest rates fell after remarks by Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich were interpreted as indicating that data on payroll employment for December, which are due out today, would show job growth below expectations.
Arousing the ire of a number of economists, Mr.
Reich, who was in Washington participating via satellite in a television forum in Paris, responded to a questioner seeking an indication of what the December employment numbers would show.


Court Hears Arguments on Assisted Suicide Ban
A three-judge panel of the Michigan Court of Appeals promised today to seek a speedy decision on the constitutionality of the state's ban on assisted suicide after hearing arguments in three cases, two of them involving Dr.
Jack Kevorkian.
"This is perhaps the first court in this country that has had to make the decision that we had to make," Judge E. Thomas Fitzgerald said.
"We will try to get you a decision as quickly as possible, doing the best we can."


Retailers' December Sales Solid
Most major retailers reported yesterday that their sales rose during December, though the range was very broad, from 13.3 percent at Sears, Roebuck for stores open at least a year to 1.1 percent at Kmart.
But underneath those higher sales was an enormous amount of price-cutting and promotions, which took a toll on profit margins.
Everywhere, the theme was value, value, value.


Toll in Peru's War With Rebels Is Down by Half
Charting a sharp decline for South America's fiercest guerrilla insurgency, the toll of human and economic losses in Peru's war with the Shining Path virtually dropped by half last year.
In the sharpest drop in the 13 years of the Maoist revolt, 1,692 people died in political violence last year, down from 3,101 in 1992.


Janet Reno's Shameful Delay
Attorney General Janet Reno seems hellbent on sacrificing her reputation to the White House's effort to contain the Whitewater Development flap.
Not only has she continued to refuse, on insultingly specious grounds, to appoint an independent counsel.
It now emerges that by so refusing, she has bought time for Justice Department and White House lawyers to cook up a deal to keep the Whitewater records under wraps.
Moreover, those records are being handled so sloppily that when an independent counsel is finally -- and inevitably -- appointed, that official will have to spend vast energy to be sure no evidence has been destroyed.
Is no one at the White House reading the history of recent Presidential scandals?
These clumsy efforts at suppression are feckless and self-defeating.
This White House's attempts to maintain political control of the investigation into President and Mrs.
Clinton's real estate dealings in Arkansas are swiftly draining away public trust in their integrity.


War Protester Abandons Life In Underground
Captured already by middle age and the weariness that comes with nearly a quarter-century on the run, one of the country's last fugitives from the politics and passion of the late 1960's surrendered here today.
The fugitive, Jeffrey David Powell, was a 19-year-old leader of the militant Weather Underground student group when hundreds of Weathermen stormed through Chicago during the "Days of Rage" in October 1969 to protest the war in Vietnam.


Martin's Widow Denied
Billy Martin's widow cannot sue for pain and suffering in his death and cannot collect damages from the town where the baseball manager died in a truck accident because of snow-covered roads, the Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court ruled yesterday.
The Appellate Division of the Supreme Court dismissed part of JILLUANN MARTIN's suit against WILLIAM REEDY, the town of Fenton, N.Y., and Ford Motor Credit Company.





Orioles Sign Anderson
MIKE DEVEREAUX and BRADY ANDERSON, two-thirds of the Baltimore Orioles' outfield, entered this year one season away from being eligible for free agency.
The Orioles have tried to trade Devereaux, but yesterday they signed Anderson to a three-year contract worth $10.25 million.


Home Video
For Children, and Parents
For Kidvidz, a distributor of children's videos in Newton, Mass., there are two not unrelated problems with supplying good tapes for viewers aged 2 to 12.


Michael Jackson Defends Himself


Diner's Journal; Christer's and Amarcord
So many new restaurants opened in New York City in the last few weeks of 1993 that it was hard to eat fast enough to keep up with them.
But two of the flashier newcomers are interesting because they are moving in opposite directions.
Christer Larsson and Pino Luongo are both famous food people in the city.
Mr.
Larsson was the chef at the beautiful, upscale Aquavit for six years.
Mr.
Luongo, of course, is the man who put Tuscany on New York's food map.
Each has opened a new restaurant in Manhattan.
One looks forward.
One looks back.


Sports of The Times; Disaster As Close as Nearest Fan
THE pistol made me nervous at first.
I wasn't used to being around guns, but there it was, a big nasty pistol that made a loud clatter when the manager plunked it down in a motel room.
"Er, could you turn that toward the wall?" I'd ask a bit nervously.
To accommodate me, he would drape a ball cap over the pistol.


2 Republican Power Brokers Make County Their Battleground
Who is Stephen P. Tenore and why is he saying all those terrible things about the Westchester County Executive?
That is the question Mr.
Tenore has provoked in recent months by his orneriness in running the county's 17-member Board of Legislators.
Why, Westchester politicians and community leaders are asking, is Mr.
Tenore giving his fellow Republican, Andrew P. O'Rourke, such a bad case of political heartburn by increasing the budget, blocking raises for county workers, and pushing for the independence of the county medical center, all with some choice adjectives for Mr.
O'Rourke?


Review/Art; An Early Champion of Modernists
When the collection of the dealer Charles Daniel was auctioned at Parke-Bernet Galleries in New York in 1946, an article about the sale referred to "the late Charles Daniel." In fact, Daniel was forgotten but not gone.
He lived until 1971.
No doubt the gallery he ran, which closed in 1932, had faded so much from people's minds by the end of World War II that the confusion was understandable.
Today, probably only a handful of people have more than the vaguest knowledge of him.
But a first-rate exhibition at the Zabriskie Gallery honoring Daniel and his gallery should help to rectify that.


Seles Out of Australian Open
Monica Seles, who hasn't played a match since she was stabbed in the back last April 30 while competing in Hamburg, Germany, announced yesterday that she would not be a last-minute entry at the Australian Open later this month.
Seles, No. 1 at the time that she was stabbed by a fanatical supporter of Steffi Graf, would have been attempting to win her fourth consecutive Australian Open, the Grand Slam event in which she holds a record of 21-0.
Seles hasn't set a timetable for her return but in the past has indicated that if she was forced to miss the Australian, she would not hurry back to the tour.


Technology Chief at Dell To Head PC Unit at MIPS
The Dell Computer Corporation's chief technology officer, Glenn Henry, resigned today to become director of the personal computer division for MIPS Technologies, a unit of Silicon Graphics Inc.
At MIPS, Mr.
Henry will lead the effort to move the MIPS microprocessor design, which has been primarily used in powerful work stations and servers, into mainstream desktop computing.
MIPS microprocessors employ RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, a technology that speeds computation by relegating more tasks to software.


Golden Boy Boitano Settles for a Second
The common wisdom said that Brian Boitano had the United States men's figure skating championships wrapped up beforehand.
Everyone else would be skating for second place.
Scott Davis begged to differ.
Victory would be earned, not given, he said.
And he was right.
Skating with vibrant energy, landing two triple axels to one for Boitano and spinning with unmatched speed and dexterity, Davis repeated as national champion tonight and earned a spot on the United States Olympic team for the Winter Games next month in Lillehammer, Norway.


Review/Photography; A Chronicler of Life, and of This Century
From its first issue in 1936 until its death as a weekly in 1972, Life magazine brought a mix of expressive news photographs and sassy captions into millions of American homes.
Many of Life's best-known images were taken by Alfred Eisenstaedt, one of the magazine's four original staff photographers; over the course of his long career, Mr.
Eisenstaedt carried out over 2,500 assignments for Life, and produced 86 covers.
Mr.
Eisenstaedt, who turned 95 last month, has been photographing since 1914, when he was a teen-ager in Berlin.
A worthy exhibition at the Circle Gallery in SoHo offers a charming survey of his career, which, at 79 years, has spanned nearly half the history of photography.


In New York's Southern District, Mediation Unjams the Courts
To the Editor:
In "Trouble in Foley Square" (Op-Ed, Dec. 27), Judge Kenneth Conboy, stepping down from the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, points out how an avalanche of lawyers, laws and dubious cases have crowded the court's docket.
He notes that "immense sums and years are spent in round after round of document production and counterproduction and endlessly multiplying depositions."


A Portal To Life In America
IF a museum is meant to be a place where things are displayed to teach us who we are and where we've come from, then the grimy and dank building at 97 Orchard Street in Manhattan that opened for tours last week may prove to be more intimately meaningful for many than the Louvre or the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The 130-year-old building, which had been boarded up since 1935, is now the centerpiece of the Lower East Side Tenement Museum.
From beneath its floorboards and between many strata of wallpaper have come notes and artifacts to illuminate the experiences of more than 1,300 people who passed through the building's 22 units.
Teams of historians have traced descendants of the original occupants and studied photographs, diaries and letters to uncover stormy dramas and mundane details of the very real folk who arrived at 97 Orchard Street, lived there and then left, most of them to enter further into America, to become Americans.


More States Ask Prudential Hearing Delay
Several states have joined an effort by California's top securities regulator to halt hearings temporarily on the biggest class action settlement stemming from the limited partnership scandal at Prudential Securities.
At least three states -- Indiana, Missouri and Utah -- have written letters to the Federal judge in the case calling for the halt.
Several others, including New Jersey and New Mexico, have asked California officials for more information, according to Gary S. Mendoza, the California securities regulator.


Irate Protesters Give Packwood No Break On a Visit to Oregon
He checks into hotels under assumed names and slips into public appearances through back doors or side entrances.
He begins earnest speeches on health care or timber and then ends up talking about his sexual failures and who kissed whom first.
For Senator Bob Packwood, his first tour of Oregon in more than four months finds him in the curious role of Senator Surreal.


A Guide to the City's Depression Murals
"ALICE and Friends at Coney Island Playland," a sprightly 55-year-old mural left for dead in an abandoned city hospital, has a new lease on life.
The painting, which depicts Alice in Wonderland and her buddies -- the White Rabbit, the Mock Turtle, the Mad Hatter and others -- parachuting over the Brooklyn amusement park, has been brought back to life for the entrance to the emergency room at Coney Island Hospital.
The "Alice" work, which is among 16 "Alice in Wonderland in New York City" panels dating from 1938 by one Abram Champanier, was painted in the throes of the Great Depression.
In those days, the Federal Government was playing Medici to its artists, and the "Alice" series was commissioned through the Federal Art Project of the Works Progress Administration, set up under the New Deal of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.


Despite Settlements, Mideast May Find Peace
To the Editor:
Whatever one may think of the Jewish settlements established in the West Bank and in Gaza, it should now be clear that they are obstacles to peace.
Their proponents cynically (and preposterously) maintained that they would encourage Jewish-Arab amity.
Now they are calling for establishment of additional settlements because, in the words of the settler group Zu Arteinu, "This is a way to break the peace process."


U.S. Aides Say They Still Back Aristide
A day after President Clinton said the Administration would reassess its support of Haiti's ousted President, Administration officials appeared to backpedal today, saying they were sticking to their goal of reinstating the Haitian leader.
Indeed, the officials said they planned to step up the pressure on Haiti's military leaders, who ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in September 1991.
They vowed to tighten the trade embargo unless the military commits itself by Jan. 15 to give up power.


New Criteria For Earnings
The listing of corporate earnings in Business Day now covers only companies that have at least $50 million in quarterly revenues.
Banking and insurance companies, which do not usually report revenues, are covered in the listing if their total assets exceed $2 billion.
In addition, for any company reporting a loss, the listing of corporate earnings now shows the loss per share.


Corrections
A brief report on the Health page on Dec. 29, about sources of help for people with the winter lethargy known as seasonal affective disorder, misidentified the maker of a light therapy device that simulates the dawn.
It is Pi Square Inc.; the Sunbox Company distributes it.


No One Gives the Steelers A Chance Except Steelers
This was going to be a great year for the Steelers.
Neil O'Donnell was a bright young quarterback, Barry Foster was becoming a premier runner, the offensive line was good and the defense was even better than the offense.
So what happened?
On Sunday, the Steelers slipped into the National Football League playoffs only because they beat the Cleveland Browns and both the Miami Dolphins and the Jets lost.


No Headline
"I am proud to have fought for my country against the criminal government of Richard Nixon. And I am very happy not to be at war with my government now." JEFFREY DAVID POWELL, surrendering after nearly a quarter-century as a fugitive.  [ A14:1. ]


More U.N. Troops for Rwanda
The Security Council unanimously approved a second deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces to Rwanda, doubling the force of 1,260 already deployed there.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali called last month for additional peacekeeping troops to improve the prospects for peace agreements between the Rwandan Government, formed by the majority Hutu ethnic group, and the rebel Rwandese Patriotic Front, which includes Tutsi exiles who invaded the country from Uganda in 1991.


Fare Cards: A Glimpse of the Future Underground
Token clerks and other transit employees wore bright yellow baseball caps, television crews taped one another using the new bright blue-and-yellow magnetized plastic cards and a man who usually sells tokens held a megaphone and did a passable impression of a sideshow barker.
"Step right up, ladies and gentlemen," he said.
"Five dollars, $10, $20 or more, it's your choice!"


Giuliani Demands Campaign Board Chief Resign
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani demanded the resignation of the new chairman of the New York City Campaign Finance Board yesterday and threatened to cut off the board's funds or to seek legislation to revamp it if he does not get his way.
The chairman, Thomas J. Schwarz, refused to step down, offering instead to delay the beginning of his term for a few months so that the former chairman, the Rev.
Joseph A. O'Hare, can complete his review of campaign spending in last year's mayoral race.


Seymour Lawrence, 67, Publisher For a Variety of Eminent Authors
Seymour Lawrence, an independent book publisher in New York City and Boston for almost 30 years who brought the first works of many important writers to the public, died on Tuesday at the Englewood Community Hospital in Englewood, Fla.
He was 67 and lived in Wilton, Conn.
The cause was complications of a heart attack, said Irene Williams, the publicity director of the publisher Houghton Mifflin, with which Mr.
Lawrence was affiliated.


Harper Can't Arrive Soon Enough for Riley
Tonight's performance showed why the Knicks acquired Derek Harper.
Winning in lackluster and sloppy fashion, the Knicks nearly squandered a 20-point fourth-quarter lead before escaping with a 92-86 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's record misstated the number of jobs created in New York during his tenure and then lost.
From January 1983, when Mr.
Cuomo took office, until April 1989, when job growth ended, New York gained 1,051,500 jobs, according to seasonally adjusted figures provided by the state Labor Department.
From April 1989 until November 1993, when job losses ended, New York lost 572,400 jobs.
The net gain for Mr.
Cuomo's tenure is 479,100.


United Stationers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.S. Official Visits Graves in Croatia
In one of several moves underscoring its determination to bring war criminals to justice in the former Yugoslavia, the Clinton Administration sent a Cabinet-rank official on a symbolic visit today to a grave here that is believed to hold the bodies of several hundred Croats massacred by Serbs.
On a more practical plain, that official, Madeleine K. Albright, the United States chief delegate to the United Nations, warned that the United States may use its Security Council veto to maintain the economic blockade of the Yugoslavian federation of Serbia and Montenegro until Belgrade hands over those accused of atrocities.


Review/Theater; Accepting Largesse For Mistaken Identity
Tony Randall has devoted himself so tirelessly to the fortunes of the National Actors Theater that you'd like to grant him the occasional indulgence.
The company is his, after all, and if he wants to take tickets at the door, direct Ibsen or even sell pina coladas in the lobby at intermission, that is his right.
He's earned it.
Nonetheless, why, oh, why did he ever cast himself as the lead in "The Government Inspector," the splendid comedy by Nikolai Gogol that opened last night at the Lyceum Theater?
Playing an opportunistic wastrel Gogol described as "a young man, about 23 years old, lean and slim," Mr.
Randall is relatively lean, moderately slim and exactly 50 years too old for the part.
Putting the make on a foolish provincial lass, he pleads at one point: "Look, I'm on my knees. Didn't you hear them crack?" It's not the only line to take on unwanted resonance under the circumstances.


Snow Blows, Fog Arrives, Revenue Meetings Swirl
Neither snow nor fog nor cold kept major league club owners from their apppointed rounds today.
They made it to their first revenue-sharing meeting in nearly five months, despite bad weather.
But after going round and round in various sessions, they fell one vote short of adopting a plan that would bring peace among the owners and the start of labor negotiations with the players.
The owners, who several times during the day divided into three separate caucuses, took votes on four plans that would increase the amount of local revenue the clubs would share.
A plan proposed by the eight clubs considered the high-revenue bloc received only 11 votes, but an amended form of a plan put forth by Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, received 20 votes.


Sounds Around Town
Mbira Master
Ephat Mujuru, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 545-7536.
The Zimbabwean musician is a master of the mbira, an instrument often referred to in the West as a thumb piano.
Played for centuries at spirit-possession ceremonies of the Shona people of Zimbabwe, it is considered the country's national instrument.
Mr.
Mujuru, who comes from a long line of mbira players and began studying the instrument at age 7, specializes in the music associated with all-night ceremonies that link the world of the living with departed ancestors.
Show time is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $12.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Judeo-Spanish Songs
Elias Ladino Ensemble, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 545-7536.
Ladino, one of the three major Jewish languages, has produced a rich and extensive repertory of Judeo-Spanish songs, many of which have been collected by Joseph Elias, who is regarded as the Pete Seeger of Ladino music.
With his ensemble, which was founded in 1976, Mr.
Elias performs songs that draw on Arabic and Spanish musical modes and influences from the Sephardic diaspora.
In addition to Mr.
Elias on vocals, the group includes his son Daniel on vocals and clarinet, Maurice Sedacca on lute, Scott Wilson on zither and Richard Khuzami on drums.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $12.
S.
H.


Jack Pickens Coble; Architect, 84
Jack Pickens Coble, the architect who designed the contemporary House of Good Taste for the 1964 World's Fair and Cole Porter's home in Williamstown, Mass., died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Coble was born in Greensboro, N.C.
He graduated from the Cornell University College of Architecture, where he won first prize in the 1934 Baird Prize Competition, $35 and a gold seal, for designing a proscenium arch and a curtain for an opera house.


Study Shows Wider Utility for Aspirin
A large new international study has shown that women, the elderly, diabetics and those with high blood pressure should be added to the groups of patients who should be given aspirin after they have survived heart attacks or strokes to prevent the risk of recurrence.
The study greatly strengthens the evidence that aspirin is beneficial for people who are experiencing a heart attack as well as for those who have survived a heart attack or stroke.


UConn and B.C.: Watch the Subplots
Bill Curley of Boston College and Connecticut's Donyell Marshall, the Big East's most conspicuous players, will be important factors when their teams meet tomorrow night in the Gampel Pavilion at Storrs, Conn.
But the performances of other players will be key to the outcome of the game between the conference's two most highly regarded teams.
Take, for example, Danya Abrams and Eric Hayward.


A Blurry U.S. Preview Down the Data Highway
For all the Clinton Administration's trumpeting of the national information infrastructure, there still seems to be little information and less structure.
Yesterday in Manhattan, Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown announced a 27-member communications- and media-industry council that will advise the Administration on information-policy matters.
But noticeably absent from the panel were big media companies like the ABC, NBC and CBS television networks.


Sheffield Is Exonerated
Criminal charges against GARY SHEFFIELD of the Florida Marlins, stemming from an altercation with some Houston police officers last summer, have been dismissed.


Madden Expected to Jump To 'Monday Night' Booth
John Madden's future may be with ABC's "Monday Night Football."
The CBS analyst, according to people in the broadcast industry, will quite likely sign with ABC.
He would replace Dan Dierdorf, who might shift to college football commentary on CBS or join the Fox Network.


Cuomo Backs Loan Program For Broadway
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has pledged to create a new state-financed program of loans for the repair and upkeep of Broadway theaters, whose owners have complained for more than a decade about government indifference.
With that -- although not as a quid pro quo, according to the official line -- two of Broadway's major theater owners dropped their opposition to the Walt Disney Company's plans to take over the New Amsterdam Theater on 42d Street, clearing away a high political hurdle faced by the project.


Clinton Seems Willing to Pay a Price To Keep Files on Land Deal Private
President Clinton has apparently decided he would rather bear the political consequences of being accused of hiding something about an Arkansas real estate venture than to allow all of the facts to become public.
The President's advisers said as much on Wednesday.
Their version of events is that they asked the Justice Department to subpoena documents relating to Mr.
Clinton's investment in the Whitewater Development Corporation so it would be less likely that the material would be disclosed publicly.


Mr. Cuomo's Sobering Summons
Plenty of people have said that Gov.
Mario Cuomo sounded like a Republican in his speech to the New York State Legislature on Wednesday.
Many have also observed that the three main issues he addressed -- the economy, welfare and crime -- are uppermost in the minds of New York voters and thus an excellent formula for victory should he decide to run for a fourth term.
Yet far too little has been made of a more compelling point: As legislative programs go, the Governor's is eminently achievable.
In that sense his address is a pointed challenge to the Legislature, especially the Republicans who have so often thwarted him -- and to Mr.
Cuomo, who has a habit of thwarting himself.


Sudbury Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Accounts
*
Ernst &amp; Co., New York, to New York Creatives Inc., New York, to handle advertising for the financial services company, previously at Ponzi &amp; Weill, New York.
Billings have not been determined. *
Knogo Corp., Hauppauge, L.I., to Genova Hartwick Juliano, Greenwich, Conn., to handle the surveillance-system manufacturer's account, previously in house.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


F.C.C. Officials See Hurdles In Curbing Stern's Employer
Pointing to a recent court decision that struck down Federal restrictions on indecent broadcasting, officials at the Federal Communications Commission said today that they might not be able to stop the company that employs Howard Stern, the radio personality, from buying more stations.
Mr.
Stern's chief critic at the F.C.C., James H. Quello, a commissioner, conceded today that the commission would face big legal obstacles in any attempt to block the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, Mr.
Stern's employer, from buying three radio stations for $170 million.


U.S. Law Agencies Told To Destroy Gun Surplus
The Federal Government ordered all Federal law-enforcement agencies today to destroy their surplus and outmoded firearms rather then sell them to gun dealers for resale to the public.
In the past 10 years, more than 60,000 revolvers, rifles, shotguns and semiautomatic pistols have been have been sold by Federal agencies to dealers for resale to the general public, with the proceeds from the dealers going to offset the operating costs of the agencies.


Lillian Vernon Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Richard Harrison, Avid Bird-Watcher And Map Maker, 92
Richard Edes Harrison, one of the country's foremost map makers and a well-known New York bird-watcher, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 92.
He had had a brief illness, his family said.


Rabbi Malcolm Stern, 78, Dies; Historian of Judaism in the U.S.
Rabbi Malcolm H. Stern, a historian of American Judaism and its premier genealogist in the United States, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 78 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his wife, Louise.


American Medical Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Human Rights, Chiapas, Spring 1993
In May -- more than seven months before the New Year's rebellion that has taken scores of lives in Chiapas, in southwestern Mexico -- a team of observers from Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights visited Chiapas to investigate reports that soldiers and police officers had beaten, tortured and illegally detained civilians.
What follows are excerpts from the team's report, prepared by Eric Rosenthal and published to little notice in August 1993.
ANDREW REDING, director of the North America project of the World Policy Institute
In Chiapas, on March 28-29, 1993, following the disappearance and presumed killing of two soldiers, approximately 400 soldiers and a handful of police arbitrarily detained, searched and beat civilians in two Tzotzil  [ Indian ]  villages.
Police tortured a number of those detained.
On April 25, about 200 police returned to the same village, searched and looted homes, and again interrogated and tortured villagers.


Louise Averill Svendsen, 78, Dies; Was Guggenheim's Senior Curator
Louise Averill Svendsen, an art historian and former curator and administrator at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, died sometime last week at her home in Manhattan.
Her body was found on Monday by the superintendent of the building in which she lived.
She was 78.
She died of natural causes, said her brother, Roswell Averill of St. Simons Island, Ga.


Miscellany
*
Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, has acquired Joe Duffy Design Inc., Minneapolis, after a nine-year affiliation.
Terms were not disclosed.
Joe Duffy, president and chief creative director of the design group, will serve on Fallon's board and continue in his current positions.
Joe Duffy Design will not change its name.


INSIDE
Retreat of the Japanese Yen
The Japanese yen is falling in value against the dollar after a year-long rise, and that is cheering Japanese industry.
Page D1. 60's Radical Surrenders
Closing a chapter on Chicago's "Days of Rage" in 1969, a fugitive from the militant Weather Underground group turned himself in.
Page A14.
Trenton Woman of Influence
Though little known outside New Jersey, Hazel Gluck has become a kind of godmother to her state's Republican women's movement.
Page B1.
F.C.C.
Shift on Howard Stern
An F.C.C. commissioner conceded that it would be hard to stop Howard Stern's employer from buying more radio stations.
Page D1.
A Glimpse of the Future
At two subway stations, magnetized fare cards began to replace tokens, which are intended to go the way of the horse-drawn trolley.
Page B3.
Skater Is Assaulted
Nancy Kerrigan, an Olympic gold medal favorite, held her knee after an attack yesterday in Detroit that jeopardized her qualifying chances.
SportsFriday, page B7.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  U.S.
TO PENALIZE CHINA ON TRADE  The Clinton Administration said it planned to cut the amount of clothing and fabrics China can export to the U.S. by more than $1 billion.
The move is in retaliation for efforts by China to get around American limits on imports by shipping goods through other nations.
A1  FURIOUS CLASHES IN SARAJEVO  Bosnian Serbs hammered Sarajevo with shells and clashed with Government troops along a southern battlefront in the capital.
It was the sixth straight day of heavy fighting in the city, and the Serbs said more would follow unless the Muslim-led army gave up the battle.
A1


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Blazers Win With Rally  Cliff Robinson scored 21 of his 29 points in the second half as the Portland Trail Blazers came back from a 20-point halftime deficit to beat the Charlotte Hornets, 116-110, last night.
Portland has beaten Charlotte all seven times the two teams have met at the Charlotte Coliseum.


Billy Sullivan Jr.; Baseball Player, 83
Billy Sullivan Jr., who played for seven major league teams over 12 seasons before retiring in 1947, died of heart failure on Tuesday at the Springwood Nursing Home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 83.
Sullivan, who played for the pennant-winning Detroit Tigers in 1940 and for the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1942, had a career batting average of .289 in 962 games.
His father, Billy Sullivan, who died in 1965, was a catcher in the majors from 1899 to 1916, mostly with the Chicago White Sox, whom he also managed in 1909.


Heavy Shelling And Firefights Rake Sarajevo
Smoke billowed from burning homes along a battlefront in the southern part of this city today after predawn artillery barrages were followed by furious infantry clashes and heavy shelling that lasted until dusk.
Soldiers of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government and Sarajevo radio reports said the Serbs had launched the attack.
Serbian radio blamed the Bosnian Army for starting the clashes, which took place along a front line near the old Jewish Cemetery.


At the Bar; Falsely accused: In a humiliating arrest, a black judge finds lessons of law and race relations.
Almost a month has now passed since Judge Claude Coleman's fateful visit to the Bloomingdale's at the Mall in Short Hills, N.J., when an innocent Christmas shopping trip turned into a nightmare of false accusations, public humiliation and eventual vindication.
He is back behind the bench in Newark Municipal Court and back, at least superficially, to his old good-natured self.
But despite apologies from Bloomingdale's and the Millburn, N.J., Police Department, Judge Coleman, who served as director of Newark's fire and police departments before joining the judiciary, is still smarting -- and thinking.
He is pondering just how fragile things like a reputation and the presumption of innocence can be.
He is also wondering what, if anything, a black man must achieve to be beyond suspicion.


Judge Bars Nanny's Bid to Go to Jail Mental Unit
Saying she was too distraught to appear in court, the nanny who last month admitted killing a child in her care tried to admit herself to the psychiatric unit of the Westchester County Jail today.
But a judge angrily blocked that action, instead issuing a warrant for her immediate arrest.
"Yes, she is anxious," the judge, J. Emmett Murphy, said in Westchester County Court.
"No, she cannot have this on her terms."


Mexico Offers an Amnesty To Rebels as They Retreat
As the Mexican Army sealed off roads into battle zones outside this southern city today and troops pursued hundreds of retreating guerrillas, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari said the Government would consider a pardon for rebels who gave themselves up.
Although the fighting, which began when the guerrillas took over four towns before dawn on Saturday, appeared to be dying down, the military blocked reporters from entering areas in which they had moved relatively freely, making it impossible to determine whether the rebels were regrouping or were fully in retreat.


Grey and Gerber Part on U.S. Account
The Gerber Products Companyindep and Grey Advertising Inc.indep in New York said yesterday that they had mutually decided to part ways on the American food portion of Gerber's account, with total billings estimated at $15 million to $20 million.
They jointly cited "emerging conflicts" between the Gerber Graduates line of toddler foods and products marketed by other Grey clients including Dannon yogurt and Kool-Aid powdered drink mix.
Al Piergallini, chairman, president and chief executive of Gerber, said in a statement that the company "will now work with other U.S. marketing communications firms on a project-by-project basis." The identities of those agencies could not be determined; a call yesterday to company headquarters in Fremont, Mich., was answered by a woman who said corporate executives had left for the day.
In his statement, Mr.
Piergallini said Grey continued as the Gerber agency in Latin America, while Apco Associates, a Grey subsidiary in Washington, would continue to represent Gerber in public affairs activities.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the number of homicides in New York City in 1993 included several incorrect figures supplied by the Police Department.
The final tally for homicides in 1992 was 1,995, not 2,007.
Of those, the police say, guns were used in 75 percent, not 52 percent.
In addition, according to preliminary department figures for 1993, the 34th Precinct had the most homicides of any precinct in Manhattan, but did not rank second citywide.
Similarly, the 44th Precinct had the most homicides in the Bronx, but did not rank third citywide.


FRANCE TO DEPORT MORE IMMIGRANTS
With a new nationality law and tougher immigration rules now in place, France's conservative Government has unveiled plans to step up deportations of undocumented foreigners to discourage illegal immigration from Eastern Europe and North Africa.
"When we have sent home several planeloads, even boatloads and trainloads, the world will get the message," Charles Pasqua, the hard-line Cabinet minister who is in charge of security and immigration affairs, said on Wednesday.
"We will close our frontiers."


Films Born Of Ill-Hidden Agendas
Anyone still under the illusion that propaganda is foreign to the American way of life, a totalitarian spore that never landed in this country's democratic climate, should visit the American Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens, over the next four weekends.
It will be time well spent, both as an engrossing history lesson and as an all-out hoot.
"Our Secret Century: Revelations From the Prelinger Archives," a retrospective of 160 industrial, advertising and educational films from 1935 to 1965, presents a rich sampling of the ways that American corporations and government, at every level, have urged us to think and to behave in lockstep.


Despite Settlements, Mideast May Find Peace; Never-Ending Interim
To the Editor:
"A Deadline Slips in the Mideast" (editorial, Dec. 15) suggests that the stalled Middle East peace talks can be put back on track if the parties "try harder to resolve their differences, most of which concern numbers, not basic principles." But the peace process is mired precisely because its most basic principle -- that decisions now about control of territory are only temporary -- is no longer believed by the Israeli side.


For Children
'Jazz for Young People'
Wynton Marsalis  Alice Tully Hall  (212) 721-6500 (Centercharge)  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Tomorrow
Wynton Marsalis is going to try something difficult: teaching the blues to children.
The blues, the often melancholy jazz that emerged in the first decade of this century, is hard to listen to without feeling slightly sad.
"But if you have the blues and you give something to the blues, it gets rid of the blues," Mr.
Marsalis said.


Despite Settlements, Mideast May Find Peace; The Bedouins Adapt
To the Editor:
"The Bedouins' Eviction Notice" (Op-Ed, Dec. 29), Prof.
Clinton Bailey's attack on Israeli Government policy toward Bedouin citizens, is emotional and unfounded.
To make his case of Government mistreatment, Mr.
Bailey uses such inflammatory language as "waging a kind of war against the Bedouin tribes," "ethnic cleansing" and expulsion.


Art and Government in an Uneasy Alliance
Most of New York City's New Deal murals were sponsored by the Federal Art Project, the biggest and most influential of four agencies established by the Government to help artists during the Depression.
From its inception in 1935 until its dissolution in 1942, the art project was responsible for some 200 murals in the city.
Among the better-known New York artists who earned weekly Federal paychecks doing murals, easel paintings and sculptures for the art project or other New Deal programs were Jackson Pollock, Isamu Noguchi, Reginald Marsh, Philip Guston, Ben Shahn and Stuart Davis.
Perils of Poetry
The average salary was less than $25 a week, but in those days that was nothing to sneeze at.
Still, making public art could be as complicated as it is now.


With Talks Back on Track, a Visit to a Bridge


Coleman and Anderson Get the Attention
They are the leading vote-getters at their positions for the Eastern Conference All-Star team.
They lead the Nets in most categories and they have earned deep respect from their opponents this season.
But for forward Derrick Coleman and guard Kenny Anderson, it's a double-edged sword these days.
"The respect is good; I've just got to find a way to beat the triple team," Coleman said on Wednesday night, after he grabbed a team-high 12 rebounds, but scored only 9 points while missing 8 of 11 shots from the field -- one on a dunk attempt -- in New Jersey's 100-91 loss to Milwaukee at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Bruce Peyton; Playwright, 44
Bruce Peyton, a playwright and lyricist, died on Dec. 25 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said James Seymour, a friend.


Berlin Journal; City of Tomorrow (Then Why the Self-Doubt?)
Poised to become an important political and financial center of the 21st century, Berlin is nonetheless gripped by uncertainty and insecurity.
For nearly 50 years, life in Berlin has been predictable and, in the west, very good indeed.
Eager to make West Berlin an attractive place to live, the West German Government gave its residents special concessions ranging from tax credits to cheap theater tickets to a blanket exemption from the military draft.
Tourists filled the city.


No Credit History? No Problem With a Secured Card
Oscar Hoyos, 29, of Elmhurst, Queens, tried to get a credit card many times but was consistently rejected.
Without a credit history, he knew he would have a problem if he ever wanted a loan to expand his limousine business or to attend college.
Then one day a bank commercial on a Spanish television station caught his eye.
He contacted the bank, People's Bank of Bridgeport, Conn., and applied for the card advertised.
After he deposited $1,000 at the bank, he received a so-called secured credit card.
Thses cards are intended for people with tarnished credit histories or none at all.


Integration in Chicago
To the Editor:
"An Underground Railroad From Projects to Suburbs" (news article, Dec. 1) suggests that I consider Chicago's Gautreaux housing program an effort at "forced integration." That term suggests that low-income black families are compelled to enter the program and to move into predominantly white communities.


Thailand Wants Peace Next Door in Cambodia; Dirty Business
To the Editor:
I applaud your Dec. 19 front-page article and "How to Help Cambodia" (editorial, Dec. 23) for pointing out that Thailand's corrupt military is keeping the Khmer Rouge in business and that only direct pressure from the United States can bring an end to this destructive relationship.


Big Oil Spill Off Puerto Rico Fouls Beach at Height of Tourist Season
A barge carrying more than 1.5 million gallons of heavy fuel oil struck a coral reef off the coast today and began spilling its pungent cargo along the city's premier resort beaches.
The 750,000-gallon spill, occurring at the height of the winter tourist season, spread across a mile and a half of turquoise coastline -- roughly half the length of the San Juan beachfront.
Currents moved the oil and its overpowering stench westward, toward the walled colonial city of Old San Juan, and eastward, toward the Condado and Ocean Park tourist sections, where most of the city's luxury hotels are situated.


Assumable Mortgage Is Trying a Comeback
THE assumable fixed-rate mortgage, a relic from the halcyon days before the high inflation of the 1970's and 1980's, is being unearthed and repackaged for home buyers in the low-inflation 1990's.
Such loans -- which allow qualified buyers to take over an owner's mortgage at the same interest rate -- remain uncommon, but are being offered by about 20 lenders across the country.
Among the largest is the Barclays American Mortgage Company, which is based in Charlotte, N.C., and has 13 branches.


NEWS SUMMARY
International -6  NATO OFFERS POLAND A DEAL  The United States told Poland that NATO was willing to hold joint military exercises on its territory this year.
The offer is part of an effort to persuade East European countries to accept a relationship short of full NATO membership.  1  U.S.
SEEKS HARMONY ON BOSNIA  Three days before a NATO summit meeting, the United States and France agreed to paper over their differences over Western military involvement in Bosnia.
Many Israelis worry about the bitter language that has crept into the debate on peace.  3  FIRES RACE UP AUSTRALIAN COAST  Thousands of people jammed into cars to flee brush fires that have raged out of control on the coast of New South Wales.
New fires were reported almost hourly outside Sydney, Australia's biggest city.  4  ERASING HISTORY IN SEOUL  In the year since he came to power, South Korea's President has been on a wrecking-ball craze, tearing down any reminder of Japan's 40-year domination of his country.
The latest target is a museum that some curators would prefer to preserve.  4  As Crimea's misery grows, so does a longing for Russia.  5  Two weeks after drastic floods, waters rose again along the Rhine.  4 National 7-9  VIACOM TOPS QVC'S BID  Viacom submitted a $105-a-share cash offer for 50.1 percent of Paramount Communications, topping QVC Network's bid.
KELLEY'S HIDDEN ILLNESS  Virginia Clinton Kelley may have seemed fine, but President Clinton's 70-year-old mother, who died this week of complications from breast cancer, had been receiving intensive treatment for her condition.  7  WHITE HOUSE FIGHTS G.O.P.
Luis Quero Chiesa, politician and an educational administrator.
Fred C. Scribner Jr., Treasury official in the 1950's.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  A new opening in North Korea.
The shrinking Speaker.
Angels in Albany -- and City Hall?
No time to dump Aristide.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: A Pyrrhic victory.
Russell Baker: This mortal coil.
Roger Wilkins: A loud silence on racism.
Darin F. Detwiler: Tragedy wasn't enough.
Lynn Duggan and Nancy Folbre: Women and children last.
Bridge 19 Chronicle 24 Crossword 16


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.08
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
3.03
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.22
3.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.17
5.34
6.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.22
6.34
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.20
7.32
8.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.55
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Company Stays With Kerrigan
The attack on figure skater Nancy Kerrigan on Thursday will not affect her relationship with Campbell's Soup, which features her in one of five commercials for a campaign called "Never Underestimate the Power of Soup."
"We'll keep running it for the next couple of months," said Kevin Lowery, a Campbell's spokesman.
"We've worked with Nancy for a year and a half, and we've created quite a relationship with her. She's like family."


G.O.P. Sounds Confident, But Unity Proves Elusive
Though New York State Republican leaders publicly brim with confidence about their chances of unseating Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo this fall, their party remains disunited in ways that remind some of the fiasco that resulted in their crushing loss to Mr.
Cuomo in 1990.
At last count, 12 men were vying for the Republican nomination, but none have been able to unite the party's key factions.
And while leaders of the Republican and Conservative parties have talked about uniting behind a single challenger, tensions within and between the two parties have hamstrung their search and created the appearance of disarray among the anti-Cuomo forces.


Rivals Agree Kerrigan Rates Olympic Spot
The top finishers in the women's short program at the United States Figure Skating Championships said tonight that they would accept any decision placing Nancy Kerrigan on the Olympic team, even though she withdrew from the competition today after being assaulted on Thursday.
Tonya Harding of Portland, Ore., who is seeking to make her second Olympic team, won the short program today.
Nicole Bobek of Chicago finished second, and Michelle Kwan, the 13-year-old world junior champion from Los Angeles, took third.
Elaine Zayak of Paramus, N.J., the 1982 world champion, finished a satisfying fourth in her return to amateur skating.


People Near and Far Still Give to Neediest
It has been 3 1/2 years since Paul and Wendi M. Gilbert moved from New York City to San Francisco.
But after helping prepare a dinner this Thanksgiving for the homeless in nearby Santa Cruz, Calif., they could not stop thinking about the legions of poor and homeless in the city they left behind.
"Even though we no longer live in Manhattan, we will always feel connected to The City," the Gilberts wrote recently in a letter accompanying their $25 donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"New York often gets a bad rap about being such a cold, uncaring place, but we choose to remember the basic 'can do' spirit that has always helped New York and New Yorkers survive."


Thailand Wants Peace Next Door in Cambodia
To the Editor:
"In Big Threat to Cambodia, Thais Still Aid Khmer Rouge" (front page, Dec. 19) accuses Thailand of maintaining a special tie with and assisting the Khmer Rouge.
This is unfair to the Thai Government and armed forces, which have played a constructive role to restore peace and stability to Cambodia for more than a decade.


Amtrak Shows Gains, but Needs Help
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 26 report that Amtrak is pressing for funds to buy cars and equipment is too bleak.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The job market strengthened further last month, with payrolls swelling by 183,000 and the unemployment rate falling to 6.4 percent.
Economists said the numbers supported optimistic forecasts for the economy in the early months of 1994 but that they did not frighten those watching for symptoms of revived inflation.  [ Page 1. ]  New Jersey's unemployment rate jumped to 7.1 percent, from 6.2 percent.
New York State and New York City rose slightly.  [ 47. ]
Consumers increased buying on credit in November, although not as much as in October.  [ 39. ] Companies
Viacom submitted a $105-a-share cash offer for 50.1 percent of Paramount, beating a deadline to top QVC Network's bid.
It will also pay $8.4 billion in stock to merge with Blockbuster Entertainment, the home video company that has backed its Paramount bid.  [ 1. ]  Stock analysts said Viacom's offer for Paramount was actually lower than it appeared.  [ 51. ]
A combination of Viacom, Blockbuster and Paramount would represent a culmination of an investing strategy by Blockbuster's chairman, H. Wayne Huizenga.
Thanks to his cash-rich video chain, he would become vice chairman of the combined company.  [ 51. ]
Tri-Star Pictures's chairman Mike Medavoy resigned amid personal tensions with Peter Guber, chairman of Sony Pictures.
The resignation was a sign of turmoil at Sony films.  [ 39. ]
Pacific Telesis will set aside $576 million and take an additional charge of $89 million to cover the costs of a revamping at Pacific Bell that will eliminate 10,000 positions by the end of 1997.  [ 39. ]
Rite Aid will sell four nondrugstore businesses, close 200 underperforming drugstores and buy back as many as 22 million of its outstanding common shares.
The company's stock jumped.  [ 41. ]
Food Lion will take a $103 million after-tax quarterly charge for closing 88 supermarkets in the Southeast and Southwest.  [ 41. ]
Cray Research's former chairman John A. Rollwagen will become chairman of Plasma and Materials Technologies.  [ 41. ] Markets
Interest rates fell as the prices of Treasury securities rose after the release of unemployment data for December that indicated the economy was growing only moderately as 1993 ended.  [ 39. ]
Stocks rose across the board in reaction to the fall in interest rates.
The Dow industrials posted another record close.  [ 40. ]
The dollar tumbled against the German mark and slipped against the Japanese yen.  [ 50. ]  Precious metals fell.  [ 50. ] International
China threatened the U.S. with retaliation for slashing the amount of textile goods it can export to America.
But it also signaled it might be open for negotiations.
And Treasury Secretary Bentsen gave Beijing 10 days to work things out.  [ 39. ]
Many economists now believe that poor countries that want to grow rapidly will not necessarily experience a widening gap between the haves and have-nots.
They are beginning to view income equality as compatible with faster growth -- and perhaps even contributing to it.  [ 39. ]
Shares of Metallgesellschaft plunged in Germany.
The company expects big losses from oil trading by an American unit.  [ 41. ] Your Money
This is a good time to make adjustments in retirement portfolios to avoid an ill-advised concentration in one sector.  [ 37. ]
Investors who lost billions in Prudential Securities partnerships face a decision on how to pursue compensation.  [ 37. ]
The assumable fixed-rate mortgage is being unearthed and repackaged for home buyers in the low-inflation 1990's.  [ 38. ]


Crimea Vote Raises Regional Tension
The poor relations between Ukraine and Russia, already tense over Ukraine's nuclear weapons and its inability to pay for Russian oil, are likely to be aggravated by the election on Jan. 16 of the first President of Crimea.
A peninsula with balmy weather and a beautiful coast that juts into the Black Sea, Crimea is home to the Black Sea Fleet, an aging fleet of rusting ships that Ukraine and Russia continue to bicker over.


Collins Says He'll Be Ready Sunday
The Giants are hoping that cornerback Mark Collins, who could barely walk Thursday because of a mild sprain to his left knee, will be able to play against the Minnesota Vikings Sunday.
They are listing their star cornerback as probable.
As ice and snow blanketed the region, the Giants moved indoors to the Meadowlands Tennis Center in Carlstadt, N.J., where Collins had a limited workout with the team.
He said that his knee is still sore but that he would play in the wild-card matchup with the Vikings because the game is too important to miss.


Vigor Masked Illness of Clinton's Mother
Contrary to the impression she created in recent public appearances that her health was fine, Virginia Clinton Kelley, President Clinton's mother, who died on Thursday of complications from breast cancer, had been under medical supervision over the last several months and had been receiving intensive treatment for her condition.
But up to the moment she died in her sleep at home in Hot Springs, Ark., a family member said today, Mrs.
Kelley, who was 70, displayed an indomitable spirit, pushing herself to her limits and seldom discussing her battle against breast cancer.


Angels in Albany -- and City Hall?
Gov.
Mario Cuomo's commitment to a new loan program for Broadway theaters is a vital boost for New York City's cultural core, as well as for the project to make the seedy parts of Times Square glow again.
Mr.
Cuomo does not propose to risk tax dollars on hits and flops; rather, Albany would help set up a new state and local program offering loans to rescue, renovate and modernize existing commercial Broadway theaters.


HEAVY RAIN CAUSES NEW RHINE FLOODS
Two weeks after the worst floods along the Rhine this century, the waters rose again today but were not expected to reach the record heights that drove tens of thousands of people from Coblenz to Rotterdam out of their homes over Christmas.
The river crested at 54 feet above sea level then, and began receding here on Christmas Day.
But continuing heavy rains downstream ever since caused it to start rising again at the start of the year, and it is now only about three feet below where it was at Christmas.


Sports of The Times; No Question, Kerrigan Deserves Spot
THEY owe her.
They owe her big-time.
Nancy Kerrigan was injured on company time.
She is hobbling around with a wounded knee because the United States Figure Skating Association did not stop a goon from whacking her on the knee.
Now the officials must protect Kerrigan, however belatedly.
When they go into their meeting tonight after the final event, the 40 members of the skating association's international committee must put her on the team that is going to the Winter Games in February.


Slain Heiress Is Remembered as Trusting
Anne Scripps Douglas was an heiress with the cushion of the Scripps newspaper fortune, but she struck her friends as someone who needed their protection.
"I always wanted to fold her in my arms and pat her," said Dorothy Brennan, a friend and neighbor in Bronxville.
"She was a beautiful person with an air of innocence. She was not of this world."
Indeed, her life, beginning with her schooling in an upstate convent school and almost until she was bludgeoned to death in the village of Bronxville in Westchester County, had an aura of having been a sheltered one.


New Shoes for Knight
After nearly 14 years with Adidas, BOBBY KNIGHT has a new pair of shoes.
The athletic equipment company announced on Thursday that it was ending its long relationship with the Indiana coach because he failed to wear the company's apparel as required by his contract.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Harold Mayer Weston, a lawyer who was an expert in labor-relations management and government, misstated the day of his death.
It was last Saturday, not Sunday.


Moynihan Says President Is Insincere About Reforming the Welfare System
The tempestuous chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, accused the White House this week of acting in bad faith on welfare reform, and he threatened that he "might just hold health care hostage" as a result.
But reached at home late tonight, Senator Moynihan said he didn't really mean it, not all of it, anyway.


The Shrinking Speaker
Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., dead at 81 this week, was a well-liked Massachusetts Democrat and competent Speaker of the House who memorably remarked, "All politics is local." Yet it is also true that the office of Speaker has shrunk in authority and prestige in part because so many House Democrats have pushed the O'Neill axiom to its logical conclusion.
They care more about sentiment in their home districts, as in the Nafta vote, than about the merits of the argument and the success or failure of a Democratic President.
Fidelity to party mattered far more a century ago, when The Washington Post expressed a common view about the Speaker: it was an office "no less consequential than the President." During the 1890's, Thomas Reed of Maine was the unquestioned ruler of the House, "ambitious as Lucifer," as a rival said, who clearly spoke for its Republican majorities.
The era of the czars and bosses continued with Joseph Cannon of Illinois, Champ Clark of Missouri, Nicholas Longworth of Ohio and Sam Rayburn of Texas.


Harold Watson, 82, Pioneer in Air Force
Maj.
Gen.
Harold E. Watson, a pioneering Air Force pilot and aeronautical engineer, died on Wednesday at Jupiter Hospital in Jupiter, Fla.
General Watson, who lived in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., was 82.
The cause was emphysema, said a friend, Col. Ray Sleeper.


Islanders Win One, But Arbour Loses Five
The Islanders beat the Calgary Flames, 6-2, tonight at Nassau Coliseum with four players appearing in their first National Hockey League game and their coach under suspension for the first time in a career of more than 20 seasons.
The players were Jamie McLennan, the starting and winning goalie; Zigmund Palffy, a left wing; Jason Simon, a left wing, and Dan Plante, a right wing.
The coach, Al Arbour, was serving the first part of a five-game suspension.
He sat high above the ice watching the Islanders end their losing streak at four games before an announced crowd of 11,373.


Without a Carriage Law, an Old Debate Rears Its Head
In the 1980's it was one of the most hotly debated bills before the New York City Council.
Last month its renewal proved contentious again.
And now, with the old law expired, the city's regulations on the horse-drawn carriages that roll through Central Park and parts of Manhattan is provoking more fury and political machinations.
The law regulating carriages expired with the new year, and David N. Dinkins vetoed new legislation on his next to last day as Mayor.
This left a legal loophole big enough for, well, a horse to ride through.


At 52 Years Old, Dave Stockton Finally Finds Out He Has a Fastball
What Dave Stockton has done in two days here at La Costa in the Mercedes Championships doesn't have many parallels in other professional sports.
Seniors don't often break out the old uniform, come back to the arena and dust off athletes who are still in their primes.
It's almost the same as Nolan Ryan coming back in two years and leading the American League in strikeouts after a couple of games.
The difference is that, until recently, Dave Stockton, 52, never had a fastball.


Rite Aid Plans Sale Of 4 Units
In an announcement that pleased investors and analysts, the Rite Aid Corporation said yesterday that it intended to sell four non-drugstore businesses, close 200 underperforming drugstores and buy back as many as 22 million of its outstanding common shares.
The company's stock price jumped after the announcement, gaining $1.50, to $18.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Cray's Ex-Chairman to Head A Semiconductor Concern
John A. Rollwagen, the former chairman of Cray Research Inc., will announce on Monday that he will become chairman of Plasma and Materials Technologies, a Chatsworth, Calif., semiconductor equipment manufacturer.
Mr.
Rollwagen was one of several high-profile computer industry executives, including John Sculley of Apple Computer Inc. and John F. Akers of I.B.M., to leave their companies last year.
He said today in a telephone interview that the new position would be a part-time one and that he would continue to live in the Minneapolis area.


How Many Days Till April?
It wasn't the week to end all weeks, weather-wise.
But snow, sleet, rain and more snow made it seem that way to many New Yorkers.
Page 25.


Court to Reconsider Gay Military Ruling
In what gay rights advocates considered a setback, a Federal Appeals Court decided to reconsider a ruling that had struck down the military's ban on homosexuals.
Conservative judges on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit wiped out a decision by three of their liberal colleagues and ordered the case reheard.
Article, page 7.


Prominent Blacks Meet to Search For an Answer to Mounting Crime
With their communities so ravaged by crime that even people like the Rev.
Jesse Jackson are saying they sometimes fear encountering young black men on the street, a group of black politicians, sociologists, ministers, celebrities and civil rights leaders met today in what some acknowledge is an increasingly desperate search for answers.
While they agreed that the problem was rapidly spinning out of control, they condemned the solution most often offered to deal with it: stiffer prison sentences and more jail cells.  'It's an Uphill Struggle'
"We've got to take the initiative, even if it's an uphill struggle, to move government and the country away from this simplistic approach to the crime problem," Representative John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan, said at the conference, which was organized by Mr.
Jackson.


Clinton Returns to Boyhood Home to Bury Mother
Setting aside the pressures and difficulties of Washington to grieve and reminisce, President Clinton returned today to the town were he grew up to bury his mother, Virginia Clinton Kelley, who died on Thursday at the age of 70.
Mr.
Clinton was joined here this afternoon by his wife, Hillary, and their daughter, Chelsea, who planned to spend the night at Mrs.
Kelley's modest lakefront home with his half brother, Roger, and Mrs.
Kelley's husband, Richard.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing
CHAMPIONSHIP AUTO RACING TEAMS -- Named Andrew Craig president and chief executive officer, effective March 31, 1994.
Announced the resignation of Tony George, Indianapolis Motor Speedway president, from the CART governing board.
Baseball  American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Hubie Brooks, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.


COMPANY NEWS;
The Pacific Telesis Group said today that it would set aside $576 million and take an additional charge of $89 million to cover the costs of a revamping at Pacific Bell that will eliminate 10,000 positions by the end of 1997.
The cuts at Pacific Bell, its regional telephone operating subsidiary, are in line with earlier projections by the company.
The plan calls for 3,000 of the job reductions to come this year.


A New Opening in North Korea
Encouraging signs emerged this week that the Clinton Administration's diplomacy is having the desired effect on North Korea.
The North has agreed to allow the resumption of regular international inspections of all seven of its declared nuclear sites.
And it has reportedly canceled the sale of its Rodong missile to Iran.
That is a relief to Israel, which would be within range of such a missile.
True, North Korea has not yet agreed to admit inspectors to two suspected but undeclared nuclear sites.
But this initial agreement, if carried out, will go a long way toward easing immediate fears about the North's nuclear program.
And it has set the stage for a package deal that could put more lasting curbs on proliferation on the Korean Peninsula.


Clinton Justice Dept. Errs in Diluting Child Pornography Law
To the Editor:
More than 100 members of Congress (22 senators and 82 representatives) have asked for the right to argue in the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit how the child pornography law should be interpreted in Knox v.
United States (news article, Dec. 28).
The case involves videotapes of girls 10 to 17 years old wearing bathing suits, leotards or underwear while the camera zoomed in on their covered genitals.


Narrator's Sex Charge Sinks Condom Ad
The Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has withdrawn a radio ad from its new campaign to promote the use of condoms to prevent AIDS because the narrator was belatedly found to have been convicted of indecent exposure and sexual battery.
In the ad, the narrator, Anthony Kiedis of the rock group the Red Hot Chili Peppers, says: "I've been naked on stage. I'm naked whenever I have sex. But now I'm on the radio. So I might as well get naked again. Now I'm naked. With a condom. Wear a condom if you're gonna have sex."


Weather Halts Aqueduct Card
For the second time in four days, both live and simulcast racing were canceled at Aqueduct yesterday because of the weather.
No decision on today's racing was expected until this morning.
Richard Hamilton, the steward for the New York Racing Association, said that yesterday's program was canceled at 9:30 A.M. because the forecast indicated that sleet and freezing rain would continue and travel would be dangerous.


China Reacts In Dispute Over Textiles
China threatened the United States today with retaliation for slashing by $1 billion the amount of textile goods it can export to America, but also signaled that it might be open for negotiations to resolve the dispute before the sanctions take effect on Jan. 17.
Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen extended an olive branch to the Beijing authorities, saying that they had 10 days to work things out before the American punitive actions began and that they should take advantage of it.


Company Briefs
ACS ENTERPRISES INC., Bensalem, Pa., has signed an agreement to acquire wireless channel rights and systems in three markets for $30 million.


Can Child of the 60's Be Coach of the 90's?
Like many leaders coming to power in the 1990's, Pete Carroll is a member of the baby-boom generation.
Born in 1951, the new Jet head coach was a child of the 1960's, but not exactly a flower child.
Although he was raised near San Francisco and celebrated his 16th birthday during that city's Summer of Love, Carroll, 42, kept his hair short and his nose clean.
The strongest thing he inhaled was football philosophy.


U.S. Would Temper Oil-Spill Damage Calculation
Dealing a setback to environmentalists, the Clinton Administration today called for "a conservative approach" to calculating how much compensation polluters should pay after oil spills.


Dell and NEC In Sales Plan
In an unusual alliance aimed at helping preserve its dominance of Japan's personal computer market, the NEC Corporation said today that it would supply its personal computers to be sold in Japan by the Dell Computer Corporation.
NEC's PC 9800 series controls about half of Japan's personal computer market, but it is not compatible with any other computers except a clone made by Seiko Epson.


Growth-Income Leaders Are Small in Size
While the growth-and-income funds with the best three-year record use varied approaches to picking stocks -- value, growth or a mix -- most have unusually small market capitalizations.
On average, growth-and-income funds sport market capitalizations of $7.8 billion.
But the average for the top 10 is $2 billion to $6 billion, letting them ride the rally in small stocks over the last three years or so.


Grand Jury Is Convened In Crown Heights Inquiry
A Brooklyn grand jury began hearing evidence yesterday in a renewed investigation into the 1991 killing of a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights.
According to law-enforcement officials, an important question for the grand jury will be whether to bring charges against a Brooklyn man, Ernesto Edwards, whom Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly identified last week as a suspect in the case.
A spokesman for Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, refused to confirm or deny whether a grand jury had been convened to consider evidence in the case involving the killing of the scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum.
The grand jury was convened a day after Mr.
Hynes's latest request to the Justice Department to pursue a Federal civil-rights prosecution over the stabbing death of Mr.
Rosenbaum on Aug. 19, 1991.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall
Joan Tower's Concerto for Orchestra, jointly commissioned by the New York Philharmonic and the St.
Louis and Chicago symphonies, made its first trip to this city on Thursday night.
Weight and growth are the watchwords of this 30-minute piece, its droning cello introduction and its subsequent employment of deep, resonating bass tones acting as implied metaphors for earth-as-progenitor.


For $150 Contract, Police Say, 2 Youths Killed Accountant
The fee was $150 and for that, the police said yesterday, two teen-agers -- one 16, the other 18 -- gunned down an accountant who had uncovered discrepancies of $80,000 to $100,000 in the books of a Bronx drug-treatment agency.
"It was a contract killing," said Detective Kim Royster, a spokeswoman for the Police Department.


Q &amp; A
Variable Annuity Costs
What are the costs involved in buying a variable annuity?DEBRA TAMBINI, Astoria, Queens
Because a variable annuity is essentially a family of mutual funds within a tax-deferred insurance wrapper, there are investment management and operating expenses charged by the funds, sometimes called subaccounts.
Then there are the charges of the annuity contract: an administrative fee of up to $60 and a mortality and an expense risk fee of up to 1.4 percent.
The total annual expenses of a variable annuity average slightly more than 2 percent -- much more than the average mutual fund.
"The benefits of tax deferral can usually offset the higher costs if you hold the contract for at least 10 to 15 years or if you take a lifetime income at retirement," said Glenn S. Daily, a fee-only insurance consultant.
People who drop annuities after only a short period will be heavily penalized.
Most annuities have a surrender charge that begins at 5 percent or more and declines to zero over several years.
Because these products were designed as retirement savings vehicles, a policyholder who makes withdrawals before age 59 1/2 will also have to pay a 10 percent penalty to the Federal Government.
Taxes on Estates
Our daughter, a United States citizen, resides permanently in England.
If and when she inherits our estate, will she be required to pay American taxes, British taxes or both?
FRANCES COGAN, Bronxville, N.Y.
There are two considerations: estate taxes and income taxes.
Your estate will be subject to Federal and state taxes in the United States.
But your daughter will not be subject to estate taxes in England, under current law.
Income taxes depend on your daughter's legal residency.
"If your daughter has retained her U.S. domicile and the estate assets -- and income generated -- remain outside the United Kingdom, the income will only be taxed in the United States," said Lawrence E. Kraus, a tax partner in Clarfeld &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm.
"If the estate assets and income are remitted to the U.K., she will be taxed in both the U.S. and U.K., but will be able to utilize the foreign tax credit and avoid paying double tax."
Keogh Withdrawals
I am self-employed, 71 years old and must take a distribution from my Keogh retirement plan.
May I take the entire distribution from my money-purchase plan or my profit-sharing plan, or am I required to divide the distribution proportionately?
HAROLD E. FIRESTONE, Santa Monica, Calif.
The two plans cannot be aggregated.
You have to make withdrawals proportionately from the plans, each of which has its own minimum distribution requirements.
"This is not to say that you must withdraw from each and every one of the accounts that make up the plan," said David S. Rhine, a partner in the accounting firm of BDO Seidman.
"If the securities for your profit-sharing plan are held in one brokerage house and you also maintain a money market fund for the plan, you may take your entire distribution for that plan from the money market fund."


From the 60's Counterculture to Religion
To the Editor:
"Generation That Left Church Goes Back With Its Children" (front page, Dec. 26), on baby boomers returning to church on the heels of their children, is nothing new and has been documented in many places besides "A Generation of Seekers," Wade Roof's perceptive and helpful book.


U.S. Offers Joint Military Games As Step to Poland's NATO Ties
The United States told Poland today that NATO was willing to hold joint military exercises with Polish forces in Poland later this year as part of an effort to persuade East European countries to accept a relationship short of full membership in NATO.
The offer was made to President Lech Walesa by Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who was born in Poland.
He has been sent to Eastern Europe on a special mission with Madeleine K. Albright, the chief United States representative to the United Nations, to get approval of the "Partnership for Peace" plan, which the 16 NATO nations are expected to adopt at the organization's summit meeting in Brussels next Tuesday.
Ms.
Albright is Czech born.


No Headline
I don't need polls to tell me that at this moment the people are concerned and angry, and they are registering their strong disapproval with those of us in command.
I know that makes us underdogs as we enter this race. -- GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO.  [ 1:3. ]


Friday the Rabbi Was Threatened
SOMETIMES there are stories in this city that, while dramatic and interesting, still make you wonder whether they should be written.
Will publication reward fools and boors with the attention they crave?
Might it encourage folly?
The tale of Lev Tsitrin and his threat to spit in the face of Rabbi Jules Harlow is that kind of story.
It began innocuously last year when Mr.
Tsitrin, a Brooklyn resident, submitted an article to the editors of Conservative Judaism, a serious quarterly published by the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and the Rabbinical Assembly, the international organization of Conservative rabbis.
The article, "The Correct Theology," was read and rejected.


Corrections
Headlines yesterday about a lottery to distribute Betaseron, a drug for multiple sclerosis, characterized the drug incorrectly.
As the article noted, Betaseron has received marketing approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
It is not experimental.


Armed-Crime Dip Recorded During Gun Exchange
During the 16-day guns-for-gifts exchange program that collected 1,502 firearms in a Washington Heights police precinct, there was a substantial decrease in reports of armed felonies in the area compared with the same period last year, the police said yesterday.
Police officials acknowledged that the time period was too short and the number of crimes too small to draw any firm conclusions about the effectiveness of the exchange effort, which ended yesterday.
But Lieut.
Rubin Wexler of the 34th Precinct, where the program took place, said he thought there was a connection.


Head of Drug Gang Indicted in Slaying Ascribed to Jealousy
Almost from the start, investigators thought they knew who chased Nathaniel Gaddy on a bicycle last year in Harlem and shot him in the back.
But it took seven months of cajoling frightened witnesses to build a case against the leader of a local drug gang, officials said.
Cameron Knight, whose indictment on charges of murder and weapons violations was announced yesterday, has a record of several drug and weapons convictions at the age of 22, but prosecutors said the May 1 death of Mr.
Gaddy, 32, had nothing to do with drugs.
By their account, it was a case of jealousy and retribution.
Mr.
Knight was arrested on Dec. 13 on drug-related arrest warrants.


Ayers Breaks Ankle
Coach RANDY AYERS of Ohio State broke his right ankle yesterday when he fell on ice outside St.
John Arena in Columbus, Ohio.


No Time to Dump Aristide
It was an almost Reaganesque display of cluelessness.
On Wednesday President Clinton said his Administration needed to "reassess" its support for Haiti's exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
On Thursday his aides were left with the task of reasserting American support for Mr.
Aristide while trying not to make their boss look like a fool.
One of them, however, insisting on anonymity, couldn't resist telling The Times that Mr.
Clinton was "two weeks behind" on Haiti policy.
Timing and discretion aside, President Clinton was reflecting a pervasive view within his Administration, which has gradually shifted its support from Mr.
Aristide to his acting Prime Minister, Robert Malval.
Mr.
Malval is a businessman and a member of Haiti's mulatto elite who is seen as more palatable to the military and more inclined to compromise.


Gotti Lawyer Is Convicted Of Contempt
In a case watched closely by defense lawyers, a Federal judge convicted Bruce Cutler, the flamboyant lawyer, of criminal contempt of court today for comments he made to reporters during the trial of John Gotti.
Mr.
Cutler, whose clients have included Mr.
Gotti, Joseph and Thomas Gambino, and other figures in organized crime, was convicted of violating a court order barring lawyers from making statements that had a "reasonable likelihood" of prejudicing the outcome of a case.


Review/Opera; Hildegard Behrens in 'Elektra'
When the Metropolitan Opera audience rose to its feet at the end of this season's first performance of Richard Strauss's "Elektra" on Thursday night, and kept applauding and stomping until well after the house lights had come up, it was a fitting tribute to Hildegard Behrens.
Her focused, intelligent performance as the heroine of this Greek myth-turned-psychodrama was at times quite thrilling and even beautiful -- and this in a role that goes out of its way to resist beauty in favor of trauma, and parades its own difficulties before the ear like a showoff neurotic.
It was certainly not the singing of someone with a ravaged, spent and wasted voice, which many attributed to Ms.
Behrens two years ago when she sang Elektra in the debut of this production by Otto Schenk.
She is an uneven and unpredictable singer, technically flawed but ready to take risks.
And when those risks pay off, as they did on Thursday, there are few other dramatic sopranos today who can match her accomplishments.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sports article yesterday about the broadcaster John Madden's negotiations with "Monday Night Football" misstated one option available to Dan Dierdorf, whom Mr.
Madden would succeed.
He could do commentary for college football games on ABC, not CBS.


Seoul Journal; Is a Museum Out of Line in More Ways Than One?
Seoul was so thoroughly destroyed during the Korean War that there are precious few buildings left of any architectural majesty or historical importance: a few palaces, some rebuilt temples and the city's biggest landmark, the sprawling National Museum.
The museum was built as an imperial headquarters by the Japanese 70 years ago, and it dominates the center of the city, a mass of stone sitting at the foot of one of the most sacred mountains in Korean lore.


Analysts Skeptical on Viacom's New Bid for Paramount
Wall Street stock analysts and investment managers expressed reservations yesterday about the new bid for Paramount Communications offered by Viacom Inc.
The company said it would merge with the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation in an $8.4 billion deal and raise the cash portion of its offer to gain control of Paramount by 23.5 percent, to $105 a share from $85 a share.
But the analysts quickly pointed out that the bid, when examined in its totality, actually represented a package of cash and securities valued at about $78 a share.


Knicks Are Pining for Help From Harper
As Derek Harper prepared to join the Knicks, it was obvious that his talents were needed.
The Knicks (20-8) have an erratic 5-4 record since Doc Rivers's season-ending knee injury.
They floundered to a 92-86 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks Thursday, did not have a field goal during the final 5 minutes 23 seconds and nearly lost a 20-point lead.


Lawyer Snubs Suspect in Rail Shootings
A Brooklyn lawyer known for his involvement in some of the city's most bitter racial disputes today withdrew his offer to represent Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train last month.
The lawyer, Colin A. Moore, had said he would take Mr.
Ferguson's case at no charge, but this morning he withdrew the offer, citing conflicts that he would not specify.


Pier Luigi Samaritani, Set Designer, Dies at 51
Pier Luigi Samaritani, a director and set designer for opera, theater and ballet, died on Wednesday in Rome at a private clinic where he had been hospitalized for some time.
He was 51.
The Milan newspaper Corriere della Sera reported that the cause was a tumor.


Rockies Sign Weiss
WALT WEISS, the free-agent shortstop, and the Colorado Rockies agreed yesterday on a $2.2 million, two-year contract.
Weiss, 30, spent 1993 with Florida, hitting .266 in 158 games.


Dr. Lee R. Straub, 80, An Orthopedic Expert
Dr.
Lee Ramsay Straub, an orthopedic surgeon at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, died on Thursday at his home in Bridgehampton, L.I.
He was 80.
Dr.
Straub was the executive assistant to the chief surgeon, director of the clinics and a specialist in hand surgery.
He had served as president of the American Orthopaedic Association, the national honorary society for orthopedists, and was a founding member and past president of the New York Society for Surgery of the Hand.
He was an expert on total hip replacement and surgical responses to arthritis and wrote many articles on his specialties.


Richard Berczeller, 91, Physician And an Author Who Fled Nazis
Dr.
Richard Berczeller, a physician who began writing short stories and autobiographical recollections in his 60's, died on Monday in New York.
He was 91.
His works, including 10 short stories published in The New Yorker, dwelt in part on his early life in the Austrian Socialist movement of the 1920's and 30's.
His father, Adolf Berczeller, was a co-founder of the Hungarian Social Democratic Party, and the son participated in the Austrian workers' movement even after it was declared illegal by the Fascist Government in Austria in 1934.


U.S. Data Show Moderate Gains In Employment
The job market strengthened further last month as payrolls swelled by 183,000 and the unemployment rate edged down to 6.4 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
Private analysts called the job gain large enough to support optimistic forecasts for the economy in the early months of 1994 but not so large as to frighten those watching for symptoms of revived inflation, presumably including the Federal Reserve.


Elvis Sighted, Again and Again, at Harley-Davidson Cafe


Luis Quero Chiesa, 82, Politician; And Educational Administrator
Luis Quero Chiesa, a business and cultural leader born in Puerto Rico who devoted most of his life to political and educational matters in New York City, died on Tuesday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 82.
The cause was cancer, said his grandson, David Nappa.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO SEEKING FOURTH TERM
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will seek a fourth term, saying he wants the chance to help New York rebound from a recession that has sapped both the state's economic vitality and the Governor's political popularity.
Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine will again be his running mate.
Page 1.


Review/Dance; The Ever Youthful Side of a 53-Year-Old Ballet
George Balanchine's "Concerto Barocco," virtually a signature piece for the New York City Ballet, is as formally structured as its music, Bach's Double Violin Concerto in D minor.
Yet there is also a springtime youthfulness about the 53-year-old ballet, and this quality was sharply brought out on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater by a veritable sister act.
Margaret Tracey made a role debut as the ballerina who dances a pas de deux with the ballet's sole male, while her younger sister, Kathleen Tracey, performed the second ballerina role.


IRAN-CONTRA DATA TO BE MADE PUBLIC
A Federal appeals panel today ordered publication in the next 10 days of a long report expected to accuse some of President Ronald Reagan's top aides of conspiring to cover up elements of the Iran-contra affair, unless someone named in the report appeals to the Supreme Court.
It appears likely, however, that lawyers for at least some of those people accused in the report by Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel who has investigated the Iran-contra affair for six years, will do just that.


Sailor Lost in Storm
The Coast Guard searched yesterday for a 38-year-old crewman from a fishing trawler who fell overboard 50 miles off Montauk, L.I., at 10:35 A.M., Coast Guard officials said.
The sailor, whose identity was not immediately released, was apparently not wearing survival gear when he lost his footing.
A Coast Guard cutter and a C-130 airplane circled the area, but the Coast Guard said they were hampered by four- to six-foot waves.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall
Last season the New York Philharmonic introduced two series of brief concerts in the hope of luring listeners who don't normally attend the orchestra's programs.
The performances are at odd times -- Rush Hour concerts begin at 6:45 P.M.; Casual Saturdays at 2 P.M. -- and last about an hour.
The atmosphere is informal: the conductors give short, nontechnical introductions to the music, and the musicians mingle with listeners over hors d'oeuvres after the performance.
And the repertory, drawn from the orchestra's regular programs, is popular but not pandering.
At the first Rush Hour concert of the season, on Wednesday evening, Leonard Slatkin conducted Respighi's "Ancient Airs and Dances" Suite No. 3 and Stravinsky's "Sacre du Printemps."


Economics of Equality: A New View
Most economists long believed that poor countries that wanted to grow rapidly had to expect a widening gap between the haves and have-nots.
And during the Reagan era, many thought the same principle applied to wealthy nations like the United States, seeing tax cuts at the top as the best way to revive investment.
But many economists are now revising their views, having begun to see greater income equality as compatible with faster growth -- and perhaps even contributing to it.
That change was much in evidence at the American Economics Association conference here this week, where a dozen or so sessions focused on inequality.


Sports of The Times; The Jets Try Another Assistant
NOW the Jets begin all over again with a new head coach who has to learn how to be a head coach.
In knighting Pete Carroll yesterday as Bruce Coslet's successor, General Manager Dick Steinberg described the 42-year-old former defensive coordinator as a "motivator, teacher, intelligent, understands the big picture, a people person." And in assessing himself, Carroll described his promotion as a "natural step."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Seymour Lawrence, an independent book publisher who died on Tuesday, misidentified the publisher of "Little Big Man," a 1964 novel by Thomas Berger.
It was the Dial Press, not Mr.
Lawrence.


Court to Reconsider Ruling Voiding Military's Gay Ban
In what gay rights advocates considered a setback, a Federal appeals court today threw out a ruling, by a panel of its own members, that had struck down the Pentagon's policy of dismissing any service members who acknowledged being homosexual.
The ruling, issued in November by a three-judge panel, had found the policy to be unconstitutional.
The ruling concerned the Pentagon policy on homosexuals that was in place when President Clinton took office; that policy is being changed by the Clinton Administration.


Observer; This Mortal Coil
Woke up the other morning, turned on the TV, they were doing colon cancer.
Turned off the TV.
Started the coffee, got the paper off the front steps, Page One was doing blood: not enough being donated.
Worried awhile about whether there'd be enough life-saving hospital blood in case some luckless devil got an artery accidentally severed while cutting his breakfast grapefruit.


Allyn Vine, 79, Dies; Proponent of Submersibles
Allyn C. Vine, an oceanographer who was a leader in developing manned submersible vessels to explore the deep sea, died on Tuesday at his home in Woods Hole, Mass.
He was 79.
The cause was heart failure, said Shelley Lauzon, a spokeswoman at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
Mr.
Vine was a physicist, physical oceanographer and senior scientist at the institution for nearly 40 years, until his retirement in 1979.
Contributed to War Effort
Because of Mr.
Vine's tenacity in pursuing the construction of submersibles, the first American manned research submersible for deep diving was named Alvin, a contraction of his name.
When the vessel was christened in June 1964, Mr.
Vine was unable to be present because he was three miles below the surface of the Atlantic Ocean aboard the French submersible Archimede.


Blockbuster's Investing Led To Merger
Walk into any one of 3,600 Blockbuster Video stores worldwide, each crammed with up to 13,000 prerecorded videocassettes, and peer at the dozens of people standing in line, many with several videotapes in hand.
You will know instantly why H. Wayne Huizenga, the chairman of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, the largest video renter in the world, has a spare $1.25 billion burning a hole in his pocket.
In the Viacom-Blockbuster merger plan announced yesterday, Blockbuster will immediately invest that amount to bolster Viacom's once-faltering bid for Paramount.
In the process, Mr.
Huizenga (pronounced high-ZEEN-ga) has transformed Blockbuster's minority holding into a position of power at Viacom.
Mr.
Huizenga, already a billionaire, will become even richer from selling his Blockbuster stock to Viacom.
He will also become vice chairman of the combined company at a presumably large salary and will be able to fill 3 Blockbuster seats on the 12-member Viacom board.


A Loud Silence on Racism
Khalid Abdul Muhammad of the Nation of Islam, speaking at Kean College in Union, N.J., on Nov. 29, talked of "Columbia Jew-niversity" and "Jew York City" and suggested that German Jews brought the Holocaust upon themselves.
He also took aim at whites generally, the Pope, homosexuals and the blind and disabled.
No blacks on the faculty and staff condemned the contents of the speech, according to news reports.
One faculty member sidestepped issues raised by the talk and lashed out at racism on the campus, to which he believed Jewish faculty members had contributed.


Tri-Star's Chairman Quits In a Sign of Studio Turmoil
Mike Medavoy, a one-time talent agent who served as a senior film company executive for more than two decades, resigned today as chairman of Tri-Star Pictures.
The resignation came after months of personal tensions between Mr.
Medavoy and his boss, Peter Guber, chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment.
Mr.
Medavoy, who is 52, said in a statement that "with a full schedule of pictures for next year and a very strong development slate, it is time for me to take some time out to think about what I would do with my future." Mr.
Medavoy had more than a year remaining on a multimillion-dollar contract, and Sony officials declined to discuss the details of any settlement.


No Offense: Jets Drop Coslet and Name Carroll
Faced with the prospect of relinquishing part of his control of the offense, Coach Bruce Coslet of the Jets wouldn't back down and lost total control of the team.
General Manager Dick Steinberg dismissed Coslet yesterday morning and replaced him with the team's defensive coordinator, Pete Carroll.
The dismissal brought to a conclusion three days of intense meetings involving Coslet, Steinberg and other team officials.
And it came with the blessing of the Jets' owner, Leon Hess, who was informed on Thursday evening that Coslet was unwilling to give up control of game planning and play calling.


New Campaign Finance Chairman Quits
Conceding to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Thomas J. Schwarz resigned yesterday as chairman of the Campaign Finance Board, saying he had been heartened by Mr.
Giuliani's pledge to establish a nonpartisian method for board appointments similar to the selection process for judges.
"It is clear to me that my concerns with respect to the independence of the board have been lessened by the Mayor's pledge and in reliance upon its sanctity I decline the chairmanship," said Mr.
Schwarz, who was named to the post by Mayor David N. Dinkins just before he left office.


Piston for Life, Thomas Silent On Next Role
Isiah Thomas confirmed yesterday that he would remain a Detroit Piston, as a player for now, as a fill-in-the-blank later.
Reports that he would become team president with a piece of ownership as part of a $55 million package upon his retirement were not addressed either by Thomas; the Pistons' president, Tom Wilson; the player personnel director, Billy McKinney, or Coach Don Chaney at a news conference yesterday in Auburn Hills, Mich.


Treasuries Surge on Jobs Data
Prices of Treasury securities rose sharply yesterday, and interest rates fell after the release of unemployment data for December that indicated the economy was growing only moderately as 1993 ended.
Long-term rates had crept up in late December and early January, as economic data for November showed stronger-than-expected growth.
That concerned many bond traders, who reasoned that it could lead to higher inflation and that the Federal Reserve might then raise interest rates to counter it.
On Monday, the yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond reached a four-and-a-half-month closing high of 6.41 percent.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
The Celtics' Faded Glory  The Boston Celtics reached their longest home losing streak in 44 years as the Cleveland Cavaliers, the National Basketball Association's second-worst road team, cruised to a 99-85 victory last night.
Boston suffered its fifth straight home loss, one less than the franchise record set in 1948-49.
Boston last lost five consecutive games at home in 1949-50. (AP)


Abraham S. Braude, Philanthropist, 74
Abraham S. Braude, a Jewish philanthropic leader in Cincinnati, died there yesterday in the Jewish Hospital.
He was 74.
The cause was complications of cancer, said his son Jonathan P. Braude.
From 1945 to 1973 he was an executive of several manufacturers including the Gruen Watch Company in Cincinnati and the Hartmann Luggage Company in Racine, Wis.
He then became a marketing and management consultant.


CHRONICLE
Scarlett and Rhett go to London.
JOANNE WHALLEY-KILMER and TIMOTHY DALTON, the actors who will portray two of the most famous lovers in movie history, met the press at Claridge's Hotel yesterday.
They talked about the eight-hour television miniseries "Scarlett," based on Alexandra Ripley's sequel to "Gone With the Wind," which they will start filming tomorrow.
It is to be shown on CBS in November.
Asked if there was not something odd about casting British actors as quintessentially Southern characters, Mr.
Dalton said, "It's better than having any damned Yankees playing the parts." And even purists would have to admit that Ms.
Whalley-Kilmer and Mr.
Dalton are no less American that Vivien Leigh, who starred in the 1939 movie.


VIACOM ANNOUNCES MERGER AND RAISES BID FOR PARAMOUNT
After a week of speculation about how he might pull together the money to win Paramount Communications Inc. in a fierce bidding war, Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom Inc., submitted an offer yesterday that on the surface seemed stunning.
Trying desperately to beat a rival bid from QVC Network Inc., Viacom offered $105 a share in cash for 50.1 percent of Paramount's stock, with the rest to be purchased with Viacom stock.
And in a companion move, he said Viacom would merge with the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, the giant video-rental company that has backed his bid for Paramount, in an exchange of stock worth $8.4 billion.


CHRONICLE
A postscript for ANDREW GIULIANI watchers.
In addition to the antics that stole the scene at his father's inaugural ceremony on Sunday, the Mayor's 7-year-old son managed to dash some cold water on the occasion.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Mayor RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI told BILL MAZER, the host of a morning talk show on radio station WEVD-AM, that Andrew did something else at City Hall that was not visible to spectators.


Review/Jazz; Optimistic Voice With Verve
A singer's musical style is often unconnected with a more essential emotional signature.
That's why even in moments of high exuberance, Ella Fitzgerald, for instance, projects an underlying calm tinged with a girlish wistfulness.
In the case of Gail Wynters, a talented jazz singer who has been performing in New York clubs for about 15 years, that signature is an earthy, good-hearted optimism.
Even when interpreting a song as down-and-out as Billy Strayhorn's "Lush Life," Ms.
Wynters gives the unstrung narrator a reserve of pluck and resilience.
Her voice is simply too large and full to suggest anything else.
"Lush Life" was one of many pop and jazz standards that Ms.
Wynters sang on Tuesday night at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street), where she began an open-ended engagement with a trio led by the pianist Herman Foster.
Mr.
Foster, who seems temperamentally compatible with Ms.
Wynters, revels in chunky Erroll Garner-style chords that give a sense of solidity similar to her singing.


Classical Music in Review
New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players  Symphony Space
"The Pirates of Penzance" is a musical-theatrical contraption that tends to succeed no matter what the conditions of performance, as grade-school productions across the country demonstrate.
The current New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players production, heard on Thursday night at Symphony Space, has many charms, but it periodically spoils its foolproof material with campy, self-conscious gestures.


Clinton Aides Denounce Attacks Over Land Deal
Seeking to control a political fire, the White House today attacked Republican lawmakers who have challenged President Clinton's handling of a Justice Department investigation into his Arkansas land investments.
As part of the offensive, David R. Gergen, the White House counselor, sharply criticized the Republicans for seeking an independent prosecutor to examine the relationship between a failed business that was partly owned by the Clintons and an Arkansas savings and loan association that failed nearly five years ago.


Corrections
A report in the "On Stage, and Off" column of Weekend yesterday about "Angels in America" referred incompletely to the Broadway box-office record for a nonmusical play.
In the week ended Jan. 2, "Angels" surpassed the record, taking in $400,931.
But "Laughter on the 23d Floor," with $1,421 more, also surpassed the record, and set the new one.


Aristide Bows to U.S. On a Haiti Conference
Bowing to pressure from the United States, Haiti's exiled President announced today that he was making changes in a conference he plans to hold in Miami next week to help resolve Haiti's crisis.
In a statement, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide said the revised conference would focus, as the Clinton Administration had hoped, on building a broad political coalition to improve the chances of forcing Haiti's military to give up power.


U.S. and France Resolve Dispute on NATO Talks
Three days before the NATO summit meeting, the United States and France have agreed to paper over their differences over Western military involvement in Bosnia and Herzegovina in a last-ditch effort to avoid an embarrassing rift at the meeting in Brussels.
In recent days, senior French officials have insisted that the war in Bosnia be at the top of the agenda when the 16 NATO heads of state come together next week, and have publicly announced that France would call on the United States to join Europe in a more direct military intervention in Bosnia.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in Weekend yesterday about the Lower East Side Tenement Museum misstated its address.
The building shown is at 90 Orchard Street, not No. 97.


U.N. Accuses Bosnia Army Of Setting Off New Attacks
United Nations officials said today that the Bosnian Government's mostly Muslim army set off this week's surge in street fighting here, which led to retaliatory Serbian artillery bombardments of crowded neighborhoods and the loss of dozens of lives.
Bosnian Government officials acknowledged this evening that Bosnian Army infantry assaults kicked off several days of clashes in the hillside Grbavica neighborhood, which peaked on Thursday in a bitter firefight near the city's old Jewish cemetery.
But the officials condemned the Serbian retaliation as out of all proportion to the initial assaults.


Fred Scribner Jr., 86, Treasury Aide to Eisenhower
Fred C. Scribner Jr., an Under Secretary of the Treasury in the Eisenhower Administration who held positions in the Republican Party and in his home state of Maine and in Washington, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Portland, Me.
He was 86 and lived in Falmouth, a town near Portland.
The cause was a heart attack, said Robert N. Barnes, a funeral director.


Critic's Notebook; Opera Composers and the Idiosyncrasies of Their Art
Opera, that most curious of beasts, is never more intriguing than when its imperfections show.
Operas that don't work are just the ones we have rushed to see at the Metropolitan Opera this season.
The latest is Berlioz's "Troyens," an amazing five-hour stage piece that ultimately sinks under the weight of its own generosity.
Its immediate predecessor was "I Lombardi" by Verdi, an opera that makes no sense at all but somehow persuades us that it does.
Dvorak's "Rusalka" offered an altogether prettier face before Christmas and with it enough dramatic logic and beautiful music to constitute a thriving masterpiece.
Yet few companies outside Central Europe put it on with any frequency.
It doesn't take much digging to see what's wrong with "I Lombardi," namely a plot in which A leads not to B but instead leaps without explanation to the farthest reaches of the alphabet.
Not so with "Rusalka." The seeds of its indifferent fate are planted a little deeper and out of sight.


Beliefs
Three years ago today, the United States was a week from war with Iraq and still debating whether such a war was morally justified.
At the center of that debate was the question of whether economic sanctions were the more humane way to the desired end.
A United Nations resolution authorized the use of force if Saddam Hussein had not withdrawn Iraqi forces from Kuwait by Jan. 15.
Give the sanctions more time, was the cry of those opposed to military action.


Review/Dance; Dancers' Choreographic Sampler
Dancers from Paul Taylor's company presented a program of their own choreography, "New Dances for the 21st Century," on Thursday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.
The title was pretentious.
The dances were not.
The presentation, under the artistic direction of Larry L. Lash, featured vivid choreographic sketches that received polished performances by a cast including, in addition to members of the Paul Taylor Dance Company, dancers who are, or have recently been, associated with such troupes as the Joffrey Ballet, Feld Ballets/NY and the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company.


New Year Tune-Up for Retirement Funds
The new year compels many people to re-evaluate their investments, and this month may be a good time to make some adjustments.
Among the five mutual fund experts who created hypothetical retirement portfolios for The New York Times in July, most have decided to rejigger their portfolios after sitting tight for six months.


New York Area Jobless Rate Higher
Even as the rest of the country reported the lowest jobless rate in three years, Government figures released yesterday showed that the number of unemployed in New Jersey went up by nearly 1 percent in December while the unemployment rates in New York and New York City rose slightly.
The monthly jobless rate continued to fluctuate more widely in New Jersey, rising to 7.1 percent of the work force last month, from 6.2 percent, according to seasonally adjusted figures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.


CUOMO ANNOUNCES HE WILL RUN AGAIN DESPITE LOW POLLS
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced this evening that he would run this year for a fourth term, saying he wanted the chance to help New York rebound from a recession that has sapped both the state's economic vitality and his own popularity.
Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, who was Mr.
Cuomo's running mate in 1986 and 1990, will run again at Mr.
Cuomo's side, the Governor said in a statement.


Maxwell Is in Hospital
VERNON MAXWELL, a Houston Rockets guard, was listed in stable condition yesterday after being admitted to a hospital Thursday night complaining of an irregular heartbeat.
Maxwell, a six-year veteran, could remain hospitalized in Houston for two to three more days for additional testing.
Teammates said Maxwell had complained of a rapid heartbeat since suffering a chest bruise in a Dec. 23 game against Denver.
He underwent an electrocardiogram and returned to practice on Dec. 24.
He played in the next game. (AP)


Choosing the Right Path In the Prudential Case
THE first fateful decision by investors who lost billions of dollars in limited partnerships from Prudential Securities was made the day their brokers persuaded them to buy the risky investments.
For many, the second will be made this month.
All 400,000 investors must eventually decide which of several options to pursue in hopes of getting the most compensation for their losses.
The decision is fraught with risk, and an investor should approach it with caution.
A wrong turn could prove almost as devastating as the original agreement to invest.


INSIDE
Gotti's Lawyer in Contempt For His Remarks During Trial
A Federal judge convicted Bruce Cutler, a flamboyant lawyer, of criminal contempt of court for comments he made to reporters during the trial of John Gotti.
Page 25.
Jets Dismiss Coslet
The New York Jets dropped Bruce Coslet as coach, replacing him with an assistant, Pete Carroll.
Page 31.
Giuliani Picks Labor Official
Mayor Giuliani named a former Federal prosecutor to be his Labor Commissioner, a crucial post given the Mayor's promise to wring concessions from municipal unions.
Page 25.


NBC Extends Jay Leno's Contract
Saying he is doing great work and is still getting better, NBC rewarded Jay Leno today with a contract extension that will keep him as host of the "Tonight" show through 1995.
The Fox Network also announced tonight that it had decided to abandon, at least for the moment, its efforts to enter the late-night competition.


CONSECO FORMS AN INSURANCE INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIP
Conseco Inc., one of the fastest-growing, most profitable life insurance companies over the last decade, yesterday announced a new investment partnership with capital of $615 million.
The partnership will buy controlling stakes in other insurance companies that it expects to improve and eventually sell at a higher price.
An earlier partnership produced annual profits of 125 percent in the last three years.
Investors in the new partnership include Conseco and its chairman, Stephen C. Hilbert, the Allstate Corporation, several banking companies and the Philadelphia Life Insurance Company.


Homeowner Shoots Tourist by Mistake In Texas, Police Say
A businessman from Aberdeen, Scotland, wandering a wealthy neighborhood in search of a telephone after a night of drinking, was shot and killed early this morning by a homeowner who took him for a burglar, the police said.
Andrew De Vries, 28, who was in Houston on a business trip, was shot twice after he pounded "in a furious manner" on the back door of a home in an exclusive neighborhood on the city's west side about 4 A.M., said Alvin Wright, a spokesman for the Houston Police Department.


Attacked Figure Skater Is Unable to Compete
Nancy Kerrigan, a gold-medal favorite for the Olympics, made an emotional withdrawal from the United States figure skating championships today after a knee injury suffered in a clubbing attack on Thursday.
In a voice that broke, she said she was "upset and angry" that the attack would prevent her from competing.
But she and her coaches were optimistic that she would be granted a waiver and placed on the Olympic team for the Winter Games next month in Lillehammer, Norway.
A decision will not be made until the American championships conclude late Saturday night.


CHRONICLE
KATRINA VANDEN HEUVEL, a writer and an expert on the former Soviet Union, will serve as editor in chief of The Nation magazine for one year, starting Monday, while the editor in chief, VICTOR NAVASKY, takes a leave of absence.
Ms. vanden Heuvel, 34, has been associated with the weekly magazine since 1980, or, as she put it yesterday, "one-third of my life."


Bridge
The Burgay International Challenge Match, played Dec. 16 and 17 in Manhattan, provided one deal that challenged the commentators and Vugraph spectators.
Looking at the four hands shown in the diagram, with South facing a trump lead in a three-spade contract, would you choose to play or defend?
After the compulsory one no-trump opening, North-South would have done well to defend, collecting 200 or 300 even without a double.
But both North-South pairs busily entered the auction.
In one case the French partnership bid to two hearts, which just succeeded.
In the other, the American North, Paul Soloway, reopened as shown with two clubs.
This showed clubs and spades, and prompted his partner, Bob Goldman, to issue a game invitation with a jump to three spades, reaching a precarious contract.
After a trump lead and a low card from the dummy, the European East, Soldano De Falco, had a problem.
If he had made the normal play of the nine, South would have won with king, crossed to the club ace and ruffed a club.
Then he would have used the heart jack as an entry for another club ruff, and played heart winners to discard diamond losers from the dummy.
West would ruff the fourth heart, but the dummy would score two more tricks to give South nine.
De Falco did better by taking the spade ace, cashing two diamond winners to make sure of them, and leading the spade jack.
Soloway won with the king, led to the queen and played a fourth round, going down one.
Looking at all four hands, there is a difficult way to succeed in three spades after De Falco's defense.
South must assume an even heart break, and start by winning the fourth trick in dummy with the spade queen.
He must then enter his hand with a heart lead and ruff a diamond, establishing a diamond winner.
Then he can overtake the heart jack and continue hearts.
East must ruff sooner or later, and the closed hand has a trump entry, allowing any remaining red-suit winners to be played.
East has two trump tricks and two diamond winners but that is all.
So the double-dummy answer is that you should choose to play three spades.
But you should not choose to bid it.


Indians Choose Not to Sign Ojeda
The Cleveland Indians are not negotiating to re-sign pitcher BOB OJEDA, and he will be free to talk with any other team after today's signing deadline passes.
Ojeda, 36, returned to the team after recovering from severe scalp injuries suffered in the March 22 boating accident that killed two teammates, Steve Olin and Tim Crews.


Shh! Devils Are Creeping Close to Rangers
Quietly and methodically, the Devils have moved within 5 points of the Rangers, the best team in hockey.
A 4-1 triumph over the Florida Panthers tonight nudged New Jersey ahead of Toronto as the second-best team in the National Hockey League with 52 points (24-12-4).
"I'm not looking at anything," Coach Jacques Lemaire of the Devils said.
"We've got to win the next game."


Well-Rested Messier Is Back
After missing six games with a sprained right wrist, Mark Messier joined the Rangers on their trip to Montreal yesterday and is expected to play tonight when the Rangers meet the Canadiens at the Forum.
Messier was injured on Dec. 22 against the Panthers in Florida and has held himself out for six games as a precautionary measure.
The Rangers were 4-2 without him.


Giuliani Picks Ex-U.S. Prosecutor for Labor Post
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani named a 38-year-old labor lawyer who was a high-ranking prosecutor in the Reagan Justice Department to be his Labor Commissioner yesterday, a crucial post for the new Mayor given his campaign promise to wring concessions from municipal unions.
Union leaders reacted with cautious optimism to the appointment of Randy L. Levine, who has a reputation as a hard-nosed but honest negotiator for professional sports teams and garment companies.


Shamir Remarks on New York Bomb Attack Draw Criticism
Former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was embroiled today in a sharp dispute over remarks he made that seemed to many here to condone an attempted terrorist bombing by right-wing Jewish extremists in New York City.
Mr.
Shamir quickly sought to amend his comments, in which he suggested that the leftist targets of the bombs caused more harm to Israel than the explosives themselves, but the effort came too late to stifle criticism from both the political left and right that he had gone too far.


Increased Security Measures Planned
The attack on Nancy Kerrigan, the United States' best female figure skater, in Detroit on Thursday has led to increased security at this weekend's Olympic speed-skating trials in Milwaukee and Lake Placid, N.Y., and a determination by American Olympic officials to increase precautions at future meets and practices.
"This will be a watershed event for security at sporting events in the United States," said Mike Moran, the spokesman for the United States Olympic Committee, which was flooded with calls yesterday from agents for top athletes seeking assurances that their clients would be protected.


California State Budget Unveiled


P.L.O. Signs Economic Accord With the Jordanians
The Palestine Liberation Organization and Jordan said today that they had reached an accord that would open the way for Jordanian banks to play a major role in the development of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
The move came after a warning by King Hussein this week that unless the accord concerning the Israeli-occupied territories, negotiated more than two months ago, was signed he would take unspecified actions.
Arafat's Reluctance
Under the agreement Jordanian banks, active in the West Bank until Israel captured the area in the Arab-Israeli war of 1967, can reopen their branches there.
The Jordanian central bank gets to act as a clearinghouse for financial aid that is expected to make its way to the territories during an interim period of five years before their final status is decided in negotiations with Israel.


Public &amp; Private; A Pyrrhic Victory
Pop quiz: A 16-year-old is appropriately treated at a school clinic after he is advised that the reason it feels as if he is going to die when he urinates is because he has a sexually transmitted disease.
Told that condoms could have protected him from infection, he asks for some.
A nurse tells him to wait while she looks for his name on the list of students whose parents have confidentially requested that their sons and daughters not receive them.
The student replies: (a) "No problem"; (b) "Hmmm -- an interesting way to balance the reproductive health of adolescents and the rights of parents"; (c) Nothing.
He sidles out of the office and not long afterward gets a whopping case of chlamydia.


On Lard and Bread, He'd Survive Winter
To the Editor:
Last month a friend of my family in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, lost her life to cancer.
In Yugoslavia, which has for more than a year been under United Nations sanctions, there are no cancer treatment drugs, nor even aspirins.
The old woman died fast and painfully.
Maybe she would have died with the best treatment.


Nature Slides In a Reminder of What Season It Is; Worst Possible Combination of Rain, Sleet and Snow Hobbles the Metropolitan Region
For a week now nature has been doing what nature does at this time of year: snowing and sleeting and raining and hailing and blustering, not necessarily in that kind of distinct, discernible order.
It wasn't the week to end all weeks, weatherwise.
It only seemed that way.
Somehow the accumulation of irritations made the slush seem messier and the snow drifts deeper.
Apartment-house tenants whined about having to stumble over the neighbors' wet boots in the hallways.
Spit-and-polish housekeepers spent hours scrubbing dirty footprints from too-often-crossed kitchen floors.
And for parents whose children racked up snow day after snow day, well, enough's enough.


Clinic Is Revival's Newest Milestone
A plan to open a medical center for children in Hunts Point this month marks a milestone in the longstanding efforts to revive a neighborhood struggling against the ravages of urban deterioration and neglect.
The center, called the South Bronx Children's Health Center, is the first medical center of any kind to open in the neighborhood since Prospect Hospital closed some two decades ago, sponsors say.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 28 about historic homes on Shelter Rock Road in Manhasset included two show-business figures erroneously among those involved with the area, and misstated the area's association with those who should have been listed.
The movie director Leland Hayward married the actress Margaret Sullavan on Shelter Rock; the couple were not Lewis Haywood and Maureen O'Sullivan.
The wedding site was the home of William S. Paley of CBS; there is no evidence that the couple had a home in the area.
The article also misidentified the couple's daughter; she is the writer Brooke Hayward, not Mia Farrow.
The article misidentified the former publisher of The New York Herald Tribune whose home was on Shelter Rock; he was John Hay Whitney, not William Payne Whitney.


Russian Entrepreneurs Aren't All Gangsters; Real Alternative Needed
To the Editor:
The basic roots of Russian fascism go back as far as the mass conformism formed by decades of authoritarian rule of the state and Communist Party bureaucracy.
President Boris N. Yeltsin has let these roots grow with his "shock therapy" and other remedies.
These policies plunged Russia into pre-fascist disasters.


SUNDAY, January 9, 1994; Worth Thinking About
"Women across all continents, all political systems (including socialism and communism), all racial groups, all religious groups, and all systems of mating (from intense polygyny to presumptive monogamy) place more value than men on good financial prospects."  -- FROM "THE EVOLUTION OF DESIRE: STRATEGIES OF HUMAN MATING," BY DAVID M. BUSS, FORTHCOMING FROM BASIC BOOKS.


New Sights
To the Editor: My husband and I have traveled for many years, both independently and with tour groups.
We've now reached our mature years and wish to travel with tour companies.
The problem: In every area that we wish to revisit, the tour company always returns to the usual tourist sites, along with a few new ones.
Is it not possible for a company to offer tours like classes: 1A for the first-timers, 1B for those wanting a more advanced study of the area?
We wouldn't mind perhaps one repeat, but several is too much.
Example: We've been two times to Mayan ruins in Central America, but we have no desire to revisit Chichen Itza, Uxmal, or Tikal again.


Twin Thrillers: Montana and the Pack Are Back; Overtime Kick Lifts the Chiefs
A few of the 74,515 Kansas City fans got up and headed for the exits of Arrowhead Stadium after Joe Montana was sacked by linebacker Gerald Williams for an 8-yard loss at his own 9 on a third-down play with three minutes to go and his team trailing, 24-17.
Perhaps they didn't realize that Montana had rallied his teams to victory 27 previous times in the fourth quarter in situations as bleak or bleaker than this.
Maybe they just weren't aware that he was 14-5 in playoff games and 4-0 in Super Bowls.
Perhaps they were trying to beat traffic.
Whatever the case, they were definitely out of their minds to leave.


Persistent Sexism in American Education; Why So Few Women Physicists?
COLUMBIA University is unusual because it has one woman on the faculty in its physics department.
Most universities in the United States have none.
Last spring Elena Aprile, an associate professor of physics at Columbia with a strong independent streak, was unanimously recommended for tenure.
"I call it a miracle," she said.
"I'm very proud."
But for now, at least, the miracle is on hold.


Jan. 2-8: Cracking Down in Florida; Mayors and Police Chiefs Seek to Reassure Vacationers
With the winter tourist season nearing its peak and vacation bookings down, mayors and police chiefs of Florida's big cities gathered in Jacksonville last week and demanded that the State Legislature calm voters and visitors with tough, and expensive, new measures.
Failure to do so, Mayor Ed Austin of Jacksonville warned, would be "aiding and abetting" the wave of violence that has made Florida synonomous with crime.
The mayors talked of the need for a "war on two fronts," but the resolution they issued focused more on punishment than prevention.


Back to Motels
To the Editor: The article on returning to the joys of motels after "charming" B &amp; B's ("Forget the Doilies and Ruffles," Nov. 28) brought a wry smile.
My family too has come to realize we've been treated like an inconvenience rather than the raison d'etre by B &amp; B owners one too many times.
I recall the Santa Fe guest house where not once during our three-day stay were the beds made or towels changed (at over $100 a night).
The owners said with a straight face they wanted to give us the feeling of home.
In New Hampshire we encountered open hostility when our desire for breakfast did not coincide with the host's preordained schedule.
In San Antonio we felt like downright intruders among the host's immaculate antiques.
On those occasions when we have been accompanied by our (not small) children, it's been mixed; even those inns that claim to welcome them basically view children with suspicion and fear.


F.Y.I.
A Soldier of Fortune Q.  From growing up on Allerton Avenue near Bronx Park, I remember a statue of a Civil War soldier in the middle of the Bronx River, just south of Gun Hill Road, which at that time was a lover's lane of sorts.
Check it out, please.


The Nation; Redressing the Harms Of the Nuclear Age May Not Be Cheap
KEITH L. PRESCOTT worked as a miner in the 1960's, digging radioactive debris out of the deep tunnels beneath the Nevada desert where the Government tested atomic bombs.
Mr.
Prescott has told interviewers that he was ordered to work in underground chambers so contaminated by radiation that he became nauseated and dizzy.
In 1969, Mr.
Prescott developed multiple myeloma, a bone marrow cancer known to be caused by radiation, and in 1980 he sued the Government.
For 14 years, the Government denied that it had anything to do with Mr.
Prescott's illness and fiercely battled to keep him out of court.
But last week, the 67-year-old Mr.
Prescott took the stand in a Federal trial in Las Vegas and accused the United States of negligence.
And his testimony found a sympathetic audience at the top levels of the Clinton Administration.


Inaugural Festivities
Here is a listing of Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman's inaugural events: Friday
Pre-inaugural reception, 6 to 8:30 P.M., Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street, Newark.
Tickets: $350, $500.
Business attire.
Benefit for the Community Foundation of New Jersey and the museum.
Saturday
"New Jersey -- One Family" exhibition, 2 to 6 P.M., Atlantic City Convention Center, Atlantic City.
Tickets: $25, available through Ticketmaster.
Concert featuring Barry Manilow, 7:30 P.M., Atlantic City Convention Center.
Tickets: $25. (Tickets purchased for the exhibition are also valid for the concert.) Monday, Jan. 17
Martin Luther King Day commemorations in Trenton and Newark.
Specific events and times to be announced.
Tuesday, Jan. 18
Interfaith prayer service, 9:30 A.M., Trinity Cathedral, Trenton.
Admission by invitation.
Governor's swearing-in ceremony, noon, War Memorial, Trenton. Admission by invitation.
Parade, about 1 P.M., beginning at the War Memorial and proceeding to the State House.
Reception, about 1 P.M., Masonic Temple (across from the War Memorial).
Admission by invitation.
Swearing-in ceremony, Attorney General and Secretary of State, 3 P.M., State House.
Admission by invitation.
Inaugural Ball, 7 P.M., Raritan Exposition Hall, Edison. Tickets: $500. Black tie.
For more information, the Inaugural Committee '94 can be reached at (609) 633-2030.


Corrections
The Night column and the Evening Hours column last Sunday referred incorrectly to the ancestry of Prince Joachim Napoleon Murat of France and his son, who bears the same name, and his daughter, Princess Laetitia Murat, who was making her debut at the International Debutante Ball.
They are direct descendants not of Napoleon Bonaparte but of his younger sister Caroline Bonaparte.


Twin Thrillers: Montana and the Pack Are Back; Favre Saves Day in Final Minute
One would figure that with the home team up by 24-21, 55 seconds left and the visiting team 40 yards from the end zone, a touchdown is implausible.
A field goal to tie the game and send it into overtime is what the home team would try to prevent.
And then the implausible happened.


Data Bank/January 9, 1994
Data Bank/January 9, 1994
Construction Spending
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
1.8
2.5
1.8
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.4
1.2
0.7
Consumer Borrowing
Annual rate of change
10.6
12.0
9.6
Employment
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
In thousands
120,700
120,400
119,900
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,200 (6.4)
8,300 (6.5)
8,800 (6.7)
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 31
Dec. 24
Dec. 17
In thousands
363
293
330
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,864
1,843
1,847
Electric Power Production
Millions of gigawatt hours, weekly total
59,782
60,243
59,738


For Some Women, Fantasy Is Ongoing
THE reason for seeing "Wife Begins at 40," a domestic comedy by Arne Sultan, Earl Barret and Ray Cooney at the Arena Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, has little if anything to do with the fatuous script.
The main attraction is Linda Bub.
Ms.
Bub, who plays the about-to-be-40 wife, looks so much like a living Barbie doll that the resemblance is uncanny.
In this production, she changes from one gorgeous Barbie-like costume to another to underscore the look-alike angle.


A New Look for Striver's Row Area
The newest piece in the puzzle of reviving the Striver's Row area is a set of condominiums going up on Frederick Douglass Boulevard in four lots from 136th to 138th Streets that have been vacant for years.
The St.
Charles Condominiums are designed by the Stephen B. Jacobs Group to blend with the historic homes on Striver's Row and other local architectural treasures.


In the Region/Connecticut; New Investment Stirs Renewal in South Norwalk
SOUTH NORWALK'S renewal, long subdued by the recession, is stirring again with a combination of private and government investment.
Large projects are being designed to encourage tourism in the waterfront area, the site of the $30 million Maritime Center.
In addition, some foreclosed commercial buildings have attracted buyers.


Carol Gramer, John Belmonte
Carol Randolph Gramer, a principal in the benefits consulting firm of William M. Mercer, was married yesterday to John Albert Belmonte, a freelance writer.
Both work in New York.
Canon Ralph E. Hutton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Orleans, Mass.
Ms.
Gramer, 40, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Gramer of Brewster, Mass.


Harper Shoots, and Misses a Big Chance
Making his Knicks' debut, Derek Harper missed his chance to be a hero.
New York trailed by 3 points.
John Starks passed the ball to Harper with 4 seconds to play.
Harper shot a 24-foot, 3-point attempt that could have tied the game.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Wednesday
Producer prices, Dec., pct. change
0.0
0.0
Thursday
Consumer prices, Dec., pct. change
0.2
0.2
Retail sales, December, percent change
0.4
0.3
Jobless claims, weekly, in thousands
363
327
Friday
Industrial production, Dec., pct. change
0.9
0.5
Capacity utilization, Dec., percent
83.4
83.2
Business inventories, Nov., pct. change
0.0
0.1
This Week's Developments
Monday
President Clinton visits Europe
Tuesday
Treasury Secretary Bentsen visits Moscow


The Myth of Community Development
BURIED SO DEEPLY WITHIN PRESIDENT CLINTON'S first budget that it has barely been mentioned by the press is the biggest new Federal program for inner-city ghettos in more than a decade.
The program is called Empowerment Zones, and it will cost the Government $3.5 billion over five years -- an amount that puts it in the league of Great Society programs that we now think of as having been unimaginably vast, like the War on Poverty and Model Cities.
The crime, poverty and physical and social deterioration of the inner cities is America's most obvious problem.
The crisis in health care that has Washington's main attention right now manifests itself in private individual tragedies and in frightening statistics; but the crisis in the ghettos is right there in plain sight, in the middle of our main population centers.
It is constantly discussed over millions of dinner tables, and also in establishment circles in New York, Washington, London and Tokyo.
The 1992 Los Angeles riots, our biggest domestic disturbance in a generation, dramatically underscored how bad conditions are.
It shouldn't come as a surprise -- in fact it seems natural -- that the Government might want to respond.


What Did Those Lost German Files Tell?
To the Editor:
In "Germany's Poison Chalice" (Op-Ed, Jan. 3), Donald Koblitz describes the Christmas gift of his Stasi file and Germany's problems in liberal access to the files of East Germany's Ministry for State Security, or Stasi, the country's secret police and intelligence agency.
But the article is misleading about access of Americans to their files.
Mr.
Koblitz saw only one page of a Stasi file and still has not gained access to his file despite a request filed two years ago.


Mississippi Town Roiled by Lesbians' Plan for Women's Camp
A lesbian couple building a women's camp in the pine woods of southern Mississippi about 120 miles north of here has roused a torrent of opposition from angry residents and several Baptist ministers, hostility that the couple fear could become violent.
The two women, Brenda and Wanda Henson, who consider themselves married, have already found a dead dog draped over their mail box in the rural community of Ovett.
They also encountered armed men on their property, a former farm they hope to turn into an educational and cultural retreat for women.
They live behind a locked lavender gate, protected by armed volunteer guards.


MAKING A DIFFERENCE
In "Making a Difference" (Hers, Dec. 12), Ellen Lewis claims to be against gender stereotyping.
But she admits that, while she gives "trucks and tools" to her daughters and the daughters of friends, she has yet "to buy someone else's son a doll."


Pamela S. Squires, David P. Reiss
Pamela Susan Squires, a daughter of Richard C. Squires of Rowayton, Conn., and Ruth B. Henchey of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Peter Reiss, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Reiss of Colchester, Vt.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Rye.
The bride, 31, graduated from the University of Connecticut.
She is a local advertising sales coordinator for Group W Satellite Communications, a cable television programming and distribution company, in Stamford, Conn.
Her father is the publisher of Tennis Buyer's Guide and Tennis USTA, trade magazines, in Trumbull, Conn.
The bride's mother is a saleswoman at the Whitney Shop, a gift store in Greenwich, Conn.


Clinton on the Continent
Waiting at the door for Bill Clinton, Europe is as edgy and defensive as an executive who has asked the boss home to dinner.
"This is a critical moment for them and for him," said Pamela Harriman, the friend, adviser and fund-raiser whom the President sent to Paris as Ambassador.
"The Europeans don't know him. Too many of them see him as a man who plays the saxophone by night and wears running shoes by day. Next week he needs to show them his brains, his scope, his leadership." Sources of the Anxiety
When Mr.
Clinton arrives on Sunday afternoon for his first visit to Europe as President, he will have completed almost a year in the Oval Office.
For all those months, Europeans have been watching, trying to take his measure from afar, studying his policies (or what many see as the lack thereof) and wondering why he has waited so long to come.


He Bargains as He Plays: Smartly
William Davidson doesn't read the same history book as the rest of pro basketball, the revisionist edition that fails to recognize the best little man of the modern game.
That book says John Stockton was more worthy of the Olympic dream, that Joe Dumars was a Detroit Piston more deserving of honor than Isiah Thomas.
Davidson looks at his Palace in the distant Detroit suburb of Auburn Hills, the years of sellout crowds, the two championship banners that hang inside.
He knows better.
He understands who built that building, who hung those flags.


The House Of Flowers
Steve Latour gets a lot of jokes when he calls himself the Lei Man, but after only three months of making and delivering fresh leis, he's hiring an assistant, moving out of his Mount Pleasant home in northwest Washington and smiling all day long.
He may also give more traditional florists a run for their money.
For $31.50, Mr.
Latour personally delivers handmade orchid or carnation leis to offices and homes.
Yes, he wears a Hawaiian shirt and even says "Aloha."


CROSSWORD PUZZLES
Although I am 83, and have worked every Times puzzle since the first one appeared 51 years ago, I am glad to see a 41-year-old now in charge.


Giuliani Borough-Power Plan Generates Heat With the Cheers
By suggesting that New York City's five borough presidents be given greater control over road repairs, garbage collection and other municipal services, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani may have opened a Pandora's box for a city where political power has progressively grown more centralized.
Mr.
Giuliani's offer to share power, which he made publicly on Dec. 30, has been warmly received by the borough presidents, and for good reason.
The five officials, all political veterans, lost much of their clout with the recent elimination of the city's Board of Estimate, a powerful legislative body in which the borough presidents controlled 5 of the 11 votes.


Figure-Skating Drama Far Bigger Than the Rink
Even as figure skating has moved into the forefront as a prime-time attraction, the sport has maintained a pattern that seems constructed from afternoon soap operas.
This week's attack on Nancy Kerrigan, one of America's leading candidates for an Olympic gold medal, is the latest episode in skating's often turbulent world.
With Kerrigan out of the United States championships, which concluded last night, the question of whether to grant her an automatic berth and await her ultimate fitness to compete in Lillehammer, Norway, has again given the sport a dramatic subplot that intrigues outsiders.


Thick Steaming Soups for Wintertime
No dish changes quite as much from season to season as soup.
Summer's soups are bowls of chilled pastel strewn with herbs.
If hot they are sheer, insubstantial broths afloat with seafood.
In winter they turn steaming and thick to serve with slabs of rustic, crusty bread.
Bean soups fortified with meat, sturdy root vegetable purees and chunky chowders whet cold weather appetites.
No sort of meal assembly is a easy as one based on soup.
And although the best winter soups may depend on freshly-made long- simmering stocks, dried beans soaked overnight then tended as they cook for hours and tough cuts of meat or fowl stewed until they fall apart.
There are shortcuts however.


NOT-YET-READY-TO-WEAR
Aren't women lucky to have a savvy dude like Hal Rubenstein to explain fashion to them (Style: "Not-Yet-Ready-to-Wear," Dec. 12)?
It's "fantasy," he tells us?
Whose fantasy?


Assessments Are Not Immovable Attributes
Dr.
Robert Goon argues  [ "A Different Way to View Assessments," Letters, Dec. 12 ]  that if two houses in the same town change hands for the same price, but one has a real-estate tax assessment much higher than the other, this is no reason to reassess either house.
Dr.
Goon argues that the future stream of real-estate taxes, whether high or low, was already taken into account as part of the package that determined the fair market value of each of these two houses.
If someone pays an extra-high purchase price in exchange for having an extra-low assessment, then it would be unfair to increase the assessment after the sale.
Under this rationale, no assessment should ever change.


Thick Steaming Soups for Wintertime
No dish changes quite as much from season to season as soup.
Summer's soups are bowls of chilled pastel strewn with herbs.
If hot they are sheer, insubstantial broths afloat with seafood.
In winter they turn steaming and thick to serve with slabs of rustic, crusty bread.
Bean soups fortified with meat, sturdy root vegetable purees and chunky chowders whet cold weather appetites.
No sort of meal assembly is a easy as one based on soup.
And although the best winter soups may depend on freshly-made long- simmering stocks, dried beans soaked overnight then tended as they cook for hours and tough cuts of meat or fowl stewed until they fall apart.
There are shortcuts however.


Dixon Place, a Real Home for Theater, May Be the Last of a Breed
THERE'S A STRETCH OF THE Bowery below Houston Street that is grungy, dark and deserted at night, lined with metal shutters pulled down tight on stores with hand-painted signs selling restaurant equipment.
One of the signs reads Dixon Place, a rather grand name for Ellie Covan's modest living room cum theater loft, a second-floor space filled with an eccentric collection of mismatched chairs.
It is a last bastion of downtown New York's long tradition of theatrical experiment in storefronts, lofts and galleries.
Ms.
Covan began presenting theater at Dixon Place (then on East First Street) in 1986 because she was, as she put it, "interested in the new forms." Theater in this case falls under that elastic label performance art, and even in 1986 the forms weren't so new.
But Dixon Place was a quieter, less distracting alternative to East Village bars such as the Wah-Wah Hut and Darinka, then popular purveyors of the form.
The tiny storefront gave comedians like Reno ("She wasn't funny at all back then," Ms. Covan said) a place to develop something more ambitious than the standard stand-up routine.


LIVING DOLLS
As a professional in the fashion industry, I was surprised and disturbed by the fashion layout "Living Dolls." Your portrayal of women as children is not only unfashionable, it is most insensitive.
Why must the featured dresses, each one beautiful in its own right, be debased by a cliched presentation that borders on pornography?
The truth is that these are sophisticated dresses for women, not for children.
To portray them as something less is an insult.
STEPHEN CIRONA New York, N.Y.


The Mugger Who Came Back From the Dead
THE GREEN KNIGHT By Iris Murdoch. 472 pp. New York: Viking. $23.95.


Journal; The Silver Lining
On his Inauguration Day as the new Mayor's Best Showbiz Friend, Ron Silver failed to give Rudolph Giuliani the most essential advice a professional actor can bequeath to an amateur: Never share a stage with a child or a dog.
This was not the first time Mr.
Sil ver was missing in action while the Mayor floundered in artistic affairs.
Earlier, the new Deputy Mayor for Economic Development, John Dyson, had stepped into a front-page embarrassment by waving a budgetary hatchet at New York City's already starving smaller arts organizations.


California's Tide of Illegal Aliens Ebbs
Even as public resentment over a perceived invasion of California by illegal aliens has soared, the tide of illegal immigration here may in fact have begun to ebb.
While thousands of illegal aliens from Mexico and Central American still illegally cross the California-Mexico border every day, their numbers seem to be declining even as substantial numbers of aliens already illegally here appear to be returning home.
The effect has still been a net increase in illegal immigrants in California over the last year, the experts say, but in declining numbers.


Board Moves Against Principal
A Brooklyn school board that for years took no action on allegations of wrongdoing on the part of one of its principals voted last week to bring administrative charges accusing him of political coercion and sexual harassment of teachers.
School District 21, reconstituted in last year's election and facing a scathing report by a school system investigator, agreed during a closed-door meeting on Wednesday to take the action against Stuart Possner, principal of Public School 100 in Brighton Beach.
The meeting had been convened to respond to the charges by Edward F. Stancik, special commissioner of investigation for New York City schools.


On the Ice, Fear of Curbs Makes Fishermen Chillier
When ice-fishing season unofficially opened here last week with a smooth cap of ice across smaller lakes and reservoirs, Daniel Swim brought a sonar depth sounder and fish finder that can spot a potential catch up to 120 feet away.
At the end of an hour, with 10 perch to show, Mr.
Swim said the $170 fish finder that he bought as a Christmas present for himself was worth it.


Alice Aragones, Javier Vergara
Alice Eugenia Marta Aragones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jose R. Aragones of New York and Madrid, was married yesterday to Ignacio Javier Vergara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Enrique M. Vergara of Mexico City.
The Rev.
Paul L. Cioffi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Vergara is an associate in the Washington office of Coudert Brothers, the New York law firm.
She graduated from Georgetown University, from which she also received a law degree.
Her father, now retired, was the general manager for Iberia Air Lines' operations in the United States, France, Italy and the Netherlands.


Once More Up the Flagpole for New Realism
The art of this century has experienced several bouts of New Realism.
The Germans came close when, in the 1920's, when they coined the term Neue Sachlichkeit, or New Objectivity, for the morbidly precise images of painters like George Grosz and Otto Dix.
The late 1950's brought the Nouvelle Realistes, a French movement that included Arman and Raymond Hains, who worked with such things as found objects and filched kiosk posters.
The phrase cropped up briefly in the United States as a forerunner to the Pop Art label, most prominently as the title of an exhibition of works by Rosenquist, Lichtenstein, Warhol and others at the Sidney Janis Gallery in 1962.
Although I can't quite remember, there may have been some additional runs up the flagpole in the 1970's, what with Conceptual Art and performance pieces (Chris Burden having himself shot in the arm and Vito Acconci masturbating under the floorboards at the Sonnabend Gallery), and again in the 1980's, when appropriation was the rage.


CROSSWORD PUZZLES
Since Will Shortz took over editing the crosswords in November, the puzzles have become more difficult, more humorous and more fun -- desirable qualities all, in my opinion.
No doubt because they're more difficult, he will receive some letters of complaint, and I say, "Ignore them!" After all, crosswords are to be played, not worked.
JOHN GOSNELL Merriam, Kan.


Include Russia, Too
The strong showing by right-wing nationalists in Russia's recent elections has intensified Eastern Europeans' fears of a resurgent Russia and increased their desire to ally with NATO.
Such an alliance would commit the U.S. to their defense.
But as Bosnia showed, neither the U.S. nor its allies seem eager to assume such commitments.
Moreover, the military threat that frightens Eastern Europe is, at worst, years away.
One way to keep that threat from ever becoming a reality is to begin treating both Russia and the Eastern Europeans as partners -- cultivating habits of military cooperation throughout the region.


The Death of Russian Beauty
A TIME TO GATHER STONES By Vladimir Soloukhin.
Translated by Valerie Z. Nollan. 251 pp.
Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press. $29.95.


Ms. Langdon, Mr. Cranley
Christina Francis Langdon, a daughter of Iris O. Langdon of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., and Theodore P. Langdon of Mahwah, N.J., was married yesterday to John J. Cranley 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Cranley Jr. of Short Hills, N.J.
Msgr.
Paul Bootkoski performed the ceremony at St.
Gabriel the Archangel Church in Saddle River, N.J.
Mrs.
Cranley, 28, is the marketing manager for Martha Stewart Living magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Delaware.
Her mother is a vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The bride's father retired as a senior vice president of Stagebill magazine.


No Headline
"The Europeans don't know him. Too many of them see him as a man who plays the saxophone by night and wears running shoes by day. Next week he needs to show them his brains, his scope, his leadership." PAMELA HARRIMAN, Ambassador to France, speaking of President Clinton.  [ 1:3. ]


Luxury's Dead; Long Live Luxury
To the Editor:
Suzy Menkes's Runways column "Luxury Hides Its Face" (Dec. 19), provided an insightful perspective on contemporary social trends regarding consumption and display of high-end products.
She correctly identifies the 1990's shift to a quieter kind of luxury, what we at Trend Sights labeled "stealth wealth."


Programming for Monsters
IN A SMALL, dimly lighted room across from Lincoln Center in New York City, Valerie Vigoda is wedged into a corner behind her desk, an upright piano, Macintosh computer, mixing board and synthesizer.
She is writing the music for a chorus line of monsters, who will dance across the computer screen in software that Children's Television Workshop hopes will be available later this year.
She clicks her mouse, and speakers play back a sprightly tune.
"They're monsters," said Michael Artin, the director of consumer software development at Children's Television Workshop and Ms.
Vigoda's supervisor.
"Maybe there should be some dissonant notes." She swivels back to the synthesizer.
A few doors away, a computer artist is working on gestures and facial expressions for Elmo, the bright red young monster who is a "Sesame Street" regular and will appear in the software program.
How much should his mouth move when he breathes?
Should he amble or glide when he walks?


Big Easy's Rocky Road To Legalized Gambling
IN the nation's rush toward legalized gambling, which saw industry revenues triple from 1982 to 1992, few cities are placing bigger bets than New Orleans.
There are wildly differing views on whether gambling will complement the city's current attractions and raffish charms or cheapen and suck resources from the restaurants and galleries of the French Quarter.
But with the strong support of Gov.
Edwin Edwards and with games of chance already the leading growth industry across the border in Mississippi, gambling is certain to change the face of the Crescent City.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
I've taken a lot of pictures of authors for their book covers, but the one that says it all is Kitty Kelley's photo on the back of "Nancy Reagan: The Unauthorized Biography." Talk about props!
That picture of the writer, surrounded by all her files on Mrs.
Reagan, delivers the most effective message of what the author and book are all about.
STANLEY TRETICK  Washington


The Great War and Carnal Memory
THE WAR AT SIXTEEN Autobiography.
Volume 2 (1916-1919).
By Julian Green.
Translated by Euan Cameron. 207 pp.
New York: Marion Boyars Publishers. $24.95.


Are Meetings for Men Only?
To the Editor:
There I was, amused and happy, reading Stanley Bing's "Sure Cures for the Madness of Meetings" (Viewpoints, Dec. 19), until he advises that to escape a meeting, "dial your secretary and tell her . . . When she does . . . ." Then I looked at the illustration of a person at the meeting -- a man.
I went back through the article and circled all the pronouns.
All the people in the meeting were referred to as "he," "his" and "him." The only time a female appeared was as a secretary.
All of a sudden I felt excluded from the article -- and the meeting.
STEPHANIE BENSON  Manhattan, Dec. 20  The writer is an attorney in Manhattan.


Correction
The What's Doing column on Dec. 26, about Taos, misstated the telephone number for the Taos Inn.
It is (800) 826-7466.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
I read with interest Dick Teresi's comments on the photograph of Robert Stone that appears on the back jacket of "Out erbridge Reach." Mr.
Teresi apparently can't imagine why anyone would adorn the back of a book with this picture; I can't imagine why anyone would write Mr.
Teresi's article.
There ain't no accounting for taste.


Yes, It's Winter. But Don't Forget the Trees.
TREES are dormant now and they will remain so until they start to leaf out in late April and May.
Because they are dormant, this is a good time of year to think about having them pruned, cabled or braced and checked.
Or if they are property liabilities, they may even have to be cut down, a sad case.
But this drastic step is necessary particularly if the tree is diseased in its core and has rotted.
There are two basic reasons why trees are trimmed when they are dormant.
The most obvious one, of course, is that the deciduous trees are leafless and it is easy for the arborists to see what branches need to be cut out.
Getting to the twigs and limbs is simplified.
The other reason is that the trees will not bleed.
That is the sap is not running inside the tree's core.
When the sap is flowing up the trunk, it will ooze from any cuts and run down the trunk making an unsightly mess.
Though this bleeding does not harm the tree, the appearance often worries homeowners and quite often insects are attracted to the sap causing a secondary problem.


Let Music Be the Food Of Peace
GREGORY Rymes, a 6-year-old first grader at James Weldon Elementary School in Manhattan, is learning through song lyrics that his hands are not for pushing, punching or shoving, but rather for extending in friendship.
He and his young colleagues from age 5 to 8 are taking part in a program called "Songs for Peacemakers," an attempt to enlist music in the crusade against increasing violence in public schools. .


Ms. Karnath, Mr. Roethenmund
Mary Lorraine Karnath, a daughter of Carole M. Bohrer of Charlotte, N.C., and Albert W. Karnath of Medford, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Emil Roethenmund, a son of Ermina and Otto Roethenmund of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jean Bernard de Casenave performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chateau de Buisson-Garambourg in Normandy, France.
The bride, 34, is known as Lorie.
She graduated from Fordham University and received an M.B.A. from the European Institute of Business Administration.
She is the director of the E.M.C.
Group, a financial consulting company, in Hamburg, Germany.
Her father is the founder and director of Lenox Consulting Partners, management consultants in Medford.
Her mother is a wine consultant for Harris Teeter, a food conglomerate, in Charlotte.


U.S.-North Korean Atom Accord Expected to Yield Dubious Results
Even if the Clinton Administration completes its long-brewing deal with North Korea to reopen seven nuclear sites to international inspection, diplomats and intelligence officials say the limitations on the first round of inspections virtually assure that nothing new will be learned about how close Pyongyang has come to making a nuclear weapon.
Experts say the inspections, heralded by the Administration as a diplomatic triumph, will probably prevent the Communist Government of Kim Il Sung from diverting more nuclear material from its reactors to its weapons project.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


Yes, It's Winter. But Don't Forget the Trees.
TREES are dormant now and they will remain so until they start to leaf out in late April and May.
Because they are dormant, this is a good time of year to think about having them pruned, cabled or braced and checked.
Or if they are property liabilities, they may even have to be cut down, a sad case.
But this drastic step is necessary particularly if the tree is diseased in its core and has rotted.
There are two basic reasons why trees are trimmed when they are dormant.
The most obvious one, of course, is that the deciduous trees are leafless and it is easy for the arborists to see what branches need to be cut out.
Getting to the twigs and limbs is simplified.
The other reason is that the trees will not bleed.
That is the sap is not running inside the tree's core.
When the sap is flowing up the trunk, it will ooze from any cuts and run down the trunk making an unsightly mess.
Though this bleeding does not harm the tree, the appearance often worries homeowners and quite often insects are attracted to the sap causing a secondary problem.


Bid to Revise Education Is Fought in Connecticut
A movement to improve the public schools that has gained a rare consensus among Presidents, governors, business leaders and educators is coming under attack in Connecticut, as it has across the country.
The movement is driven by a simple-sounding theory most commonly called outcome-based education: that the way to improve schools is first to decide what skills or knowledge graduates should have, and then to design the schools to achieve those outcomes.


A Wish List Becomes a Play Festival
CONTEMPLATE the third millennium.
What matters?
Write a play about it.
No restrictions; only keep it short, say, 10 to 30 minutes.
Setting those ground rules, three women who think things up at the McCarter Theater in Princeton -- Emily Mann, artistic director; Loretta Greco, staff producer, and Janice Paran, literary manager -- drew up a wish list of writers (some playwrights, some not) and asked them to participate in the theater's first midseason short-play festival.


A Ban on Military Recruiting
A New York court judge has ruled that military recruiters may not visit the state's public schools and universities as long as the military discriminates against homosexuals.
The decision by Justice Diane A. Lebedeff of State Supreme Court in Manhattan results from a 1990 complaint against the State University of New York at Buffalo by a student who said she was refused an interview with the Judge Advocate General Corps, the military's judicial branch, because she is a lesbian.
State officials say they have not decided whether to appeal the ruling.


Flemish Drawings Open At Ohio Museums
Visitors to Ohio in the early part of this year will have plenty of opportunity to see the work of the 17th-century painter Peter Paul Rubens and his contemporaries.
"Flemish Drawings in the Age of Rubens" is currently on display at the Cleveland Museum of Art.
The show, which opened on Jan. 4, will continue until Feb. 20.
Intended as an overview of drawing in 17th-century Flanders, the show presents 75 drawings and watercolors, including nearly 30 works by Rubens.
Cleveland Museum of Art, 11150 East Boulevard, (216) 421-7340, near Case Western Reserve University, is open every day except Monday.
Admission is free.


Municipalities Seek Cable Improvement
CABLE companies are receiving an unwelcome message from Westchester municipalities: expect competition this year.
With the expiration of many cable franchise agreements at the end of 1993, and with new technologies about to be introduced, more and more municipalities are seeking nonexclusive agreements with a variety of cable companies to expand choice and improve service.
"There is nothing that gets people more angry than the cable company," said Paul Feiner, Greenburgh Town Supervisor.
"It hits a real nerve." Telephone companies like Bell Atlantic and Nynex have recently announced their intention to work with cable providers.
Northeast Networks, a White Plains company that provides business customers with telecommunications services, is seeking to expand to the consumer market.
Agreements Renegotiated
"Municipalities want the competition," said Arthur Simon, the president and chief executive officer of Northeast Networks.
"No one is very happy with the current cable competitors, and we are hoping to be able to do something by mid-1994. With the mega-mergers in the industry, we feel we have to move into the consumer area."


Carnival's Big Ship
What do you call a cruise ship that weighs 95,000 tons and holds more than 3,000 passengers?
Actually, Carnival Cruises hasn't come up with an official name yet for its latest -- and largest -- ship, scheduled to arrive in 1996.
Big Mama, as it's now known at Carnival's Miami headquarters, will be the biggest cruise ship ever, outmega-ing the current mega-ships, which weigh about 70,000 tons and hold 2,600 passengers.
But is bigger really better?
Though uber-ships are easy to navigate and have lots of public rooms, they can't visit smaller ports or even squeeze through the Panama Canal.
And is a holiday with 3,000 other people really a vacation?


Many in Haiti Now Believe the U.S. Has Given Up on Aristide
Whatever the intention, President Clinton's pessimistic assessment of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide this week convinced many Haitians that Washington's halting efforts to restore him as President of Haiti were drawing to a close.
Mr.
Clinton's remarks, in which he seemed to be calling for a reassessment of American support for Father Aristide, were banner news in Haiti's press, the talk of radio commentators and for many in a conservative elite that rejects the exiled President, an occasion for champagne toasts.


ONE COP, EIGHT SQUARE BLOCKS
For police executives in America's largest and most crime-ridden cities, the implementation of community policing is the challenge of our time ("One Cop, Eight Square Blocks," by Michael Norman, Dec. 12).
Community policing goes far beyond a simple modification of existing police policy -- the addition of foot-patrol officers walking the beat.
It is a philosophy that invokes fundamental issues of modern policing: the police mission, its culture and (most important) its relationship with the community.
How well police departments address these matters is as important as how many new officers they put on the streets.
MATT L. RODRIGUEZ Superintendent, Chicago Police Department Chicago


Barkley: Ask Him a Question, He'll Tell You No Lies
After an exhilarating run to the National Basketball Association finals and the honor of being named the league's most valuable player last spring, the new season has been anything but smooth for the Phoenix Suns' Charles Barkley.
At training camp in October, the 6-foot-6-inch forward collapsed on the court.
Tests revealed a bulging disk in Barkley's back, which has hampered his style to a degree but not his smile.
More recently, he was involved in two altercations at a Phoenix-area bar.
On the eve of the new year, Barkley offered some thoughts on his future, the league and society in general in an interview with Samantha Stevenson.
Q. Looking ahead to next year?
A. Next year? I'm not playing basketball next year.


Tripped Circuit Breakers and Fuses Can Prevent Fires
ELECTRICAL emergencies call for prompt, sometimes immediate action.
Unless the response is correct and safely performed, serious injury or fire can result.
Winter, when electrical usage is heavy, is a time to be especially alert for mishaps.
A tripped circuit breaker or blown fuse is probably the most common electrical emergency.
Generally, several lights or appliances fail at the same time.
That is usually a blessing in disguise.
Both breakers and fuses are safety devices that interrupt power to a circuit when it malfunctions, helping to prevent a fire.


Financial Climate Warms for States
Forty-five states say they are fiscally sound this year, nearly twice the number that could make such a claim a year ago, according to a survey by the National Conference of State Legislatures.
Moreover, few states say they are likely to raise taxes or employ accounting gimmicks to balance their books this year, reflecting the slow but steady growth in the national economy as well as the ability of states to learn to live within their means.


A Secure Rental Oasis For East New York
WHEN Marvin Williams returns to his Brooklyn apartment complex he reaches not for keys, but for a plastic card that opens the driveway gates leading to his secured community.
Once inside, he rounds a traffic circle and eases his car into the garage under his apartment building, where a reserved space is waiting.
One flight up, on the deck of the parking garage, is a landscaped garden and play areas for the pleasure of his family and others who live in Spring Creek Gardens.


A Rollickin' And Rollin' Revue
DANCE, mime, acrobatics, juggling -- all on roller skates.
That's the idea behind New York Express, a roller dance troupe that takes to the stage today at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts.
The six-member cast of the self-titled revue includes a former Junior Miss Maryland; veterans of the ice show "Holiday on Ice" and of the Broadway musical-on-wheels "Starlight Express," as well as dancers from the world of hip-hop.


Debra Winger: Caught on a Winter Afternoon
Late one recent wintry afternoon, the chilly river light settled into the living room of one of the two penthouse apartments that Debra Winger owns in an Upper West Side building in Manhattan.
Wearing jeans and an indifferent white pullover, worn gray socks and no shoes, no makeup, Ms.
Winger poured herbal tea and curled up on the couch.
She took a sip.
Then she took aim.
She recited from her recent press clippings: " 'After eight years of lackluster parts, Debra Winger is back.' Back? Excuse me, but what was working with Bertolucci in the Sahara Desert -- chopped liver?" she asked, her sleepy, sandpapered voice rasping to an indignant squeak.


Court Weighs Expanding Scope of Murder Charge
The subject is murder.
Or rather, that distant border separating what can legally be called a murder from tragically bad luck.
Case No. 1: A man chokes and slashes his girlfriend, who survives, though she has been left paralyzed and on a hospital respirator.
He pleads guilty to attempted murder and begins serving his sentence.
Nine months after the attack, the woman dies.
Can prosecutors charge the man with murder?


Manager's Profile
Bill Veronda Fund: Invesco High-Yield Bond Portfolio, $303 million in assets.
Manager since 1984 inception. (Sponsor: Invesco Funds Group, Denver.)  Born: April 24, 1946; Bridgeport, Conn.


A New Sphere
The sign in the courtyard said, "Welcome to the Millennium." And next to the offices of the Millennium Whole Earth Catalog -- the forthcoming sequel to the pivotal 60's generational bible -- someone was building an "experiential" multicolored tetrahedron with a metal ball suspended from it. ("Oh, no," muttered a staff photographer, "not again.")
Howard Rheingold, the editor in chief, was dressed in a kaleidoscopic fashion statement that looked as if the parking lot of a Grateful Dead concert had wandered onto his clothes.
Then, amid a kazoo chorus, Wavy Gravy, that legendary 60's civil disobedient, lead an invocation to bless the M-WEC, as the millennium catalogue is known.
One participant described the group of 30 or so writers and editors who had assembled from all over the country for a one-day millennium powwow as "granola-crunching, endorphin-drenched techno-druids." It was the utopia business as usual at 27 Gate Five Road.


My, but It's Cold Out! Time to Start Seeds
I LIVE on the top floor of a cheap fifth-floor walk-up in the West Village with an incredible view of the Hudson from the roof.
It has a couple of skylights that weren't put in too well.
And when the wind blows sleet across the roof -- and through the cracks in the skylight -- I have to wear a hat to bed.
Last Tuesday, after a long, drafty night of huddling in my Little House on the Prairie, I got up at the crack of dawn and looked out the window at the gloom that could just as easily have been nightfall.
In lieu of checking into a clinic for SAD (seasonal affective disorder), I decided to blow some of that money I've been saving (for a down payment on a country paradise) on an "eight-tray, four-tier, large-capacity space-saver light stand" from Harris Seeds.


Sound Bytes; In a State of Digital Desire
IF there is such a thing as being a citizen of cyberspace, the global computer network, Joichi Ito is an excellent candidate.
The son of Japanese parents who worked in the United States as research scientists, he is one of the few people who can be completely at home in both cultures.
Now the president of Mac Zone Japan, a mail-order software distributor in Tokyo, Mr.
Ito crosses the Pacific monthly.
He is also working with Magic Box Productions in Beverly Hills, Calif., on multimedia production, and with Energy Conversion Devices Inc. in Troy, Mich., a development company working on memory storage technology.


American Style
SYMPHONY CAFE * (212) 397-9595; 950 Eighth Avenue, at 56th Street; $$; all major credit cards


Commercial Property/Jersey City; The Siren Across the River
FOR the last four or five years, downtown Manhattan's landlords have watched vacancy rates soar and rents spiral down.
Yet across the river, along the Jersey City waterfront, space is disappearing.
Harborside Center, 10 Exchange Place and 101 Hudson Street have but a handful of spaces left.
Even Newport Office Tower, the seeming white elephant in Newport Center, has less than 40 percent of its space left.


Back to Basics


SUNDAY, January 9, 1994; Greenpeace, Meet Christo
It had the makings of a perfect stunt: moral purpose, high drama, a 1.2-mile drift net.
But when Greenpeace strung a net last month across the Seine in Paris to dramatize dangers to coastal fisheries, the event fell oddly flat.
It had none of the panache of AIDS activists slipping a giant pink condom over the obelisk in the Place de la Concorde a few weeks earlier, or of the artist Christo's wrapping of the Pont Neuf in 1985.
Greenpeace needs more art in its politics.
Christo needs more daring (lack of permission would never stop Greenpeace from wrapping the Reichstag).
Maybe they should team up on the whale issue and wrap Norway.


Why Spend More Money On Roosevelt Island Tram?
To the Editor:
A Dec. 26 article about plans for a celebration of the reopening of the Roosevelt Island tram reported that the state would spend $2 million this year on capital improvements for the tram.
As a taxpayer, I protest the continued financial support for this outmoded system of transportation.
While the city and state scratch their heads wondering how to reduce their deficits, it is irresponsible to pour more money into the tram when the island is now being served by the Q Line subway.
GERTRUDE M. SCHNEIDER  The Bronx


U.S. Crown for Harding, Olympic Spot for Kerrigan
After an unnerving week in which she was clubbed in the right knee by an assailant, Nancy Kerrigan, America's top figure skater, was named to the Olympic team tonight along with national champion Tonya Harding.
Michelle Kwan, 13, of Los Angeles finished second at the national championships and was named an Olympic alternate.
Nicole Bobek, 16, of Chicago, finished third, and Elaine Zayak, 28, of Paramus, N.J., the 1982 world champion, finished fourth in a satisfying comeback.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $290,000
40 West 24th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, dining room, 11-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls, common roof deck; maintenance $647, 50 % tax-deductible, listed at $325,000, 3 years on market (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $452,000
158 Waverly Place  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. co-op in a 4-story town house; dining room, 10 1/2-ft. ceilings, 2 fireplaces, 3 exposures, common roof garden; maintenance $525, 45% tax-deductible, listed at $599,000, 28 weeks on market (Broker: William B. May)  TRIBECA  $240,000
74 Reade Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, exposed-brick walls, 13-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $825, 53% tax-deductible, listed at $265,000, 2 years on market (Broker: Eychner/Village)  WEST SIDE  $684,000
10 West 66th Street  (Park 10)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, terrace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,798, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $695,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Marilyn Korn; Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX
RIVERDALE  $51,500
5775 Mosholu Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar condo; renovated kitchen and bath, low floor; common charge $192, taxes $1,788. listed at $65,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  WAKEFIELD  $185,000
3676 Harper Avenue  2-family, detached wood-frame and aluminum-sided 50-year-old house; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; full basement, 2-car garage; taxes $985, listed at $200,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Cancro Realty)  BROOKLYN
BRIGHTON BEACH  $182,000
3057 Brighton 7th Street  2-family, semi-attached, 50-year-old brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; finished basement, private driveway; taxes $2,000, listed at $225,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Homes 'R Beautiful)  FLATBUSH  $205,000
1206-08 Beverly Road  2-family, 76-year-old detached colonial; 6 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; private driveway, taxes $2,289, listed at $225,000, 28 weeks on market (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  WINDSOR TERRACE  $300,000
33 Prospect Park S.W.  3-family, 3-story limestone; 2 bedrooms in two units; 1 bedroom, double parlor, dining room in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, taxes $1,800, listed at $325,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS
ELMHURST  $140,000
41-74 Forley Street 5-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old detached house; dining area, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,700, listed at $199,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  REGO PARK  $235,000
63-15 Wetherole Street 5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 68-year-old detached house; dining room, family room in finished basement, 1-car garage, taxes $1,300, listed at $265,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: F.H. Realty Executives; Kingdom Realty)  STATEN ISLAND
ANNADALE  $221,000
386 Green Valley Road  2-family, 10-year-old detached house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, family room, fireplace in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 1-car garage, taxes $1,763, listed at $229,500, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)  CASTLETON CORNERS  $147,500
8 Hodges Place  2-family, 50-year-old town house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each unit; family room in finished basement; taxes $1,500, listed at $154,900, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty) NEW JERSEY  ELMWOOD PARK  $160,000
109 Godwin Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; above-ground pool, patio, full finished basement; taxes $2,813, listed at $169,000, 1 week on market (Brokers: T.B. Mabey Realtors; Weichert Realtors)  HOPEWELL  $275,000
185 Pleasant Valley Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; full basement, skylights, cathedral ceilings; taxes $5,200, listed at $289,900, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel Corp., Realtors)  MAHWAH  $450,000
14 Watch Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; fireplace in family room, deck solarium; taxes $6,132, listed at $499,900, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)
OLD TAPPAN  $448,000
81 Old Tappan Road  5-bedroom, 5-bath, 30-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, full finished basement, 3-car garage; taxes $11,380, listed at $525,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins Realtors)
CONNECTICUT
BRIDGEPORT  $72,000
130-32-24 Hansen Street  3-family, 3-story attached frame and vinyl-sided house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; taxes $2,835, listed at $75,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Coastal Realty)  FAIRFIELD  $470,000
347 Taunton Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3 year-old, wood-frame colonial; marble entry hall, dining room, den, breakfast room, Jacuzzi, central air-conditioning, 2-car garage, 0.75 acre; taxes $5,545, listed at $489,000, 18 weeks on market (Brokers: William Raveis Real Estate; Dunlap Hibbs)  GREENWICH  $870,000
31 Boulder Brook  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 47-year-old, wood-frame ranch; entry hall, dining room, family room, solarium, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, pool, c/a, 2-car garage, 1.43 acres; taxes $5,664, listed at $925,000, 36 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties Inc.; Greater Greenwich)  STAMFORD  $279,900
30 Westminster Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old wood-frame colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $3,900, listed at $299,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt Real Estate; Seymour Lapin Real Estate)  WESTCHESTER
CHAPPAQUA  $349,000
390 Bedford Road North  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 43-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining room, 2-car garage; 1.14 acres; taxes $8,250, listed at $359,000, 25 weeks on market (Broker: Holmes &amp; Kennedy)  GREENBURGH  $445,000
128 Boulder Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old condominium; deck, pool, clubhouse; common charges $435, taxes $9,600, listed at $479,000, 21 weeks on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  MOUNT VERNON  $250,000
207 Central Parkway  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 63-year-old Colonial; screened-in porch, dining room, 2-car garage; taxes $6,615, listed at $269,500, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Lindsey Real Estate)  PELHAM MANOR  $1.09 million
965 Esplanade  8-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, 64-year-old colonial; library, billiard room, 3-car garage; taxes $19,608, 50 weeks on market, listed at $1.325 million (Broker: C.S. McClellan &amp; Company)  LONG ISLAND
FARMINGDALE  $160,000
48 Sunset Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800, listed at $168,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: A-1 Realty, Network of Homes)  GLEN COVE  $255,000
72 Robinson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 88-year-old Victorian; eat-in-kitchen, dining room, 2 fireplaces, wraparound porch; taxes $3,300, listed at $269,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes)  ISLIP  $165,000
69 Bonaparte Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200, listed at $184,900, 50 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Long Island Realty)
MASSAPEQUA  $225,000
6 Deepwater Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old high ranch; dining room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,900, listed at $249,990, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Fitzgerald Properties)


Conversations: Sheik Rashid el-Ghanoushi; An Islamic Fundamentalist Abroad Talks Freely of Limits on Freedom
CHAINED hostages in Beirut's basements; the bombing of the World Trade Center; death edicts issued and carried out against writers and intellectuals.
Over the years such transgressions have elevated Islamic fundamentalism to the ranks of an international menace, blurring a demarcation line between Islam, one of the world's great monotheistic religions, and political movements that use it as a platform to grab power.
A growing number of Arabs, Europeans, Americans and others around the globe have come to regard hard-line "Islamic" regimes, such as those in Iran, Sudan and Afghanistan, as simply the newest face of old-fashioned totalitarian evil.


Not Just the 'Crazies' Opposed Carriage Bill
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's breezy column on the Irish horse-carriage drivers ("Sad Days for the Lads of the Carriage Trades," Dec. 26) focused on a bill to extend the hours and area worked by the carriages.
The measure was vetoed by Mayor Dinkins, but it will undoubtedly be offered again.


Jan. 2-8; One More Reason a Cold Feels Bad
You would think that after centuries of study of the common cold, doctors would have a complete picture of what the viral ailment does to the body.
But last week researchers came up with a surprise: the viruses causing common colds affect the sinuses as much as the nasal passages.
Doctors had long assumed that the sneezing, coughing, sore throat and stuffed head from the cold came from damage chiefly confined to the soft tissues of the nasal passages and throat.


Prehistory in the Remaking? Try Ancient Little Neck Man
Once upon a time in Queens, long before Donald Manes, Lefrak City, the Mets, Idlewild, the Long Island Expressway and both World's Fairs -- in fact, thousands of years even before the Matinecock Indians reigned and George Washington slept there -- prehistoric tribes hunted mastodon and woolly mammoths on the tundra edge of retreating glaciers.
The names of those Stone Age tribes, if indeed they had names, and their languages have long since been lost.
But the first people known to dwell in Queens and their successors left behind tantalizing evidence of their daily life: weapons and pottery shards that lie beneath roads, parking lots, high-rise apartment buildings, shopping centers and backyard patios, traveled over daily by millions of modern hominids.


Deep In the Amazon
To the Editor:
Michael Beckerman's musings in "A Tradition, From Boom to Bust"  [ Dec. 19 ]  on the declining fortunes of those once-ubiquitous pieces of home furnishing, the plaster busts of great composers, brought to mind a story I heard some years ago from the celebrated pianist Mieczeslaw Horszowski.


Sometimes January in the Cruelest Month
During January, movie studios act as if audiences had implored, "Give us your tired, your poor, your muddled messes yearning to go directly to video." This is also the month for little foreign films, sleepers and big Hollywood movies that could not be finished by Christmas.


Fishing Fleets Are Pulling in Their Giant Nets
A year after the United Nations banned the use of giant fishing nets on the high seas, officials here say nations have apparently ended the practice in most areas of the world's oceans.
The trend toward ending the practice began in 1991 with Japan, followed by South Korea and Taiwan, agreeing to stop deploying their 30- to 40-mile-long driftnets in the Pacific Ocean.


Sara B. Alyea, T. J. Anderson
Sara Ballard Alyea, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick N. Alyea of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., and Terrence James Anderson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Anderson of Cincinnati, were married yesterday at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Arthur Anderson, a Roman Catholic priest and the bridegroom's uncle, officiated.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from New York University.
She is an associate at Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, a law firm in Philadelphia.
Her father is an engineering consultant in Bala-Cynwyd.
Her mother, Retha B. Alyea, was a special-education teacher at the Timothy School in Bryn Mawr, Pa., until her retirement.


For Some Composers, 'Twas Not a Gift to Be Simple
My favorite insight into the music of Gustav Mahler came from a nonmusician -- an English professor, actually, who pointed out that Mahler and his rival Richard Strauss shared a fatal flaw: an inability to be simple even when they wanted to.
"Listen to 'Rosenkavalier,' " he said.
"Strauss tries to write with the simplicity of Mozart and composes the most complicated opera of all time. Listen to the Adagietto of Mahler's Fifth Symphony. Its title proclaims it a miniature, a cameo, the simplest piece Mahler could possibly write, yet it modulates through four keys, ranges through a variety of tempos and lasts longer than the most elaborate movements of any symphony by Haydn or Mozart."


CROSSWORD PUZZLES
So now I can complete your Sunday crossword puzzle.
Am I supposed to feel better?
Smarter?
Contented?
Is this a symbol of the great democratization of the American people?
The Sunday puzzle is now for the masses?
I miss the challenge.
I miss the intellectual satisfaction of solving the esoteric, the obscure, the ambiguous, the veiled, the camouflaged.
MARGARET SCRYMSER Arlington, Va.


Pass an Unaltered Counsel Law
Last week's White House machinations over suspicious Arkansas land and bank dealings, and the Justice Department's weak-kneed response, underscore the need for Congress to revive the Independent Counsel Act -- quickly, and without hobbling amendments that would prohibit a full public report by the counsel.
But that could take months -- at a time when speed is urgent.
Even a few weeks' delay may harm the Arkansas investigation.
As early as March, some suspicious activities involving a business partner of President and Mrs.
Clinton's may be beyond the Government's reach under a five-year statute of limitations.


CRIME
It takes the steady hand of a cool pro like Lawrence Block to monitor the erratic pulsebeat of New York City without faking it.
In his 11th Matthew Scudder novel, THE DEVIL KNOWS YOU'RE DEAD (Morrow, $20), the author steers his unlicensed private eye to the unpopular cause of a deranged derelict accused of killing a yuppie lawyer in an act of random violence -- a scenario that catches the weary city's sullen mood over its hordes of mentally unstable streetcombers.
Scudder is burdened by a load of personal baggage, including romantic attachments to three women and regular attendance at A.A. meetings, that inhibits the action and stifles its sense of urgency.
But when this droll, streetwise sleuth quits staring out the window at the rain and starts prowling his neighborhood haunts in Hell's Kitchen, he is just about the best there is.


Thick Steaming Soups for Wintertime
No dish changes quite as much from season to season as soup.
Summer's soups are bowls of chilled pastel strewn with herbs.
If hot they are sheer, insubstantial broths afloat with seafood.
In winter they turn steaming and thick to serve with slabs of rustic, crusty bread.
Bean soups fortified with meat, sturdy root vegetable purees and chunky chowders whet cold weather appetites.
No sort of meal assembly is a easy as one based on soup.
And although the best winter soups may depend on freshly-made long- simmering stocks, dried beans soaked overnight then tended as they cook for hours and tough cuts of meat or fowl stewed until they fall apart.
There are shortcuts however.


The Rise and Rise Of Irresistible Afropop
GEORGES COLLINET WAS speaking to a group of college students gathered around the turntables, amplifiers and loudspeakers he was setting up on a terrace on the Madison campus of the University of Wisconsin.
He chuckled as he recalled that evening last fall.
"Before we got started, these guys came up to me, saw all the records and told me to be sure to play a lot of Garth Brooks. Then some other kids asked me if I had anything by a band I'd never heard of. I was afraid no one had come to hear African music."


LIVING DOLLS
The Style feature "Living Dolls" (Dec. 5) presented adult women wearing baby-doll dresses, their faces painted like porcelain and their arms and legs stiffly positioned, as if they were plastic, movable parts.


The Perils of Pilaster
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE By Ken Follett. 533 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $23.95.


In America; The Gun Biz
At the moment it is absurdly easy to get a Federal license to sell guns, even in jurisdictions like New York City that have strict gun control laws.
You fill out a form on the honor system that says you are not mentally unstable, not a convicted felon and not an illegal alien.
You send the form and a $30 fee to the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and -- bingo! -- you're in business.


Molinari Sworn In for a Second Term


One of the Stone Age's Trendiest Neighborhoods
If you were looking for a home in, say, the Paleo-Amerindian Age, your agent probably mentioned Little Neck -- waterfront property, great shellfishing, a mastodon on every corner.
Anthropologists are striking gold in Northeast Queens.
With reports from midtown, Flatbush and Port Morris. (Michael R. Long/"Mammal Evolution: An Illustrated Guide"/Facts on File and the British Museum (Natural History)) PAGES 5-8


CUNY Settles Suit By Italian Institute
The John D. Calandra Italian-American Institute at the City University of New York will become a unit of Queens College, and the college will appoint a distinguished professor of Italian-American studies, under terms of a settlement reached Friday by the institute, CUNY and the Italian-American Legal Defense and Higher Education Fund.
The settlement also provides that the Calandra Institute will withdraw its charges that the university has discriminated against Italian-American faculty members, and that future complaints will be resolved through an arbitration process.


The Vikings' Winter of Content; After Trading the Future, They Find It Again in McMahon
Excuse some Minnesota Vikings players and fans for rubbing their eyes and scratching their heads during the last off season when quarterback Jim McMahon was the team's major free-agent choice, but to many, this seemed like less than a shot in the dark.
Did somebody say Herschel Walker?


G.M. Renovates Its Compact Pickups
WHAT with myriad models and trim levels, choosing an automobile is no easy matter these days.
But consider the poor shopper who wants a pickup truck.
That buyer confronts an even more bewildering array of engines, suspensions, sizes and configurations.
And the pickup is certainly worth considering.
According to the National Association of Automobile Dealers, total sales for 1994 will be on the order of 14.3 million vehicles, with more than 5.5 million, or nearly 40 percent, of them light trucks.


MASTER OF THE GAME
Two cheers for nostalgia!
Only two, because I'm not positive that's what you were doing when you printed Benjamin Stein's letter (Nov. 28).
Nominally a comment on Michael Kelly's article "David Gergen: Master of the Game," it was really a Nixon nostalgia celebration.
We haven't heard statements about "half-truths by . . .  Nixon haters," "attempts to portray R.N. as a master manipulator," etc., for quite some time.


Helping Hand for Potential Booksellers
DID you ever have dreams of opening a bookstore?
Dreamer beware -- entering the retail bookstore business requires more than enthusiasm and a love of books.
There is the financial investment: adequate capital is critical.
And as in the real estate industry, success very often depends on "location, location, location." Also important is the willingness to do a fair amount of physical labor.
Such things as unpacking and shelving books, waiting on customers, gift wrapping, operating the cash register are all part of the bookseller's daily routine.


U.S. Told to Show Deportations Aren't Biased
For seven years a group of eight Palestinian immigrants here has complained of being singled out for deportation because of leftist views.
Now a Federal judge has ordered the Government to show that it does not discriminate when it decides which immigrants must be deported and which can stay.
The ruling on Friday by the judge, Stephen V. Wilson of Federal District Court, orders the Government to disclose details of how it treats immigrants who espouse unwelcome views, and whom it wants to deport for technical violations.
And, some critics contend, it is likely to show that the Government for years has granted favorable status to foreigners who supported pro-Administration causes or groups like the Nicaraguan contras or anti-Castro Cubans.


MAKING A DIFFERENCE
Lewis knows enough to distinguish between sexism and mere gender difference.
Yet is she wise to her own passion for control?
I am troubled that a conscientious parent would waste her time policing the minutiae of her daughter's life.
Indeed, Lewis's attempt at gender engineering is but a recipe for future adolescent rebellion.
LOREN GATCH Ithaca, N.Y.


Meghan Hughes, Kimball Mayer
Meghan Lois Margaret Hughes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Hughes of Indianapolis, was married there yesterday to Kimball Powning Mayer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
W.
Brem Mayer of Atlanta.
The Rev.
James B. Lemler, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Trinity Church.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Murphy, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Mayer graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and is studying for a master's degree in art history at New York University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Sommer &amp; Barnard in Indianapolis.
Her mother, Sheila Hughes, is the director of development and communications for the Indiana chapter of the Nature Conservancy.


Youth Is Shot Dead By Pizzeria Owner After an Argument
A Bronx pizzeria owner who local residents said had been constantly harassed by neighborhood youths shot and killed one youth and wounded another after an argument at the restaurant on Friday night, the police said yesterday.
The police said they did not know the motive for the shooting.
But neighbors said the owner, Victor H. Castillo, 34, often had been the victim of bullies, who who they said would enter the pizzeria, demand free food and make fun of Mr.
Castillo.


Sports of The Times; Does L. T. Now Mean Last Time?
IT'S almost as if Lawrence Taylor doesn't want to acknowledge that today's wild-card playoff against the Vikings might be his last game at Giants Stadium.
If not his last game, period.
"I know exactly what I'm going to do, but it's not for public discussion," he was saying.
"It doesn't help us against Minnesota so I don't want to think about it."


Elizabeth Beier and Michael Hirschorn
THE philosopher Francois de la Rochefoucauld once wrote, "True love is like seeing ghosts: we all talk about it, but few of us have ever seen one." When you meet Michael Hirschorn and Elizabeth Beier, you feel convinced they've seen the ghost.


HIGH UP IN THE BOX
Maureen Dowd's column "High Up in the Box" (On Washington, Dec. 12) made me laugh so hard, there are still tears in my eyes.
Who knows?
Maybe I could be the next happy dude to end up on the hood of Marlene Cooke's Jaguar.
Looking forward to Dowd's next epistle from our nation's capital.
ROBERT WHITMER Fairfield, Conn.


The Complaint Patrol
LIZZIE BROWN and her co-workers hear a lot about what people wish they hadn't eaten.
There was the man who swore he was served a dog's tooth with his macaroni.
There was the fellow who was incensed that a cook put pizza dough on the table he had just been sitting on.
Not to mention all who call daily to gripe about the roaches, rodents and severed fingers they are convinced they have consumed in places they contend are totally lacking in garbage disposal.


Habitats/Mike Tyson's Former Mansion; Grand Plans Gone Awry
IT is a very straight, very long driveway that leads to Kenilwood.
In the 20's, it was clogged with liveried chauffeurs driving huge touring cars up to the front door to deposit Astors -- an ancestor had married Caroline Astor -- and Posts, Wilsons and Welleses.
In the late 80's, young neighborhood boys nervously scampered up the driveway to knock on the imposing oak door of the 1897 Gothic Revival stone mansion and ask for an autograph from the new owner, the heavyweight champion of the world, Mike Tyson.


Kicks
UPTOWN -- It was Wednesday, and after weeks of holiday bedlam, Michael Keilly, the head concierge at the Waldorf-Astoria, was finally having a slow night.
The week before, he'd made New Year's Eve plans for more than 1,500 guests.
"I sent them everywhere," he said.
"I spread them around."
In his morning coat, Mr.
Keilly -- who's 41, has the physique of a linebacker and speaks five languages -- transforms the lobby counter where he's confined for eight-hour shifts into a sort of international zone of good taste.
One moment you might find him assuring a guest that he'll do his best to have the florist send only yellow tulips to her suite, but if there aren't any, white would be nice, too.
The next, he's writing the address of Club USA for a man in a warm-up jacket who's asking about the dress code.
"Casual, but with flair," he says sternly.
"I have to tell them that," he said.
"Otherwise they'll go in track shoes and sweat pants. Outside New York, this is an entire nation of people in pajamas."


Bama Throws a Curve at No. 1 Arkansas
Alabama 66, Arkansas 64
Alabama, which had lost to Tennessee-Chattanooga and the College of Charleston, pulled off the biggest upset of the season yesterday, stunning No. 1 Arkansas, 66-64, in Tuscaloosa, Ala.


Business Diary: January 2-7
THE ECONOMY It's the Best of Times (Unless You're Still Out of Work)  The numbers keep showing a recovery with staying power.
Last week brought strong data on construction and manufacturing, and a report that consumers did what they can't help doing in December: buy lots of stuff.
To top it off, the unemployment rate for the month clicked downward again, to 6.4 percent, a three-year low.
The rise in payrolls was a modest 183,000, serving to dampen fear of revived inflation.
All this helped the insatiable stock market keep nudging to new records, as the Dow industrials passed 3,800 and kept on going.
With a strong 1993 wrapped up, though, some people may stop looking at an economic glass that's half full, and rising, and focus instead on how empty it still is.
More than half the new jobs were temporary, and 8.23 million Americans still want any job but don't have one.
That's a lot of Fridays without paychecks, a lot of children without new shoes.


SUNDAY, January 9, 1994; Lost in Cyberspace
There he was, as cyber as you can get without being a punk, best-selling author of "The Hitchiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, having an identity crisis -- well, a virtual identity crisis.
Douglas Adams, or some digital embodiment of somebody who claimed to be Douglas Adams, was on the Internet.
He has been on the Internet longer than most.
And immodest though it may be, he will sometimes check in with alt.fan.douglas-adams.
That, for non-cyberspeakers (to whom nets are something to string across the Seine), is a Douglas Adams fan club.


BEST SELLERS: January 9, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
10
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
74
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
4
13
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
3
20
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
5
43
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
6
6
39
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
7
15
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
8
9
4
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
9
10
9
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
10
8
5
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
11
12
12
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
12
14
17
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
13
11
3
A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) Verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.
14
15
46
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
13
6
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
8
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
12
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
3
18
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
4
4
20
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
5
14
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
6
5
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
7
10
3
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
8
8
6
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
9
35
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
10
7
14
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
11
4
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $50.) Photographs by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
12
15
74
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13
13
14
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
14
11
3
I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $19.) The humorist describes his near-death experience following heart surgery.
15
12
6
THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline Polar Bear and his owner.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
24
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
2
8
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
3
3
57
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
4
4
33
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.) More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing, intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one minute without humming.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
GARBAGE, by A.R.
Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of the 1993 National Book Award.
IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent, by Timothy Garton Ash. (Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the collapse of Communism?
A hard question, approached with respect for its ambiguity.
JAMES BEARD: A Biography, by Robert Clark. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) A painstaking, admirably unvarnished life of the great cooking teacher and food writer whose career, occasionally embarrassed by tinges of greed and cynicism, spanned the postwar era of American infatuation with food as an art form.
MAKE ME WORK, by Ralph Lombreglia. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Short stories that fizz with humor and hipness explore the lives of happy underachievers and the women patiently waiting for them to grow up.
MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B.
Breslin. (University of Chicago, $39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English, is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.
PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly realized world of 1960's Dublin.
SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.
VERDI: A Biography, by Mary Jane Phillips-Matz. (Oxford University, $45.) This portrait of the composer, an important account that alters accepted understanding on matters large and small, portrays him as a brutal and self-indulgent man with a remarkable capacity for lust, love, anger and compassion.
W.E.B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.


Peering Into the Crystal Ball
See-through dresses.
Peekaboo necklines.
Look for the most promising fashion trends of last year to remain center stage in the months ahead.


Massimino vs. Thompson Again, But It's Hardly Like Old Times
When Rollie Massimino took members of his Nevada-Las Vegas team for a shoot-around at the USAir Arena -- formerly known as the Capital Centre -- he felt himself overcome with nostalgia for a building he hadn't been to in a couple of seasons.
He remembered the wars when Georgetown was Georgetown and Villanova was Rollie Massimino.


Wall Street; An Arbitration Plan Goes Begging
SOME new ideas are so outlandish you can't even get supporters to publicly endorse them.
Or so it appears to be in the case of a proposal by the National Association of Securities Dealers to rein in the rights of investors who take action against their brokers.
The N.A.S.D. quietly filed a proposed amendment to its Code of Arbitration last June, suggesting a system to encourage unhappy investors and their brokers to settle rather than arbitrate cases of $250,000 or more in alleged damages -- a third of the 5,300 cases filed last year.
Key to the proposal is one gun-to-the-temple provision: If an investor declines a settlement offer, opting for arbitration instead, he or she will get stuck with all the brokerage firm's legal fees.


Pastas and Pizzas in a Formal Setting
NOT every restaurant that serves splendid pasta and pizza is a casual cafe.
Mannino's in Hicksville proves that.
The serious sophisticated place is much more Milan than Mulberry Street.
Diners enter a sleek ultramodern restaurant where glass- brick walls separate the dining room from the stunning mirror-backed dark-wood bar.
Tables are bedecked with white cloths, candles and sparkling green stemware.
Walls are subtly painted to resemble marble.
The de rigueur wood-burning pizza oven is surrounded by polished granite.
Opulent flower arrangements highlight the dining room and bar.


Coslet Getting Job Inquiries
A day after getting fired, Bruce Coslet said he had received preliminary inquiries about jobs with two other National Football League teams and was packing for a three-day golf outing in Florida.
"I'm fine," Coslet said by telephone from his Garden City, L.I., home last night."I'm not bitter. But I've been hardened by this experience because I've never been fired before. It's definitely an eye-opener for me. I still have a lot of confidence in my ability."


Phraseology
You're a tourist in Yemen.
Upon awakening one morning, you stumble down to the lobby of your hotel, where the proprietor asks you in Yemeni Arabic how you slept.
Unsure how best to articulate your response, you open a copy of "Spoken Yemeni Arabic." You turn to the appropriate section and recite the first thing that catches your eye, from page 148:
I did not sleep all night. The next time I want a drug.


Football Follies
To the Sports Editor:
Is this Brokaw fellow for real ("Learning Lessons for Life in Football," The Times, Jan. 2)?


Yangtze Cruise
To the Editor: Nicholas D. Kristof's evaluation of his trip through the gorges and the accommodations on the Yangtze Paradise ("The Yangtze's Gorges," Oct. 10) was quite accurate; my wife and I took the same trip from Oct. 31 to Nov. 3.
His relating of an experience another passenger had with a rat was confirmed by our experience.
There was a rat in our cabin that ran across my wife's bed.
There was a rat in the dining room that startled a table of nine diners.
There were rats heard scampering through the crawl space above the hallway of the second floor, just above the cabins.


Rounding Off a Central Park Edge
The northeast corner of Central Park will soon have an entrance that will rival the ones in the fancy neighborhoods at the south corners.
Work will begin this month on a project to transform the corner, Frawley Circle, from a dusty traffic snarl to a true circle filled with trees and a fitting home for a grand statue dedicated to one of the legends of Harlem, Duke Ellington.


Jan. 2-8; Oil Fouls Sands Of Puerto Rico
It was a gentle lesson, all things considered.
A barge carrying 1.5 million gallons of heavy oil struck a coral reef off the coast of Puerto Rico before dawn Friday, spilling half of its tar-like cargo.
The spill, in the heart of the tourist season, was called "a catastrophe" by Gov.
Pedro Rosello.
Tourists who had gone to bed with dreams of swimming in turquoise water awoke to a smell more often savored near the refineries off the New Jersey Turnpike.


A Russian Interpreter For Hockey Players
IN the summer of 1992, when Irina Cytowicz, the New York Rangers hockey team's Russian interpreter, first met Aleksei Kovalev, one of the team's hottest properties, she knew that interpreting for him was not going to be a routine job.
Introducing Mr.
Kovalev, then 19, a Russian who had been a member of the 1992 Winter Olympic Unified Team, to American ways included tasks like dealing with the news media, helping Mr.
Kovalev pick out a car, get insurance and open a checking account, and even finding him when he got lost on the Long Island Expressway.
She managed to handle these situations with aplomb.


Panic Button For Nurses
After an attack by a patient in the cavernous emergency room of the Coney Island Hospital, nurses are being equipped with security pendants that allow them to call for help with the simple press of a button.
The hospital installed the $7,500 wireless pendant transmitter system in the emergency room for the more than 100 nurses and nurse's aides who treat 75,000 patients a year.
Pressing the button on the half-dollar-sized pendant sets off intercoms to alert hospital police.


The World; Clinton's Attention Heartens Europe (Even the French)
WESTERN Europeans, at first, said of course they understood President Clinton's need to tackle domestic problems before worrying too much about foreign policy.
They even thought this would bolster the 12-nation European Union's influence and independence in world affairs.
They certainly never imagined that life would be quite so lonely without strong American leadership.
It is a measure of Europe's current mood of insecurity, then, that Mr.
Clinton's arrival in Brussels for the NATO summit meeting tomorrow has brought a sigh of relief.
Not that he has instant fixes for such intractables as the Bosnian war and instability in the former Soviet bloc.
But he will be returning here three more times this year, and that alone should keep his focus on Europe.


Secrecy Begot Activism
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis has it right when he traces the origin of our widespread cynicism about government to the culture of secrecy and deception that took root in Washington in the early cold war years (column, Dec. 27).
But there were other kinds of social fallout, not the least of which was the way great numbers of young women, myself among them, were transformed from passive political observers into determined activists.


Nuova England
Having cooked professionally for more than two decades, Jasper White, the 39-year-old chef and owner of Restaurant Jasper in Boston, is more a dean than a phenomenon on the American cooking scene.
"When I was young and hot, even 10 years ago when we opened this restaurant, I was all over the place," says White, an expansive, down-to-earth man who is rotund in the way classic chefs used to be -- a walking advertisement for his own cooking.
"I'm focused now. I know who I am. I know my own taste. I'm a traditionalist, not an inventor. And some of the things I do best don't require expert cooking skills; they require great ingredients."


Vermont Skiing
To the Editor: It is incomprehensible that a reporter, living in Montreal, writing an article about skiing in northern Vermont ("What's Doing in Northern Vermont," Nov. 21) mentions Jay Peak only in passing, and Smugglers' Notch and Burke Mountain not at all.
Jay Peak has generally an abundance of snow and many excellent trails for all levels of skiing, which are very well groomed and maintained.
There is a wide variety of lodging available -- slopeside and in surrounding villages and several good restaurants.


The Nation; From DeVon to LaDon, Invented Names Proclaim 'I Am'
I have fallen in love with American names,  The sharp gaunt names that never get fat,  The snakeskin titles of mining-claims,  The plumed war-bonnet of Medicine Hat,  Tucson and Deadwood and Lost Mule Flat.
IN "American Names," the poet Stephen Vincent Benet celebrated the rich lyrical creativity of Americans when it comes to naming things, whether places or themselves.
Mr.
Benet harked back to an earlier era when regional distinctions marked a man named Beauregard as Southern gentry, just as one named Quincy Lowell could only be a Bostonian toff.


No Headline
MAKING IT WORK 3  Taking complaints over the phone requires thick skin and an iron will.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.  4 The number of coin-operated kiddie rides is growing in the city.
So are the frustrations of the machines' owners.


From Parlor To Fridge
To the Editor:
Regarding the questionable fate of busts of great composers perched on grand pianos -- all is not lost.
As one who lives a modern life style in an efficiency apartment that won't accommodate a piano, I assure you that the future is guaranteed.
On my refrigerator door I have "stick-on" busts of Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Handel and Bach.
I am eager to add others as they become available.
LEONARD CARPENTER  Memphis


From 'Vermeer' To Obscurity
The avant-garde film maker Jon Jost has made a career out of low-budget movies and obscurity.
In 1990 he finished shooting "Sure Fire," a $105,000 film about an eager-beaver real estate developer who wants to build vacation homes in Utah for wealthy Californians.
The movie is only now opening in New York, on Wednesday, at the Public Theater.
Mr.
Jost put "Sure Fire" aside while he finished another film, "All the Vermeers in New York," which opened in 1992.
About the the latter -- which dealt with a flirtation, money and art -- Vincent Canby said: "Sometimes the effect is provocative and funny. At other times it's like being locked in a room with a raconteur who won't shut up."


Star Southpaw


SUNDAY, January 9, 1994; Thanks for the Memories
It's an old chestnut that war is good for the economy. But memories of war?
For years the travel business has had a nice little specialty in World War II nostalgia.
Now, with the 50th anniversary of the Normandy invasion coming up this June, agencies that do veterans tours are set to outdo themselves.


The Best Way to Beat The Traffic: Take a Subway
To the Editor:
Finding ways to beat traffic is a great American tradition, but "The Road Wars" (Dec. 19) ignored one of the best techniques: take the subway.
I do not drive in the city, nor do most of my friends.
When we do need a car, we hire a car service, using the money we've saved on parking and gasoline to pay the fare.


UConn Puts Off Eagles For Yet Another Day
Over three seasons and six games, Bill Curley and two other senior starters on the Boston College basketball team, guards Howard Eisley and Malcolm Huckaby, had never been able to beat Connecticut.
After tonight's 77-71 loss to No. 16 UConn at Gampel Pavilion, the three Eagles are down to one last regular-season opportunity -- on their home court Feb. 9.
The victory was Connecticut's 12th in 13 games and, at 3-0, put the Huskies alone in first place in the Big East Conference.


Q and A
Undesirable Condo Neighbor  Q. There is a resident in my condominium who has not paid common charges for years.
He appears to be mentally unstable, as he is often disruptive and loudly argumentative.
He also looks like a vagabond.
His behavior includes hauling garbage bags of empty soda cans into the building.
The bank has foreclosed on his apartment, but I am told that eviction could still be more than a year off.


Allies of Priests Accused of Role In Mexico Revolt
As fighting between Government troops and rebels continues in southern Mexico, the Government has accused peasant groups and members of the Roman Catholic Church of supporting the guerrillas.
The accusation came in a report by the Secretariat of Government, Mexico's Interior Ministry.
Most of the information could not be independently verified, but the document, issued Friday night, strongly suggests that officials have considerable intelligence information on the rebel army that stunned the nation by seizing San Cristobal and three other large towns in Chiapas state in the first hours of 1994.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN  Hockey's All-Star Game Brings Fans Special Events In conjunction with the National Hockey League All-Star Game on Jan. 22, the first held in New York since 1973, fans are invited to take part in competitions, clinics and demonstrations led by league players past and present.


Nets Give A Stiff Arm To the Bucks
After the Nets lost to the Bucks at Byrne Meadowlands Arena Wednesday night, they had two days off while Milwaukee came home the next night and lost to the Knicks.
Tonight, the Nets managed to capitalize on the extra day's rest, fighting off a Bucks rally in the fourth quarter for a 90-87 victory.
The Nets (13-18), who had led by as many as 11 points, took a 72-67 lead into the quarter.


Mutual Funds; Plotting Out '94: 3 Model Portfolios
AFTER an extraordinary 1991, stock fund returns slipped back roughly to historical stock averages of 10 to 12 percent, and it looks like more of the same in 1994.
Aside from a burst of activity in August, the stock market fluctuated narrowly last year.
In bonds, many analysts say rates have bottomed and will rise, albeit slowly, in 1994.
The bottom line: investors who profited from the market run-up since the 1987 crash probably have to adjust their expectations for the next several years.


Mainly Italian In Midtown West
BELLINI BY CIPRIANI **  (212) 265-7770; 777 Seventh Avenue, near 51st Street; $$$$; all major credit cards


Streetscapes/Grand Central Terminal; In a Forgotten Corner, a Curious Office of the 20's
THE advertising signs have been swept away.
The main waiting room has been returned to its original grandeur.
And there's a test patch for cleaning the starry ceiling of the concourse.
Still, there is one elaborate interior at Grand Central Terminal that remains untouched by the restorationists' impulse -- a richly painted, paneled room that few people have ever even seen, obscured by dropped ceilings and cheap partitions.
But now the Metropolitan Transportation Authority says it is about to sign a lease that will result in the restoration of the curious office of John W. Campbell.


Crystal Theater: Where Stars Are Born in Norwalk
BROADWAY has yet another source of musical talent: a theater program for school-age children and teen-agers in Norwalk.
More than 220 youngsters in grades 2 through 12 participate in Crystal Theater, a music theater education program founded by Cheryl E. Kemeny, her sister Alexandrea and David Jackins in 1987.


The Saga of a Phone Installation: Part 2
AS expected, they cut me off.
When my phone went dead last Sunday, the same day I grumbled in this column about the banal, grinding struggle to get new service in the first place, I felt relieved.
I wasn't paranoid.
I had waited 10 days for a phone installer.
Then I suffered through 36 hours more of misinformation, bureaucratic shuffling and inconvenience before I heard a dial tone.


Porn, the Low-Slung Engine of Progress
TO BE LINGUISTICALLY FASHIONABLE IN Silicon Valley, you must be able to speak knowingly about the "killer app" -- the killer application for a new technology, the function that makes a gadget appealing.
A killer app can be something like the spreadsheet software that induced businesses to buy the first desktop computers.
It can be something for the home, like the video games that popularized living-room computers.
And, as crowds at trade shows have discovered in the past year, it can be something for the libido.
The sensation at recent computer expositions has been a new group of booths surrounded by black curtains.
Inside are high-tech peep shows: interactive videos on CD-ROM featuring naked Penthouse models and hard-core porn actresses who respond to commands from a keyboard.
The computer industry has professed shock -- the X-rated material has been banned from one trade show and from most computer magazines' advertising pages -- but in retrospect it all seems quite predictable.


Andrei Sedych, 91, Russian Immigrant Who Edited Paper
Andrei SedychAndrei Sedych, a prominent Russian-American journalist who was the editor in chief of Novoye Russkoye Slovo in New York for 15 years and a leader in Russian emigre society here, died yesterday in Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 91.
Mr.
Sedych, who lived in Manhattan, had suffered from Alzheimer's disease, said Lawrence Weinberg, publisher of the newspaper.
Mr.
Sedych, who emigrated to this country after World War II, was an author and freelance writer in Manhattan until he joined the staff of the newspaper full time in 1967, becoming its editor in chief in 1973.


The Executive Computer; Among Desktop Users, Support Grows for the Trackball
PEOPLE who use a trackball for desktop computing are passionate about the advantages of the device, a sort of inverted mouse.
Like a mouse, a trackball uses a roller ball to control the cursor on the computer screen, but unlike a mouse, the device sits still: only the ball, firmly cradled in a base, is moved.
Trackballs, their fans say, provide more precise cursor control, are easier on aching arms and wrists and take up far less space on a desk than a mouse, which needs a meadow at least 6 by 8 inches to roam.


Model Behavior
A BALD colossus of a man, Leigh Bowery is one of Lucian Freud's favorite models.
The painter has depicted him in a recent series of nudes, rendering his shaved head, ample flesh and soulful face in rich textural detail.
Yet, no one recognized Mr.
Bowery one recent afternoon when he swept into the exhibition of Mr.
Freud's work that opened last month at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Perhaps it was because Mr. Bowery was wearing a dress.


Behind the O'Rourke-Tenore Power Battle
STEPHEN P. TENORE recalls vividly how the Board of Legislators functioned when he first joined it.
"The Budget Committee would sometimes start work at 2:30 in the afternoon and not finish until 1 in the morning, and all we were doing was making sure every Democratic measure was defeated."
The New Rochelle Republican, a funeral-home owner who never held an elected office until he was appointed to fill an unexpired term on the Board, saw this relentless partisanship as a colossal waste, although it had been standard practice for as long as anyone could remember.


Casino in the Sky
For airborne high rollers, Virgin Atlantic will offer gambling in the skies on flights between London and Hong Kong beginning in late February.
Punters can play poker, roulette or slot machines without leaving their seats.
Video gambling -- bets can be placed with the swipe of a credit card -- will be available, along with Nintendo games, in-flight shopping and eight channels of movies, on Virgin's new 14-channel entertainment system on individual seatbacks or arm-rest screens on the fleet's new Airbus A340. (The airline has not yet settled such details as minimum and maximum bets and the way players will collect winnings.)


Stockpiled Equipment Aids Cleanup of Oil in San Juan
Cleanup operations appeared to be succeeding today in containing an oil spill from a grounded barge that had dumped about half of its 1.5 million-gallon cargo into the sea on Friday.
The oil's spread was being limited to a three-mile stretch of beach in the heart of San Juan's tourist district.
But as the wind picked up and the sea got choppier, officials directing the efforts rushed to move another barge to the area to hold the oil they hoped to pump from the grounded and leaking vessel before any new holes in the barge's hull sent more of the thick, No. 6 heating oil into the ocean.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
My New York publisher suggested using a local photographer for my book.
I was recommended to a little frenetic man who rushed about the studio furiously adjusting the camera, lights, reflectors and myself.
After several shots, while I was relaxed, he tripped over the camera and it went off.
I told him to mark that shot, and of all the pictures he took, that was the best of the lot and appeared on the book.
WILLIAM DVORINE  Pikesville, Md.


Raiders-Broncos Could Be the Wild-Score Game
Defense? What defense?
When the Denver Broncos (9-7) face the Raiders (10-6) in Los Angeles today in a National Football League wild-card game, the score could be more appropriate for basketball than football.


Thick Steaming Soups for Wintertime
No dish changes quite as much from season to season as soup.
Summer's soups are bowls of chilled pastel strewn with herbs.
If hot they are sheer, insubstantial broths afloat with seafood.
In winter they turn steaming and thick to serve with slabs of rustic, crusty bread.
Bean soups fortified with meat, sturdy root vegetable purees and chunky chowders whet cold weather appetites.
No sort of meal assembly is a easy as one based on soup.
And although the best winter soups may depend on freshly-made long- simmering stocks, dried beans soaked overnight then tended as they cook for hours and tough cuts of meat or fowl stewed until they fall apart.
There are shortcuts however.


Home From College and Charged With Murder
Edward L. Summers had earned a reputation as a diligent student who, with his good grades, was on his way to attaining his long-sought goal: to become a professional dentist.
He had an engaging personality, a stable home and hard-working parents, those who know him say, and his fellow students recall him as a standout in class.


Weather Shuts Aqueduct For Third Time in Week
For the third time in five days, wintry weather canceled both live and simulcast racing at Aqueduct yesterday and further disrupted the track's transition to a betting program that includes televised races from Gulfstream Park in Florida.
The new format, seven live races at Aqueduct plus five simulcast from Gulfstream, had been canceled by stormy weather last Tuesday and again on Friday.
And on the two days that racing was held, Wednesday and Thursday, the crowds were small and the statewide betting handle fell $1 million below last year's total for each day.


Yes, It's Winter. But Don't Forget the Trees.
TREES are dormant now and they will remain so until they start to leaf out in late April and May.
Because they are dormant, this is a good time of year to think about having them pruned, cabled or braced and checked.
Or if they are property liabilities, they may even have to be cut down, a sad case.
But this drastic step is necessary particularly if the tree is diseased in its core and has rotted.
There are two basic reasons why trees are trimmed when they are dormant.
The most obvious one, of course, is that the deciduous trees are leafless and it is easy for the arborists to see what branches need to be cut out.
Getting to the twigs and limbs is simplified.
The other reason is that the trees will not bleed.
That is the sap is not running inside the tree's core.
When the sap is flowing up the trunk, it will ooze from any cuts and run down the trunk making an unsightly mess.
Though this bleeding does not harm the tree, the appearance often worries homeowners and quite often insects are attracted to the sap causing a secondary problem.


Pavarotti Is Postponed
Luciano Pavarotti's recital scheduled for this afternoon at 3 at the Metropolitan Opera House has been postponed until Feb. 20 because Mr.
Pavarotti is ill.
Tickets for today's recital will be honored on Feb. 20, or may be turned in to the box office for a refund.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Debate on Golf Course In Liberty State Park
An article about the debate over the inclusion of a golf course in Liberty State Park ("Jersey City Journal," Nov. 28) mentions gardens and a nature preserve as components of the Central Park-type plan being proposed by the Coalition to Save Liberty State Park.
It fails to mention the third component of lawns, ballfields, playgrounds and picnic areas for active recreation, which would occupy some 70-plus acres.


Rounding Off a Central Park Edge
For almost 17 years, the Darien Dinner Theater was a major attraction in Fairfield County, a place where suburbanites could enjoy a Broadway-style show without trekking into Manhattan.
"People came by the busloads from all over the state and from Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New Jersey and Westchester to have dinner and see a great show," said David Hawes, general manager for Corbin Associates, the theater's landlord.
But those days are over.
Various operators of the theater have failed, and its latest incarnation as the Club Carousel has also folded.
Its operator, Michael J. Sullo of Milford, is the target of investigations by several state agencies.
A Night to Forget
By all accounts, the theater reached its low point on New Year's Eve.
Joyce and Daniel O'Neill of Shelton came that night, looking forward to dinner, dancing and a show.
But for the first two hours, all they got for their $165 was salad, rolls and a television set rolled onto the stage for entertainment.
There were only 30 people in the audience.
"The whole atmosphere was strange and unprofessional and it became apparent we weren't going to get what we paid for," Mrs.
O'Neill said.
"Our night was completely ruined."
After being denied a refund, they complained to the police and the Better Business Bureau.
The theater's landlord has taken Mr.
Sullo to court, seeking more than $150,000 in back rent.
On Wednesday Mr.
Sullo, who also worked as an insurance agent and investment broker, was arrested on charges of writing bad checks and bilking a client out of more than $40,000.
On Friday the State Banking Commission accused him of defrauding his brokerage customers.
When some of those customers asked for their money, the commission said, Mr.
Sullo told them he had diverted it to run the theater.
The failure of the theater has upset many in Fairfield County.
It opened in 1977, and despite ups and downs, remained in business until 1992.
Last September it reopened as Club Carousel. 'A Real Tragedy'
"There was an abundance of excellent theater there over the years, and it's a real tragedy what's happened," said Douglas Bora, a local actor who appeared in Club Carousel's only major show, "South Pacific."
"I did my first show as a child actor in 1928 and in all these years I never saw anything like the monstrosity that the theater became in its closing weeks," Mr.
Bora said.
"We need a dinner theater there, and I just hope that somebody will come along and open it up again and return it to its previous high quality."
Mollie Klaff Passero, a former actress who appeared in one of the theater's earliest shows, said, "It was a marvelous place to see a musical -- it was practically like being on Broadway"
Ms.
Passero, the owner of Klaff's Lighting and Decorative Hardware Stores in Norwalk and Westport, said, "The theater's closing has left a major void."
Despite his legal and financial problems, Mr.
Sullo denied any wrongdoing.
"The Carousel closed because it just didn't do well and that's all there is to it," he said.
"I'm not going to make any other comment about all of these allegations other than to say that in the end I will be completely vindicated. I don't owe anybody anything." Bait and Switch
But former Club Carousel employees, who have filed complaints with the State Labor Department to recover more than $60,000 in back pay, say Mr.
Sullo mismanaged the theater and often lied to customers.
"It was a bait-and-switch scam where we would put on a good show like 'South Pacific,' but then the next week we would put on a rinky-dink show and charge the same admission price," said Edward C. Moffat of Stamford, who said he was hired last summer as a bodyguard for the actors but ended up working as an unofficial manager.
Mr.
Moffat said the Club Carousel's first show, "South Pacific," starring Jamie Farr, closed a week early in November because the theater lacked the money to pay the actors.
At Mr.
Moffat's suggestion, the theater said the show was closing because Mr.
Farr had to return to California because of the brush fires there.
"I didn't think a few white lies to the public would hurt," Mr.
Moffat said.
"But it got out of control. If I knew how far all of this would go, I never would have been involved." 'Very Disturbing'
Zalina Hoosein, senior business representative for Actors Equity, and Robert Malcolm, Mr.
Farr's agent, said they were upset when the theater's owners blamed Mr.
Farr for the show's closing.
"It was very disturbing to read all of that because there was only one reason the show closed early, and that was because there were insufficient funds to pay the actors," Ms.
Hoosein said.
Robert Rising of Trumbull, who had bought eight tickets totaling $466 for the final Friday performance of "South Pacific" -- which was canceled -- said he was unable to get his money back.
When he went to the club, he was told by a man who called himself John D'Agostino -- whom he said he later learned was Mr.
Sullo -- that he would have to take the matter up with the owner.
"He told me that Jamie Farr had some other obligations and that there was nothing he could do to refund my tickets," Mr.
Rising said.
"The whole thing sounded very strange and I knew something was terribly wrong."
Corbin Associates, the landlord, hopes the theater will reopen someday, but the company said it may have to consider other uses for the site.
The northeast corner of Central Park will soon have an entrance that will rival the ones in the fancy neighborhoods at the south corners.
Work will begin this month on a project to transform the corner, Frawley Circle, from a dusty traffic snarl to a true circle filled with trees and a fitting home for a grand statue dedicated to one of the legends of Harlem, Duke Ellington.


Air Fare Reductions In Honor of D-Day
To mark the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landings in Normandy in 1944, British Airways and Air France are offering fare reductions for those likely to remember the historic day.
Both airlines' fares are available from now until the end of 1994.
Air France offers a 30 percent reduction on round trips on all fares except those lower than regular advance purchase rates.
On the D-Day offer, as an example, an unrestricted advance-purchase round-trip economy ticket in January from New York to Paris would cost $540 without airport taxes.
The reduction is available to World War II veterans and up to three family members, including grandchildren.
Documentation of the veteran's status is required.
The fare is available from the nine United States cities that Air France serves.
For information: (800) 237-2747.


Engineers Learn To Hold a Wrench
MARIA LOPEZ and Robin Wright probably did not spend too much time thinking about it, but they were in the process of becoming part of America's industrial defense as they drilled and countersunk 200 holes in a 12-foot column of sheet aluminum.
For the two young women, their senior project was the culmination of their education in environmental engineering at Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J.
Instead of writing a research report they built their one-foot-wide, square-sided tower, filled with oil and plastic packing and embellished with pipes and pumps, to help demonstrate that concepts learned in the classroom can have applications.
Their device takes in air that has been contaminated by solvents, purifies it and releases it into the environment.


Pity the Professors in Terms of Pay
To the Editor:
It was amusing to read the hysterical response of business people, doctors and lawyers to Derek Bok's recommendations on trimming their high incomes ("Professional Pay Disparity," Letters, Dec. 19).
Notable was the envious attack on academics for their low work hours, long vacations and tenured employment.


Rockefeller Estate: January Bookings for May
Reservations for tours of the Rockefeller estate in the Hudson Valley, to open to the public starting May 4, will be taken beginning Jan. 17.
Spaces are expected to go quickly, according to Historic Hudson Valley, the organization managing tours of the property.
In fact, reservations for groups, which opened in late October, are already sold out through the summer.
The 40-room mansion, in the village of North Tarrytown, along with 87 acres of property, was bequeathed by former Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York to the National Trust for Historic Preservation before his death in 1979.
The house, called Kykuit (Dutch for lookout and pronounced KYE-cut), was built between 1907 and 1913 and was the home of John D. Rockefeller, his son John D. Rockefeller Jr. and his grandson Nelson Rockefeller.
Rooms will be much as they were when used by Nelson and Happy Rockefeller and their children from 1963 to 1979.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
That anyone could fail to adore the lovely picture of me on the jacket of "Outerbridge Reach" tells you how mean and low the world has got.
All right, it's true, I don't own a boat.
But I have a lot of friends with boats, which anyone can tell you is a lot better.


Debate on Golf Course In Liberty State Park
The article about the golf course for Liberty State Park suggests that only environmentalists and developers are debating the issue.
As a resident of New Jersey and a property owner in Jersey City, I object to the unnecessary and expensive bonding for this project.
The law gave the Governor the ability to balance the state budget by withholding state aid for six months while communities changed to a fiscal year.
Jersey City received $60 million in state aid for calendar year 1990 and should have borrowed half that amount for fiscal year 1991; however, consultants made large fees because Jersey City bonded for $128.9 million with state approval.
Local taxpayers must pay more than $12 million for the next 20 years.


Back to School for GATT and Nafta
AS THE acronyms GATT and Nafta fade from the nation's front pages, they are beginning to appear in university catalogues around the country, describing new courses aimed at helping business and professional people prepare for a new era of intensive international trade.
Most of the demand is from continuing-education departments whose students will be forced, in their professional roles, to work under rapidly changing conditions and with sets of dizzying new rules.
For instructors, the task at hand now is to wade through the 550 pages of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, as well as the more than 3,000 pages of the North American Free Trade Agreement, and prepare courses that are useful and do not bore the often restive students to tears.


Lisa Goldfarb, Steve Chaiken
Dr.
Lisa Michele Goldfarb, a psychiatrist, was married last evening to Steve Martin Chaiken, a vice president and assistant general counsel at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at the Rihga Royal Hotel in New York.
Dr.
Goldfarb, who is keeping her name, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Goldfarb of Short Hills, N.J.
Her father is the director of gynecology at Montclair (N.J.) Community Hospital.


Color-Coded Diesel Puts Confusion in Tank
It may not be immediately apparent to anyone who has not recently taken a close look at the pumps at filling stations, but since Jan. 1, the Government has required that diesel fuel be sold in three colors.
The colors are part of a new effort by two Federal agencies and Congress to clean the air and collect fuel taxes.
For the Government, it is simpler. For everyone else, it is far more confusing.


Sharon Lederman, Andrew Lubash
Sharon Lederman, a daughter of Sandra Lederman of Delray Beach, Fla., and Norman Lederman of Williams Island, Fla., was married last evening to Andrew S. Lubash, a son of Harriet and Victor Lubash of Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Michael Katz performed the ceremony at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Lubash, 31, graduated from Syracuse University and is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at Hunter College.
Her father is the president of Minute Man Messenger, a delivery service in New York.


Clinton Going to a Europe Poised 'at Turning Point'
As President Clinton begins the longest foreign journey of his young presidency, he is preparing to cast himself and the United States as forces of stability for an uneasy Europe and a politically divided Russia.
Far from the congratulatory idyll he may once have expected, the eight-day trip across the Continent from Brussels to Prague, Moscow, Minsk and then Geneva is shadowed by new difficulties arising from the strong showing of rightist candidates in Russian elections last month.


Correction
The At Work column on Jan. 2, about job-hunting by computer, referred incompletely to a Dow Jones job-posting service.
It is available only through the company's National Business Employment Weekly.
Though the ads do later appear on Dow Jones News Retrieval, that service does not accept them directly.


Cramming for Kindergarten
I STARED intently at the white-and-red fowl in the picture, wanting desperately to get the answer right.
"What's wrong with this picture?" the tester ordered, and that terrible angst of not having the right answer in class went through me like a knife.
It's a hen.
No, a turkey.
What was that thing?
Then suddenly I relaxed: This isn't your test, you knucklehead, I said to myself.
Matt has to answer the question.


Stepping Out


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
My wife came up with the idea that the flap photo for my novel, "Let the Dog Drive," should be printed the size of a postage stamp.
I liked her idea and ran it by the publisher's art director.
He looked puzzled, but said, "Fine."


IN SHORT FICTION
DOMESTIC NOVEL  UNDER THE RAINBOW  By Randall Silvis. Permanent Press, $22.


Good-Deed Dungeon
Stuffin' envelopes" is how the name of George Stephanopoulos is remembered. Recently the White House aide who sits in the West Wing office closest to the President's was called upon to defend the actions of two Clinton aides who had left the Administration to take up jobs directing lobbying efforts, despite 1992 campaign oratory from candidate Clinton about how he would "stop the revolving door."
Spin-doctoring into the storm of criticism, George tried to point out that Clinton ethics rules were more stringent than ever before, and that reporters were holding this Administration to higher standards.
"This is proof of the old adage," he insisted, "that no good deed goes unpunished."


The Informer -- A special report.; Tangled Ties and Tales of F.B.I. Messenger
He is, by all accounts, the linchpin of the case against a ring accused of plotting to blow up New York City.
He is a Government informer crucial enough to be shuttled between international hideouts, a witness so sensitive that the local F.B.I. director was suspended after making the merest reference to him on television.
So it should be of scant surprise that Emad Eldin Aly Abdou Salem remains a figure of intrigue six months after disclosure of his role in foiling what the authorities call a terrorist plot to assassinate political leaders and bomb the city's landmarks.
Elements of a Spy Epic
But as he awaits his courtroom debut, probably in the fall, in the Federal trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and more than a dozen co-defendants, Mr.
Salem is shedding some of his mystery -- in part by his own compulsive unwillingness to remain in the shadows.
Although in the witness protection program since June, he has been making regular calls to an ex-wife, associates and even some reporters.


Residents' Hope: What Goes Up Must Come Down
Scaffolding in New York usually goes up a lot faster than it comes down.
But some Greenwich Village residents think two years is a bit excessive.
That's how long the Atrium, a prominent apartment and commercial building at 160 Bleecker Street, has been encircled with an overhead sidewalk shed almost 500 feet long.
Calling it an eyesore and worse, residents are demanding the shed's removal.


A Mayor Yields to a Special Interest
THERE was a time, and a good time it was, when someone else's kids could be handily deplored, if only because families were larger and reproduction seemed so much less precious an extension of individual egos.
W.
C.
Fields could say things like: "I like children. If they're properly cooked." No opinion-page monographs followed from specialists in juvenilia or parents sensitized to parenting.
Just vindictive belly laughs.
Things are different nowadays as the boomers' offspring are carted aloft and in glorious display in sedan-chair backpacks and imported, safety-steeped strollers encased in screening like little Popemobiles.
They bear the terrible burden of being designer clones of the parents, displayed for genealogical appreciation.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Pizazz at Rockefeller Center, And It's Not the Rockettes  After struggling for years with the image of its retail space as a place to buy T-shirts and souvenir mugs, Rockefeller Center is adding some sizzle.
The latest example is Television City, a restaurant venture by David Liederman, the founder of David's Cookies.


There's Still Plenty to See
To the Editor:
We at the Metropolitan Museum of Art were dismayed by the misleading headline on Alan Riding's article about the postponement of our "Art of Medieval Spain" exhibition  [ "The Case of the Met's Closed Galleries," Dec. 19 ] .
Anyone who visits the Met over the next few months will encounter an array of exhibitions and installations ranging from the gold of Meroe to the style of Diana Vreeland to the art of Lucian Freud to the rarely seen landscapes of Degas.
Our galleries, in short, are very much open.
HAROLD HOLZER  New York The writer is chief communications officer for the Metropolitan Museum.


Schools Superintendent Proposes Bold Program
THE Superintendent of this school district, the largest in Morris County, is creating an educational master plan and asking teachers and parents to join him in "a vision of progress" that will make this the best school district in the nation.
A key feature of the "Parsippany 2000" program would be the establishment of an academy in each of the two high schools.
As the vision takes shape, preliminary appraisals from the educational community range from skeptical to "very hopeful." A public hearing on the program will be held on Jan. 20 at 7:30 P.M. at Parsippany High School.


POSTINGS: Commission Expands, Carnegie Hall Historic Zone; Landmark Lobby, Larger District
To call the Apple Bank for Savings at Broadway and 73d Street a neighborhood branch bank is like calling Grand Central Terminal a commuter train station.
Although not really wrong, the description misses the civic contribution made by the sumptuous, even breathtaking, interiors.
"The architects raised the routine practice of thrift to the level of an event," said William E. Davis Jr., a member of the Landmarks Preservation Commission, as he read a motion to designate the interior of the bank.


Practice Session Offers a Behind-the-Scene Look
AN OPPORTUNITY to experience music in the making" is how Paul Lustig Dunkel, director of the New Orchestra of Westchester, describes an open rehearsal that will take place next Saturday. The event will start at 10 A.M. at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College. Music-lovers can see how an the orchestra prepares for a concert and "learn more about the communication and teamwork that is the magic in music," Mr. Dunkel said.
With that morning practice session under their belts, the players return for the regular concerts that evening at 8 o'clock and next Sunday afternoon at 3 o'clock, the program exploring accessible music of the 20th century: Ravel's "Mother Goose" Suite, Symphony No. 2 by Sibelius and (with Robert Taub as guest soloist) Roger Sessions' Piano Concerto.
For reservations, call 682-3707.


CORRECTION
A picture last Sunday in the "On the Market" chart alongside an article about living in Newtown, Conn., was published in error.
It showed a building that had already been sold, not the building at 63 Main Street; the Main Street house, now for sale at $257,500, is shown above.


Political Style, Not Substance
To the Editor:
"Hollywood on the Potomac" by Jennifer Senior (Dec. 12) could have appeared in the newspaper's editorial or entertainment or education sections, but there it was in Styles of the Times.
Perhaps the story found placement there because James Carville has proven so "stylish."


Confusion on Retirement Plan Payouts
To the Editor:
Mary Rowland and some of my colleagues are missing the boat on the primary purpose of a pension plan.
In the traditional pension plan, payments end at death.
Defined contribution plans are supposed to provide a similar benefit.


Classes on Television -- For Profit
WHAT is this: educational television -- with ads?
Yes and no. Or rather, chronologically speaking, no and yes.


Corrections
An air fare listing on page 3 of the Travel section today includes an outdated entry from USAir under the heading "Unrestricted Fare." The $198 round trip between New York and San Juan is no longer available.


Winning the Confidence Game; Kerrigan Now Faces Task of Emotional as Well as Physical Healing
Even before she was kneecapped, Nancy Kerrigan traveled to figure-skating events with a sports psychologist.
Cindy Adams is her name.
Kerrigan is one of the world's most elegant skaters, with a beauty that hints of Katharine Hepburn, but she has never been particularly self-assured.
Until this year, she was afraid to test the limits of her ability.
What if she wasn't as good as she thought she was?
Adams has been there to give Kerrigan a verbal pat on the back, a boost to her fragile, eggshell confidence.
"She'll probably have to spend a lot of time with Cindy," said Evy Scotvold, who coaches Kerrigan.
"She'll be more determined than ever before. But she's going to be a very frightened woman for a very long time."


Jan. 2-8: 'A Formation of Vampires'; Investigators in Brazil Tackle Political Corruption On an Astounding Scale
One year ago, Brazilian corruption was symbolized by President Fernando Collor de Mello, who benefited from a multimillion-dollar influence-peddling network.
Today, Brazilian corruption is symbolized by Joao Alves, a Congressman with an $84,000-a-year salary -- and a leased Learjet.
To explain how $51 million was mysteriously deposited in his bank accounts in recent years, the former chairman of the budget committee said he had won 24,000 lotteries.


Santiago, Chile
To the Editor: I read with interest "What's Doing in Santiago, Chile" (Oct. 24).
Prospective visitors should be warned that gangs of pickpockets and muggers operate in the downtown area.
Though we are warned about Rio in the guidebooks, no mention is made that the same routine is used in Santiago.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
I really enjoyed Dick Teresi's essay on author photos.
I've often wondered if they were there to sell the books.
I'm mostly a paperback man, so I try not to peek at the author's photo, which is usually on the inside cover, until I have finished the book.
This does odd things for my appreciation of the book.
I read a Patricia D. Cornwell mystery, liked it, looked at her picture, fell immediately in love and bought the rest of her books.
A friend of mine had been urging me to read "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues," and when I finally got around to it I relished every sentence.
When I got to the picture of Tom Robbins, I laughed out loud and thought, "Yes, he's definitely one of us."  PETER J. SKIBA  Runnemede, N.J.


'Fair Lady': Look Who's Crying Foul
When Gioacchino Rossini arrived in Rome in the autumn of 1819, he had in his portfolio -- as composers usually did when going to oversee an important revival of an opera -- some adjustments and additions to his score.
The score was "Otello," and the adjustments involved the ending, which had to be brought into conformity with local custom: Desdemona was to avert the fateful stroke, proclaim her innocence and conclude the opera by singing a love duet with Othello.
The "lieto fine" (happy ending) was still the norm for serious opera at that time.
Justice, order, clemency, conjugal love or something else that's good for you had to prevail, and generally through a turn of plot that leaves everyone, however implausibly, satisfied, and nobody, unless perhaps an irredeemable malefactor or incontrovertible infidel, dead.


Turning TV Into Home Theater
A pet midwinter project for many video fans is the conversion of their main television set -- the big one in the living room -- into the hub of a full-fledged home theater.
Such an undertaking is neither as complicated nor as costly as it might have been only a few months ago.
New equipment packages contain everything needed for the job.
And for the first time, some sell for less than $1,000.
Though differing in details, all these conversion packages use the patented Pro-Logic circuit developed by Dolby Laboratories, a research organization based in San Francisco.
The circuit takes account of the three-dimensional surround-sound pattern in which modern film soundtracks are recorded.
As a result, the movie's mix of dialogue, music and sound effects is heard in the home video version exactly as the film director envisioned it.
That is the essence of the home-theater concept.


Tripped Circuit Breakers and Fuses Can Prevent Fires
ELECTRICAL emergencies call for prompt, sometimes immediate action.
Unless the response is correct and safely performed, serious injury or fire can result.
Winter, when electrical usage is heavy, is a time to be especially alert for mishaps.
A tripped circuit breaker or blown fuse is probably the most common electrical emergency.
Generally, several lights or appliances fail at the same time.
That is usually a blessing in disguise.
Both breakers and fuses are safety devices that interrupt power to a circuit when it malfunctions, helping to prevent a fire.


Concrete Hero Is a Wizard on Ice, Too
Everyone comes from somewhere.
But where K C Boutiette, this sudden star, came from -- as far as the world of speed skating is concerned -- was as close to nowhere as one can get.
After all, Cinderella came from cinders, the Phoenix came from ashes, and Boutiette came from, well. . . .


Mayor Given Array of Ideas On Privatizing
A transition committee on privatization has recommended to the Giuliani administration that New York City sell WNYC, the city-owned television and radio stations, and contract out a vast array of municipal services, including garbage pickup, bus routes, street-sign maintenance, solid-waste disposal and parking-meter collections.
The committee has also suggested that the city could try to lease or sell the East River bridges in return for the right to levy tolls, although it acknowledged that the political opposition could be enormous, according to committee members and officials familiar with the report.


Horse Caught Between a Truck and a Hard Place


Mary Devaney, Charles Palermo
Mary Jane Devaney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Devaney of Sanibel, Fla., was married yesterday to Charles Joseph Palermo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius Palermo of Charlotte, N.C.
The Rev.
Robert P. Morrissey performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn.


IN SHORT FICTION
THEATER MEMOIRS  THE HONOURABLE BEAST  A Posthumous Autobiography.
By John Dexter.
Routledge, $25.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
REMEMBERING DOUGLASS
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday on Saturday was chosen as an appropriate day on which to present "Mr. Frederick Douglass," a one-man play written and performed by Fred Morsell, the noted stage and television actor.
Curtain time is 8 P.M. at the Rich Forum on Atlantic Street in Stamford.


For Big Blue, the Ones Who Got Away
SINCE he became I.B.M.'s chairman last April, Louis V. Gerstner Jr. has spoken eloquently and often of the need to streamline the company further, to persuade or prod more people to leave -- a process, he says, that is painful but necessary, even cathartic.
Tom Whiteside wasn't supposed to be part of the process.
The slender, 40-year-old electronics engineer was the International Business Machines Corporation manager heading the Somerset project, an ambitious collaboration with Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc. to fashion a new family of computer chips, called Power PC.
Much of I.B.M.'s hopes for regaining its status as a technology standard-setter, and restoring its profitability, are riding on Somerset in Austin, Tex.


Neediest Cases Restores Girl's Will to Help Herself
Before last October, most of Stephanie Vega's weekdays began with an early-morning promise to her grandmother that she would attend school.
Then she would take the subway from Williamsburg, Brooklyn, to midtown Manhattan, find an out-of-the-way table in the lunchroom at Norman Thomas High School and spend the day there, listening to loud music through the headphones of a personal stereo that drowned out the hourly class bells.


The Roots Of Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
The excerpt from the new book "Hollywood on the Couch" by Stephen Farber and Marc Green  [ "Hollywood's Love Affair With Psychiatry," Dec. 26 ]  included the following sentence about Herman Mankiewicz and his younger brother Joseph: "Unlike the crass moguls who sprang from the ghettos of Eastern Europe, the brothers came from the same cultivated German-Jewish stock that had produced so many of the lions of the psychoanalytic movement."


Hip-Hop at the Mall
I used to go to shopping malls to feel culturally superior.
In Columbus, Ohio, in the 1960's, the piazzas of purchase stretched from the fashionable Lazarus department store at one end to the sensible Sears, Roebuck at the other.
In between were other shops, but neither they nor the people who shopped them were surprising.
The mall was white bread, crossroads of the status quo.
All I had to do was wear a tie-dyed T-shirt or peace-symbol earrings and eyes would widen, heads would shake.
It made me feel so very avant.
So imagine my discomfort seeing a young woman with a blond head full of dreadlocks selling cosmetics at a mall in Columbus recently.
A high-school sorority in full grunge was browsing for nose rings; multiracial packs of students roamed.
Their hair was tousled, braided, dyed or spiked.
There was something ominous in the staccato of beepers, the just-got-out-of-the-joint gait of the teen-agers.
But that wasn't what made me twitchy.
The shuffle is lifted from MTV, the beeper is more likely a fashion accessory than a conduit for drugs.
Outrageousness has become more a posture than a state of mind.
After all, it has come to the mall.


Elie Fills Maxwell's Role, And the Rockets Roll On
Rockets 100, 76ers 93
Houston, without Vernon Maxwell, turned to Mario Elie in its 100-93 victory against visiting Philadelphia last night.


It's Alphabet Soup
To the Sports Editor:
Much ado is being made over the entrance of Fox into the business of broadcasting National Football League games.
But to the average viewer, it does not make much difference whether we see the N.F.L. on NBC, CBS, ABC, TNT or Fox.
Most of us wouldn't know which network was sending us the pictures and the cliche-ridden announcing.


CROSSWORD PUZZLES
Jack Kent Cooke is the only loser I know who always wins.
It's a question of viewpoint with him.
To lose is the key to winning, as the weaknesses in anything are guideposts to strength.


MAKING A DIFFERENCE
I agree with Ellen Lewis.
I shudder when I hear things like "My husband wants a son to take to ball games and play baseball with in the backyard." Why can't he do these with his daughter?


IT'S A WONDERFUL SCIENCE
Increasing employment by decreasing the workweek is neither a new nor a revolutionary way to bring about more jobs.
I remember the negative reaction of corporate executives when our own Government proposed reducing the five-and-a-half-day workweek to five days during the Depression.
But not only did we increase jobs, we created a new industry.
By making Saturday work-free, suddenly we had the leisure-time industry, which created more new jobs.
If the French reduce the workweek, it's entirely possible Euro Disney may finally do some business.
WALTER WEIR Newtown, Pa.


China Becomes Theme Park, but Cultural Debate Remains Real
Just two miles west of the main entrance to Disney World, a 76-acre chunk of Chinese history and culture has been transplanted to Central Florida.
But to its critics, the Splendid China theme park that opened here late last month is a virtuoso exercise in fantasy and illusion that exceeds anything Walt Disney or Universal Studios has ever concocted.
When a group of Tibetan Buddhist monks gathered in front of a miniature replica of the Potala Palace, the exiled Dalai Lama's headquarters in Lhasa, Tibet, to pray on opening day, it was not one of the park's planned attractions.
It was an effort by human rights groups to protest Beijing's 35-year occupation of the real Potala Palace and the way Splendid China, which is partly owned by the Chinese Government, sanitizes Chinese policy toward Tibetans and other minority groups.


Barbara Gottlieb, Martin W. Sacks
Barbara S. Gottlieb, the daughter of the late Cora and Harry Gottlieb of New York, was married there yesterday to Martin W. Sacks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alex Sacks of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Rabbi Bonnie Cohen officiated at the Carlyle Hotel.
Mrs.
Sacks owns the Stock Shop, Medichrome and Anatomyworks, stock photography and stock illustration agencies in New York.
Her father founded the Harry Gottlieb Insurance Company in Floral Park, L.I.
Her mother owned the former Corley Agency, an insurance concern in Long Beach, L.I.


Clinton's Year At Sea
Getting elected was the best thing Bill Clinton did which is not to belittle anything else he did.
The arrival of a Democrat in the White House was a seismic event, shifting our polity's tectonic plates.
Democrats had been absent since 1968 -- if one excepts, as one should, Jimmy Carter's brief interlude, with all the impact of breath on a window pane, fading as soon as it was breathed.
The Republican hold on the White House was a cultural fact of odd significance.
It occurred at the very time when the country was undergoing a profound social revolution.


Drug Dealer Is Sentenced to Life For Ordering Killing of Officer
One of the most notorious cases of murder of a New York City police officer in recent years was back in court Friday for a piece of long-unfinished business: the sentencing of the drug dealer who ordered it, four years after his conviction in the case.
In a bizarre proceeding in which, participants reported, the defendant periodically dropped to the floor to do pushups before the bench, Howard Mason, 34, was sentenced to life in prison for his conviction on drug-racketeering charges that included ordering the murder of Officer Edward Byrne.


Lisa Pileggi, Ralph Pascucci
Lisa Christine Pileggi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene J. Pileggi of Bayville, L.I., and Ralph Patrick Pascucci, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Pascucci of Locust Valley, L.I., were married yesterday.
Msgr.
Charles A. Ribaudo performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.
The bride, 27, is a sales manager at Le Chanticleer, a gift shop in Locust Valley.
Her father is the president of Advanced Power Cleaning Systems Inc., an industrial cleaning company in Bayville.
Her mother, Patricia O. Pileggi, is a registered nurse at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.


Women on the Edge, of Madness, of Life
"MUSIC FROM DOWN THE Hill," at the WPA Theater, is the title of John Ford Noonan's new, unexpectedly sweet, two-character play set in Heavenly Hills, a mental hospital in upstate New York.
Though it's not an easy play to like initially, it grows on you.
You have to give it time.
By intention I suspect, it is all attitude at first: the voice too loud and vulgar, the manner borrowed hip, like that of a middle-class, middle-aged man who wears his baseball cap back to front and dirty white Reeboks with their laces untied.
Yet beneath that disguise you can recognize a delicacy of feeling that is rare in most theater pieces today.
"Music From Down the Hill," directed by Terence Lamude, is a cannily constructed melange of alienation, nostalgia and shock effects, diluted only near the end by the kind of upbeat sentiments that are the bread and butter of television.


Singers and a Sense of Service
JUDITH HAHNSSEN-SCHWAB, founder and director of the Westfair Chamber Singers, says she has come to expect the unexpected after performances by her all-female ensemble.
Audiences have reacted with poetry, unsolicited checks (one elderly man recently sent both) and wedding announcements -- such as one that thanked the group for bringing the couple together.
Ms.
Hahnssen-Schwab, who rehearses the chorus weekly in her home studio here, said she is gratified but not surprised by such responses, since the 17-member chorus strives to combine artistic performances with a sense of community.
"It is our desire to be more than just the music, and to include the audience as part of the whole," Ms.
Hahnssen-Schwab said.
"We expect that our concerts are really going to touch people."


Profile; The Conscience of the Dismal Science
AMARTYA SEN cannot forget.
As a boy in India, he handed out a cigarette tin's worth of rice to hollow-eyed, starving refugees during the Bengal famine of 1943.
Perhaps such memories best explain why Professor Sen, the new president of the American Economics Association, is hardly a typical economist, for all his mainstream training.
In a discipline devoted mainly to explaining what is, Professor Sen has long chosen to ponder what should be.


POSTINGS: Renaissance for a Co-op; Retrieving The Future
Less than two years ago, 111-127 Cabrini Boulevard, a co-op just north of 181st Street, seemed destined for disaster.
Its reserve fund was depleted, its systems were breaking down.
Only 20 of its 39 apartments were occupied and most of those were still rentals.
Today, thanks to $750,000 in refinancing from the Fourth Federal Savings Bank and a lot of rehabilitation assistance from Con Edison's Renaissance program, the building has new windows, new heating systems, a repaired roof and a future.
The Parks Department is planting trees on the block and the bank will help renovate empty apartments for sale.
Prices range from $35,000 for one-bedrooms to $70,000 for three-bedrooms.


Catherine Saksa, E. J. Mydlowski Jr.
Catherine Elizabeth Saksa and Eugene Joseph Mydlowski Jr. were married in a civil ceremony yesterday on the beach at Tulum, Mexico by a local official.
The bride is a daughter of Frank and Catherine Saksa of Havertown, Pa.
Mr.
Mydlowski is a son of Eugene and Ramona Mydlowski of Hamilton Square, N.J.


World Markets; Foreigners Flock Back to Johannesburg
LIKE a giant applause-o-meter of South Africa's transition, the Johannesburg Stock Exchange has been roaring the world's approval as the country approaches the end of white dominion.
Buoyed by foreign investors, the exchange's index soared 50 percent last year.
In the first trading days of the new year, it leapt to a record, receded a bit and then rebounded to close Friday at 5,749.8, a new high.
The foreign interest has reinforced the determined optimism of South Africa's own business elite, which has gradually subdued its fears of a Government under Nelson Mandela and the African National Congress.


Tough Agenda for Clinton Trip
President Clinton will cast himself and the United States as forces for stability as he begins his visit to a divided and anxious Europe.
Page 6.


The Annotated Calvin and Hobbes
1.
Miss Wormwood is a proponent of the Mortimer J. Adler Paedia Proposal, that Great Books about great ideas and deeds should be introduced in the elementary grades (Adler, 1985); cf.
Allan Bloom's "The Closing of the American Mind"--"Book learning is most of what a teacher can give." (Bloom, 1987).
This is the if-you-build-the-schoolhouse-the-pupils-will-come-and-worship-gods-of-learning school of education.*  2.
Calvin may be an example Howard Gardener refers to as Multiple Intelligences (Gardner, 1993). though Gardener refuses to admit it.
Here Calvin clearly exhibits strengths in linguistic, scientific and outerspatial intelligence.**  3.
You can see from Calvin's obvious level of emotional and intellectual commitment to comic books that reading them puts him in a state of what Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi defines as flow: "When challeges are high and personal skills are used to the utmost, we experience that rare state of consciousness . . . . We feel involved, concentrated, absorbed." (Csikszentmihalyi, 1993).***  4.
Miss Wormwood is a devoted disciplinary disciple of either William or Jesse James. ****
Her oppoents argue displeased with Calvin's ahistoricity.
However, Calvin could counter that many famous and successful people had little regard for history, viz.
Henry Ford, "History is more or less bunk", and cf.
Ronald Reagan, "Facts are stupid things" et passim.
5.
Miss Wormwood takes the neoconservative approach along with Adler, Bloom, E.D.
Hirtsch and William Bennett, who hunger for a capacious store of common knowledge and skills.*****
6.
Gardner is insistent that Calvin's strong domains of intelligence not be labeled "dumb" and "useless" by an uncaring educational system that has only "impatience with approaches that cherish the individuality of each student." (ibid) Bloom, however, knows Calvin is dumb and useless.
Sociologist Paul Fussell adds that what Calvin knows is not only dumb and useless but bad. (Fussell, 1991).  7.
Fussell reports there are 60 million functionally illiterate adults in the United States, with another 60 million reading at a fifth grade level.
Only 6 percent of the population report having read at least one book in the last year. (ibid)  8.
Calvin did read at least one bona fide book last year, in addition to "Captain Thermonuclear etc." It was Robert Fulghum's "Everything I Needed to Know I Learned in Kindergarten." At least he started it.+
9.
"Facts are stupid things, stubborn things, I should say." -- Ronald Reagan.
Incidentally, if you tip either this footnote symbol or your head on its side, you'll see it makes a very nice, small portrait of me.
*****That capacious-store business is actually a clever bit of plagarism on Nash's part but we heard somewhere that, if you confess that kind of thin it in a footnote to a footnote, you're all right. (Eds.)  + Actually, he didn't even start it.
He read the cover and figured that was all he needed to know. (Hobbs)


Updating A Home's Coverage
DO you have adequate insurance on your detached house?
The question takes on added urgency since the Midwest, Florida, California and even the normally benign Northeast experienced either flood, fire or windstorm over the last 18 months.
The stark pictures of devastation suggest that partial coverage -- based on the notion that a home is rarely totally demolished -- may no longer be adequate, no matter how sheltered the setting might seem.


What They Say About 'Dixie'
WAY UP NORTH IN DIXIE A Black Family's Claim to the Confederate Anthem.
By Howard L. Sacks and Judith Rose Sacks.
Illustrated. 259 pp.
Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press. $24.95.


A 'Giddyap!' Heard Through the Generations
NATASHA WILLIAMSON, 7 years old, broke into a huge grin on a recent cold and cloudy afternoon.
The source of her delight: a yellow-and-black mechanical horse with round red eyes, bolted to the floor of a shoe store, rocking back and forth (motivated by a quarter) to synthesized snippets of Rossini's "William Tell Overture."
"It gives you the feeling like you were riding a real horse," Natasha said.
"But a real horse, if it gets mad, will run off. If this horse gets mad, all it does is the same thing. And I like the music. It's like you're a champion and everybody's cheering you on."


Instant 'Club Kids'
RADIATING attitude as if it were a life force, the Hot 97 dancers look like the hippest, coolest, most beautiful bunch of club kids in town.
Certainly in recent months they have been the most visible.
Since it began in October, an advertising campaign for Hot 97, the popular dance-music station (officially, WQHT-FM, 97.1), has featured the young men and women garbed in outrageous hip-hop-meets-raver gear as they are splayed in striking, often sexually tinged, stances.
And in the New York area, they've seemed ubiquitous, appearing on 250 billboards, the sides of 500 buses and, most incessantly, on four different posters in almost all New York City subway stations.


Teaching An Old Mall New Tricks
One store at a time, the expanded and renovated Bay Terrace shopping center has been emerging from a cocoon of construction work.
The old-style commercial strip on northern Bell Boulevard at 26th Avenue has been under reconstruction for 18 months and now, with the project just a few weeks behind schedule, resembles the modern, upscale suburban malls that flourish across the Nassau County line.
The 45-store complex added about 100,000 square feet of retail space, bringing its total to 289,000 square feet.
The project also spruced up the site with landscaping, improved lighting, more parking (for 1,533 cars) and new brickfacing that unifies the exterior.


Rounding Off a Central Park Edge
The northeast corner of Central Park will soon have an entrance that will rival the ones in the fancy neighborhoods at the south corners.
Work will begin this month on a project to transform the corner, Frawley Circle, from a dusty traffic snarl to a true circle filled with trees and a fitting home for a grand statue dedicated to one of the legends of Harlem, Duke Ellington.


You Don't Have to Believe That Biology Governs Your Destiny
To the Editor:
" 'Eat, Drink and Be Merry' May Be the Next Trend" (front page, Jan. 2) raises an interesting issue.
Claiming that the trendiest Americans are now giving up on their health and on possibilities for improving it, you link this trend to the emergence of biological psychiatry.
According to the biological psychiatrists you cite, thinking of mental illness as biological and genetic takes people off the hook about taking care of their bodies.


SUNDAY, January 9, 1994; Plowshares in the News
Among the benefits of military downsizing:
Bat bunkers.
The 1,000-acre Great Bay National Wildlife Refuge near Portsmouth, N.H. (formerly part of Pease Air Force Base), has 15 unused missile bunkers that might make good homes for bats.
Refuge managers are studying how to make the bunkers welcoming, but for now, the doors are open.


The Nation; When O'Neill Was Young, And City Hall Was Irish
THE death of Tip O'Neill on Wednesday, only seven weeks after the inauguration of the first non-Irish mayor elected in Boston since 1917, is more than a milepost in the nation's gaudy urban history that spans the Curleys and the Kennedys and the Daleys.
It is that, of course.
Today, the only big cities with Irish-American mayors are Chicago and Los Angeles, and Los Angeles hardly counts, for Richard J. Riordan is a Republican.
But if the Irish are not what they once were to the cities, the teeming cities themselves are not what they once were to the nation.
They have less clout generally, and especially in Thomas P. O'Neill's House of Representatives.
The leading Irish-American holds a big job, of course, but Speaker Thomas S. Foley represents Spokane, an airy city of 185,000.


BENEFITS
Comedy for a Serious Cause  WEDNESDAY -- Society Ties, a volunteer group of the New York City chapter of the Leukemia Society of America, will hold a benefit evening of comedy at the Stand-Up New York Comedy Club, 236 West 78th Street at Broadway.
A 7:30 P.M. cocktail party at the club precedes the 8:30 P.M. show.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 697-7848, or $40 at the door.
Benefit for Ice Hockey  WEDNESDAY -- Members of the New York Rangers and other notables will tend bar, serve food, play indoor games and run an auction of sports items to raise money for the Ice Hockey in Harlem program.
The program provides hockey lessons to 180 children from 6 to 16.
Tickets for the party, from 6 to 9 P.M. at Baja, 246A Columbus Avenue at 72d Street, are $85, from (212) 722-0044.
For Early Cancer Detection  SATURDAY -- The Guttman Breast Diagnostic Institute at 55 Fifth Avenue near 12th Street will hold a dance party at Magique, First Avenue at 61st Street.
The 9 P.M. party, which will feature a performance by the Trammps, a disco group, will benefit the nonprofit institute.
Tickets, $25, at the door; (212) 463-8733.
Urban League Awards  JAN. 16 -- The New York Urban League will hold its annual New Year's reception and awards presentation at the Plaza from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
There will be a brunch, dancing and entertainment along with the awards ceremony, where people will be cited for their work in promoting equal opportunities.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 926-8000, extension 26.
Aiding a Historic House  JAN. 17 -- A cocktail party and preview of an auction of American furniture and decorative arts will be held at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue at 59th Street, from 6 to 8 P.M.
The auction will be held on Jan. 22.
The preview will benefit the Morris-Jumel Mansion, the New York headquarters of George Washington during the Revolutionary War.
It is the oldest former private home in Manhattan, and has been a museum since 1907.
The 229-year-old building is at 1765 Jumel Terrace at 160th Street in Washington Heights.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 923-8008.
Students Honor Their Coach  JAN. 17 -- Students of the singing coach Andy Anselmo, including Liza Minnelli, Mandy Patinkin, Joanne Woodward and Mary Tyler Moore, will be on hand to celebrate his 70th birthday at the Roundabout Theater.
The event starts with a 7 P.M. cocktail party at the Roundabout Cafe at 1530 Broadway near 45th Street, followed by a performance and a supper party back at the cafe.
The evening will benefit scholarship and community programs of the Singer's Forum Foundation, which provides singing, speech and performance lessons.
Tickets are $100 for the cocktail party and performance, or $500 for the party, performance and supper with the stars, from (212) 366-0541.
An Evening With Sardi  JAN. 18 -- The restaurateur Vincent Sardi will be the guest and the subject at a benefit performance of the Freestyle Repertory Theater Company at the Intar Theater, 420 West 42d Street.
The company invites notables to participate in an improvisational format in which an interviewer, a subject and the audience interact as the subject tells stories about his life.
The 8 P.M. performance will benefit the company's Junior Varsity Project, which brings improvisational workshops to schools around the city.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 642-8202.


Inside Albany: A Guide to Power
EXPLAIN Albany?
Assemblywoman Deborah J. Glick seemed momentarily puzzled by the question.
But as the Manhattan Democrat pondered the satiric possibilities of the New York State Legislature in general and, perhaps, the Lilliputian role of the Assembly Republicans in particular, she hit upon the real guidebook.
"Read Swift," she said, struck by the absurdist parallels between "Gulliver's Travels" and modern-day state politics.


Derek Photographers Nancy Berk and Peter Saperstone
Nancy Muriel Berk, the daughter of Barbara and Alan Berk of Greenwich, Conn., was married last evening to Peter Seth Saperstone, a son of Laurie S. Alexander and Stephen Saperstone, both of Fairfax, Va.
Rabbi Mark Golub officiated at Temple Sholom in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Saperstone, 24, is an assistant program manager in Brooklyn for Medifit of America, a corporate health and fitness consulting company based in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated cum laude from Vanderbilt University, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
Her father is the executive director of the law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren in New York.
Her mother is a speech and language pathologist for the Greenwich Public School System.


LIVING DOLLS
I think the best response to "Living Dolls" is photographic.
Don't you find the man pictured below ridiculous, when rendered as vapid, passive, juvenile?
Would you portray men as toys?
Why do it to women?
CAROLINA SALGUERO Brooklyn


To Russia, With Ambition
To the Editor:
In "Crash Russian Course for Procter &amp; Gamble" (Dec. 19), Celestine Bohlen quotes John E. Pepper, the president for international business at Procter &amp; Gamble, as saying that getting Westerners to work for the company in Moscow remains a problem.


Robert J. Schack, 49, Expert on Family Law
Robert J. Schack, a lawyer with the Attorney General's office of New York State, died late last month at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49.
His father, Dr.
Jerome Schack, said his son's body was found in his apartment on Thursday and that the apparent cause of death was cardiac arrest.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
I got a good laugh out of Dick Teresi's essay "Haul Out the Old Cliches, It's Time to Shoot an Author Photo" (Dec. 12).
To show just how much of an impact such portraits provoke, here is a quotation from a review of my novel "Till the End of Time" that appeared in The Grand Rapids Press several years ago: "The picture of the author on the jacket shows her wearing a gold lame dress, gold bangles, a diamond bracelet and huge dangling ear hoops. She is posed with hands running through her honey blond hair in a kind of Playboy pose."


At Work; A Guide to Lower Health Care Costs
FOR years, the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation has been involved in promoting the health of infants and children, through its fund-raising for research on genetic diseases and its public health education programs.
Now the foundation has codified its years of experience in a new publication intended to help corporate benefits and human resource managers develop maternal and infant health programs in the workplace.
The book, "Healthy Babies, Healthy Business: An Employer's Guidebook on Improving Maternal and Infant Health," had a dual inspiration: demographics and money.
Already, nearly half the workforce is female, a figure expected to rise to 60 percent by century's end.
In 1992, 70 percent of working women -- 38 million -- were of traditional childbearing age, and nearly half of new mothers were working.
Even 12 years ago, when the March of Dimes was developing its "Babies and You" employee education program, the demographic implications were obvious: "We realized that work sites are a good place to reach women of childbearing age," said Maureen Corry, the foundation's director of education and health promotion.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Gerritsen Beach; Seaside New England in South Brooklyn
THE 82-foot Elsie K. Princess eased into the party-boat's slip at Tamaqua Fishing Station in Shell Bank Creek around 3 P.M., the usual cloud of gulls following in her wake.
The fishermen, who had been aboard since 7 A.M., debarked, taking their catch (mostly whiting this month) home to other parts of the city.
But the captain, Tommy Paladino, didn't have far to go.
To him, Gerritsen Beach, with its narrow streets and bungalows, is home, as it had been to his father, who began the business in 1945.


Were Ancient Europeans Collectors?
IN THE YEAR 2000 B.C., DID PEOPLE living in what is now Europe prize the stone tools of their ancestors for their sculptural power?
And, after these relics had become obsolete, were copies of them produced solely for nostalgia's sake?
"Tools may have been collectibles for prehistoric people," says Frederick Schultz, a Manhattan art dealer.
"And they were probably enjoyed at home as status symbols or prestige objects rather than as ceremonial items used in cult rituals."


Stockton and Murphy Stroke a Blow for the Senior Class
In an effort to prove that youth, strength and length are not necessarily golf's most important commodities, a pair of men in their 50's are poised to administer a potentially embarrassing lesson to the best golfers on the PGA Tour.
Dave Stockton and Bob Murphy, ages 52 and 50 respectively, stand at 8- under-par 208 through three rounds of the Mercedes Championships here at La Costa.
They lead Jack Nicklaus in the senior division of the tournament by three shots, surprising enough in itself.


Those Close to Clinton's Mother Join for 'Celebration' of Her Life
President Clinton and his family said their final goodbyes today to his mother, Virginia Clinton Kelley, at a large and emotional funeral held in the convention center of the town where Mr.
Clinton grew up.
The "service of celebration and resurrection," as it was called, lasted an hour and included gospel, classical and traditional music, including the hymn "Amazing Grace."


Tripped Circuit Breakers and Fuses Can Prevent Fires
ELECTRICAL emergencies call for prompt, sometimes immediate action.
Unless the response is correct and safely performed, serious injury or fire can result.
Winter, when electrical usage is heavy, is a time to be especially alert for mishaps.
A tripped circuit breaker or blown fuse is probably the most common electrical emergency.
Generally, several lights or appliances fail at the same time.
That is usually a blessing in disguise.
Both breakers and fuses are safety devices that interrupt power to a circuit when it malfunctions, helping to prevent a fire.


Up by 17, Redmen Still Lose
How could St.
John's have lost this game, one in which the Redmen had a 17-point lead four minutes into the second half?
It was quite simple.
The Wildcats of Villanova, who could not buy a basket in the first half yesterday, suddenly saw their shots going swish.
They wiped away that big lead in less than six minutes and went on to win, 69-68, as their star, Kerry Kittles, sank two foul shots with 4.7 seconds left.


Troy Donaldson, 7


Blazing a Trail in the Inner City; Boy Scouts Try a New Approach: Paying Leaders
A gaggle of elementary-school boys had hardly settled into their seats in a Bronx classroom on a recent late afternoon when Jathiyah DuVall steered her shy 7-year-old son, Iyundah, to the room's doorway.
With a gleam of promise in her tired eyes she peered inside, then nudged the second grader toward what she hoped might become an avenue out of street life and lethal arms' way.
Ms. DuVall, 24 years old, literally pushed her boy into scouting.


MAKING A DIFFERENCE
At every turn -- by her own account -- Lewis sacrifices civility to her political agenda.
What "appropriate behaviors" (to use her phrase) is she teaching her daughter by seizing a prize box to select her own reward; by taking a casual acquaintance to task for offering a bit of "look at the bright side" philosophy for her daughter's inconvenient sleeping arrangements?


BUILDING BOOKS
How unsatisfying for those of us who are house- or apartment-proud bookaholics to read that seductive little essay by Julie V. Iovine (Style: "Building Books," Dec. 19) and be left with nothing more to gaze at than that postage stamp (a large postage stamp) photo.
I stared at the four borders of the picture yearning to browse the shelves right and left, the other shelves, indeed the room in which the books were an element of context, not to mention the dining hall in the Maine summer camp, the home of the famous collector of the 20's, and maybe some beautiful illuminated manuscripts on thick moldings running around a room.
ISABELLA JACOB New York, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; In the New America, Pirouettes Win Out
ONE of the most optimistic facts I have heard about my country of birth in recent months is that more people would rather watch Tonya Harding land a triple axel than watch Bobby Knight kick his son.
The encouraging sign of the maturation of America was found in the television ratings of last autumn, when more people watched an 8-month-old tape of the world figure-skating championships from Prague than the live broadcast of Kentucky-Indiana basketball.


U.S. BEGINS EFFORT TO RECAST THE LAW ON ATOMIC SECRETS
The Energy Department, the nation's keeper of nuclear arms and enigmas, is seeking to revamp or dismantle the legal machinery that has amassed at least 32 million pages of secrets, a stack that would rise three miles high.
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary says the legal framework behind decades of nuclear secrecy, the Atomic Energy Act, which was adopted in 1946 and revised in 1954, is obsolete and should be overhauled.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
CITIZENS HONORED .
Three Westchester citizens who have made important contributions in such fields as education and civil rights in the New York City area and three organizers of the Food Pantry for Neighbors in Need will be honored during a seventh yearly program honoring the memory of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M. at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck.
Admission is free and open to the public.


The Topic: Lazy Professors
To the Editor:
Enjoying Margalit Fox's article on "off-the-rack term papers" ("Shopping for Ideas," Dec. 12), I could not suppress my recurring anger with the real culprits who provide a market for such outfits as the Academic Research Group, namely, the college professors who assign the topics.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
As a portrait photographer who has spent a large part of my career doing both cover and author photographs for the book-publishing community, I like knowing that we now have in Dick Teresi a self-appointed chief of detectives for the Author's Photograph Police.


New Pressures on the University
One could chortle approvingly then because there seemed no reason to limit the growth of the modern university.
The money was there.
The frequent flutter of Nobel Prizes certified the importance of what was being done.
And the students -- overwhelmingly white, middle-class and young -- were well suited to apprentice themselves to the masters, who were generally white, middle-class and middle-aged.


Labor's Lost Investing Opportunity
To the Editor:
In "Like Business, Unions Must Go Global" (Viewpoints, Dec. 19), David Moberg noted that in "their battlefield with business," unions have gone global.
There is another battlefield, however, in which unions have missed potential global advantages: the investment of their pension funds.


The World; Russia's Ethnic Tapestry Is Threaded Through With Bigotry
LAST October, when the authorities in Moscow were using emergency police powers to drive out "illegal" residents -- natives of other former Soviet republics who lacked permission to live in the capital -- a professor in her mid-50's with solid credentials as a member of the Russian intelligentsia was one of many Muscovites to join in the applause.
Her approval of the city's campaign against "blacks" -- a word Russians use regularly to refer to their dark-haired southern neighbors -- was by no means racist, she insisted calmly during an argument one evening.
It was a question of fairness.
To make her point, she described a visit to the farmers market near the Kiev train station.
There, she watched as cocky young men from Azerbaijan monopolized the trading stalls inside the covered market place, while little old grandmothers from Ukraine and Russia's own farming regions stood outside in the cold, stamping from foot to foot as they hawked their bags of carrots, beets and potatoes.


The Homeless and the New Cold War
BANG BANG.
SHIVER SHIVER.
VIOLENCE and homelessness, homelessness and violence: this winter, these topics have played over and over in the media, alternating like the A and B sides of the top-selling disk in the jukebox of national conscience.
Why these depressing tunes?
Why now?
Bill Clinton's been in office a year.
He campaigned on the theme of change.
He pledged to shift the focus of Government from the international arena to the domestic sphere.
Yet people are still sleeping in boxes and still getting shot in the head.
Even a society accustomed to instant pain relievers can't expect these social ills to vanish overnight.
But there's no point losing sight of them until they've been addressed.


INSIDE
Oil Spill Appears Contained
In Puerto Rico, clean-up operations appeared to have succeeded in containing an oil spill that polluted San Juan's tourist beaches.
Page 12.
Plan to Privatize
A Giuliani administration transition committee has recommended contracting out a vast array of New York City's municipal services.
Page 21.
Boy Scouts Hiring Leaders
Scout officials in New York are trying something different to attract scout leaders: they are paying college students to work with scouts.
Page 21.
Wild N.F.L.
Playoff Finishes
Kansas City beat Pittsburgh in overtime, and Green Bay beat Detroit in the last minute.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the games ended.
Section 8.


Trails and Trials


In-Your-Faceism vs. Light
IF, IN THE BEGINNING, was the Word, resonant with meaning, lurking beneath it was surely the Voice, internal, vibrant with emotion.
Without the voice, the impulse to communicate, there would be no drive to form the word.
So should writing teachers start by helping students to find their voice?
Or by helping them to shape the words into the standard vehicles of academic discourse, like a term paper or a laboratory report?
The debate runs at fever pitch on many college campuses, and scholarly journals resonate not just with ideas but with surprising spleen: "naively arrogant," "perversely blind," "malicious and ill-informed," "the Rhetoric Police, that hardy band of zealots," to sample just a few issues of College English magazine.


Good Seats
To the Editor: As the Practical Traveler column ("Airline Seats: Not Always First Come, First Served") said on Oct. 24, the airlines have recently initiated a program for allotting seats in the economy section not based on the time of the request but so that late "full fare" economy passengers will have the choice of preferred seating.
On a trip to London, British Airways will not assign seats on a return trip one week later until the passengers arrive at the airport in London.
At that time, the airline can seat you according to the fare paid, and there isn't too much you can do about it.


Russian Entrepreneurs Aren't All Gangsters; Skip the Robber Barons
To the Editor:
in "What's Good for the Mafia Is Good for Russia" (Op- Ed, Dec. 26), Michael Scammell compares the situation in Russia to the "robber baron days" in the United States, justifying this as a necessary stage in the emergence of a market economy.


Q and A
By Bus to India
Q.
I would like to know if anyone organizes overland bus tours from England to India or Nepal. -- K. S. Umapathy, Philadelphia


Joan Savarese, William Gruver
Joan Leahy Savarese, a teacher in the Head Start program in Sullivan County, Pennsylvania, was married yesterday to William R. Gruver, a business professor at Bucknell University in Lewisburg, Pa.
The Rev.
Larry D. Shinn, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Federated Church in Eagles Mere, Pa.
Mrs.
Gruver graduated from the State University at Potsdam, N.Y., and received a master's degree in educational administration from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Alice and Robert Leahy of Lindenhurst, L.I.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


For a Speaker With Plums, Plaudits
When the New York City Council re-elected Peter F. Vallone Speaker last Wednesday, it seemed more like a coronation than a legislative struggle.
No one dared run against Mr.
Vallone, who has been Speaker since 1985, and because the Council's quirky rules require each member to shout out the name of the candidate he or she supports, observers were treated to a surreal echo of the name Vallone 49 times, with various honorifics and other modifiers attached.


Icy Aftermath of Storm Leaves Thousands Without Power
After a week of rain, snow and sleet had bent even the toughest resident of the New York metropolitan region, roads blanketed with ice and houses without power seemed a predictable if painful finish yesterday.
Across New Jersey and Connecticut thousands of people were without electricity, hundreds were treated for broken bones and bruises, roads were flooded and cars spun and bumped into one another.


Corrections
An interview with Ellis Cose, the author of "The Rage of a Privileged Class," on page 6 of The Times Book Review today misstates his age.
He is 42, not 48.


Collapsing Into Himself
WILD CAT FALLING By Mudrooroo.
Illustrated. 131 pp.
New York: Angus &amp; Robertson/HarperCollins Publishers.
Paper, $10.
WILDCAT SCREAMING  By Mudrooroo.
Illustrated. 142 pp.
New York: Angus &amp; Robertson/HarperCollins Publishers.
Paper, $11.


R.S.V.P.


Building Peace in Palestinian Schools
HASSAN Abu Ghosh, principal of the Abdullah Ibn Hussein High School for Palestinian boys in East Jerusalem, says he has little use for a study booklet on peace that he recently received from the Israeli Ministry of Education.
"We leave it here in the office -- we don't use it," he said, picking up the collection of readings published after the signing of the peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
"What peace are they talking about?  My son is a prisoner, half paralyzed, and still in jail. We've had pupils arrested."


SURFACING
PETS  Is Fido's seat belt fastened?
Much like baby seats, pet transporters made by Allyssa Industries of Elkhart, Ind., can be buckled into seat belts.
Suggested retail price: $69.95.
LANGUAGE  "Don't go there": This increasingly popular catch phrase among teen-agers is invoked when one person wants to make plain to another that a certain topic of conversation is none of his or her business.
CELEBRITY  Shock classifieds: Yet another sign of the popularity of the controversial radio announcer Howard Stern is the appearance of classified advertisements offering autographed copies of his autobiography and videotapes.
Example: "Butt Bongo Fiesta, mint cond., $325."


For East Harlem, a 135-Unit Midrise Co-op on a Park
RISING from a long sleep, the publicly assisted co-op is about to make its appearance once again in New York City, across the street from North General Hospital in East Harlem.
This modern version of the limited-equity co-op is a cousin to the Mitchell-Lama middle-income co-ops of the 60's and 70's, and a complement to the occasional mixed-income rentals that also use tax-exempt bonds.
It could become the housing type of choice in some locations as the city seeks to encourage home ownership in multifamily housing.
The backing of a major local institution as a nonprofit sponsor -- in this case, the hospital -- will be helpful.


Correction
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday, about the sale of commercial space at Zeckendorf Towers in Union Square, misidentified the developer for whom the complex is named.
He is William Zeckendorf, not William Zeckendorf Jr.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
SECOND FRONT: Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War By John R. MacArthur.
University of California, $10.
Determined not to repeat the mistakes of the Vietnam era, the United States Government adopted a policy of control and containment of information during the 1991 war with Iraq.
"Mr. MacArthur writes in fury at what he sees, correctly, as the press's failure to respond effectively," Michael Janeway said here in 1992.
RIPLEY UNDER WATER By Patricia Highsmith.
Black Lizard/Vintage Crime, $10.
Tom Ripley is an intelligent, cultured gentleman who dabbles in art, music and, occasionally, murder.
A popular though unlikely hero, he has appeared in several of Patricia Highsmith's books without ever getting caught.
But in this one, Ripley's new neighbors seem to know a great deal about the skeletons in his closet, needling him not for extortion but for pleasure.
In 1992 our reviewer, Julian Symons, said of Ms.
Highsmith, "One closes most of her books -- and her equally powerful and chilling short stories -- with a feeling that the world is more dangerous than one had imagined." For readers unacquainted with Ripley, this publisher has also reissued THE BOY WHO FOLLOWED RIPLEY ($10), a 1980 novel in which he becomes the protector of a runaway teen-ager, and RIPLEY'S GAME ($10), published in 1974, in which he manipulates someone into committing murder.
ORIGINS RECONSIDERED: In Search of What Makes Us Human By Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin.
Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
Did the human species evolve simultaneously in Africa, Asia and Europe?
Did morality originate with the emergence of human beings or can it be traced farther back?
These are among the questions discussed by Richard Leakey, the paleoanthropologist.
"It is not often that a major participant in so contentious a field delivers such a vivid, generally evenhanded summation," John Noble Wilford said here in 1992.
I, TITUBA, BLACK WITCH OF SALEM By Maryse Conde.
Translated by Richard Philcox.
One World/Ballantine, $10.
The author, a native of Guadeloupe, has created a rich novel from the history of another West Indian woman, the real Tituba, who played a central role in the Salem witch trials.
In 1992 our reviewer, Howard Frank Mosher, praised Ms.
Conde's "gift for storytelling and her unswerving focus on her characters." Ballantine has also reissued JUMPING SHIP: And Other Stories, by Kelvin Christopher James ($10).
Born in Trinidad, Mr.
James focuses on the intersection of American and Caribbean cultures in the present day.
He evokes "a particular world by virtue of his energy and generosity of spirit," Tom Piazza said here in 1992.
DAYS OF OBLIGATION: An Argument With My Mexican Father By Richard Rodriguez.
Penguin, $11.
The author, who grew up in the United States, discovers that Mexico, the land of his parents, holds more meaning for him than he would ever have believed.
Other assumptions about being Roman Catholic and gay are also examined in these autobiographical essays.
In 1992 our reviewer, David L. Kirp, said, "The self remains Mr. Rodriguez's best and truest subject."  BLACK DOGS By Ian McEwan.
Bantam, $7.95.
In this novel-cum-parable, the disintegration of a marriage is related by the couple's son-in-law, Jeremy.
In writing his memoir, he keeps returning to a mystical encounter between June (his mother-in-law) and a pair of fierce black dogs.
In 1992 our reviewer, Bette Pesetsky, praised "the richly designed weaving of a truly sinister and very real postwar Europe into these lives."  ANATOMY OF LOVE: The Mysteries of Mating, Marriage, and Why We Stray By Helen Fisher.
Fawcett Columbine, $12.50.
The complexities of courtship are reduced to biological imperatives in this social and sexual analysis.
For instance, couples are most likely to divorce after four years because they've had enough time to raise a child past infancy and can then feel free to vary the gene pool.
Mary Batten, the author of SEXUAL STRATEGIES: How Females Choose Their Mates (Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam, $12.95), also sees parenting responsibilities as central.
Women are more selective about mating, she explains, because they will largely deal with the consequences.
Both books "are fun and sometimes even delightful to read," Natalie Angier said here in 1992.
DUNSTER By John Mortimer.
Penguin, $10.95.
A British accountant in the midst of a boring middle age has one element in his life that is all too interesting: the constant reappearances of an obnoxious schoolmate, Dick Dunster, who remains his nemesis.
Last year our reviewer, Jane Smiley, called the novel "a delicious read, like a meal you expect to enjoy, and do."  MATISSE, PICASSO, MIRO AS I KNEW THEM By Rosamond Bernier.
Knopf, $35.
The author, who co-founded the French art magazine L'Oeil, drew upon her many years in Paris for the reminiscences and interviews that fueled her popular lectures, transmuted here into essays.
"They already have a period charm, evoking a smaller, simpler and probably more agreeable art world," Michael Peppiatt said here in 1991.
Painting on the other side of the Atlantic is the subject of AMERICAN VIEWS: Essays on American Art, by John Wilmerding (Princeton University, $35), in which the author discusses the work of artists like Thomas Eakins, Winslow Homer, Fitz Hugh Lane and William Bradford.
In 1991 our reviewer, John Russell, said, "On his home ground, Mr. Wilmerding never flags."  LAUREL GRAEBER


Questions on Safety Of Propeller Planes
As major airlines continue to pull jets from unprofitable routes, travelers are flying increasingly on propeller planes that, though safer than they used to be, are still more hazardous than jets, according to Government statistics.
Figures from the National Transportation Safety Board also indicated that so-called commuter aircraft have almost five times as many accidents resulting in deaths as jets do.


A New Medical Building for Sing Sing Stirs Local Opposition
THERE are 11 beds on the special-needs unit of the infirmary at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility in Ossining.
On a recent visit a few days before Christmas, a few inmates sat in dark green prison uniforms, playing a desultory game of chess -- the light from the window casting a shadow of bars on the game board.
Others were too ill to do anything but lie in bed.
Several prisoners slept in isolation rooms.
Most of the inmates in this unit are likely to die there, prison officials said.
The inmates suffer from illnesses like tuberculosis -- a disease that was prevalent when Sing Sing was opened in 1825 -- and AIDS, a disease that became known only 15 years ago.
And while another part of the infirmary treats inmates who will recover from short-term injuries or illness, officials say it is the prisoners who require long-term care in the special-needs unit that represent the changing profile of the medical requirements of the prison population.


Sorting Myth From Reality: Was Barnum Wronged?
P.
T.
BARNUM never said there's a sucker born every minute.
"He might have thought it, but he never said it," said Robert Pelton, who knows as much about Barnum as anyone is likely to know since the legendary showman died more than a century ago and there seems little more to be learned about him.
The "sucker" remark, Mr.
Pelton said, was actually that of a contemporary of Barnum's, a confidence man named Joseph (Paper Collar) Bessimer.
But it continues to be attributed to Barnum, decade after decade, many times by people who should know better.
Even a 1992 one-hour special on public television about Barnum led off with the quotation, dismaying many fans of Barnum who favor the truth about him.


LIVING DOLLS
Who are these "few women past the age of puberty who may want to dress up like little girls?" Are they women we know, like Hillary Clinton or Meryl Streep, Connie Chung or Tina Brown?
Please do not insult your readers with these duds.
I am repulsed, and all women are demeaned.
DIANE MEILINGGAARD Sparks, Md.


Sports of The Times; At a Theater Near You: The Skewering of Hakeem's Dream
I wonder how Hakeem Olajuwon will react when he finally gets around to watching "The Air Up There," a new Disney movie that opened Friday.
For now, the Houston Rockets' magnificent center is withholding comment.
Aside from being in the midst of a torrid basketball season, Hakeem is huddling with his lawyer to determine whether the movie has infringed on his privacy.


Ruth Curyk, Matthew Tallmer
Ruth Elaine Curyk, a daughter of Ruth Learnard and Martin Goldstein of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Matthew Tallmer, the son of Jerry Tallmer of New York and the late Louise Tilis.
Judge Megan Tallmer of New York City Civil Court in Manhattan, a cousin of the bridegroom, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Tallmer, a ballet dancer, was until recently a member of the ensemble company of the Dance Theater of Harlem.
She graduated from the School of American Ballet.
Her parents work in New York for the city's Human Resources Administration.
Her father is a special deputy in the Office of Employment Services, and her mother is the director of the Bureau of Revenue Assurance and Fiscal Risk Avoidance.


All Hope's Not Lost for Rebels With a Cause
YOU'RE a small business owner, the president of a civic association or just a disgruntled taxpayer.
You want something from the New York State Legislature but don't have enough money to hire a lobbyist or to make the kind of campaign contribution that causes lawmakers to take notice.
What do you do?


The Nation; Madison Ave. Finds Courage To Ask: Want a Condom?
ADVERTISING is often accused of hitting below the belt.
Sometimes the aim is deliberate.
And so it is with the Federal Government's newest anti-AIDS campaign, introduced last week, which seeks to persuade men and women ages 18 to 25 to use condoms or practice abstinence.


A la Carte; An Urbane Restaurant Makes an Auspicious Debutin Greenlawn
WHEN the wave of creative urbane restaurants that has been washing over Long Island for the last decade or more reached Huntington it left Greenlawn virtually untouched.
Until recently the village, with its pubs, pizzerias, Chinese takeouts and steakhouses, remained in a culinary time warp.
But that changed a few months ago, when Me and Mom, an ambitious trattoria-style storefront restaurant that bills itself as a gourmet deli and pasta house, opened at 64 Broadway (261-6003).


Messier's Return Helps, but Not Enough
Mark Messier came back and, for just a moment, it looked as if he might be the magic cure for what is ailing the New York Rangers.
Messier took the ice against the Montreal Canadiens tonight at the Forum, stole a puck early in the first period, and set up a Rangers goal on New York's first shot of the game.
It was pretty, it was effective, and it was just what the Rangers needed after a stretch of frustrating offensive performances.
It just wasn't enough.
Despite Messier's return from a wrist injury that sidelined him six games, the Rangers lost, 3-2, to the Canadiens, who happen to be the defending Stanley Cup champions but also happen to be in third place in the Northeast Division right now.
The defeat, coupled with New York's 4-1 loss to Calgary on Wednesday, marked the Rangers' first back-to-back losses since they fell to the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and the Tampa Bay Lightning in the third week of October.
It was also the Rangers' third loss in their past four games.


Eve Evans, Roger Liberman
Eve Evans, the daughter of Shirley and Leo Evans of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening to Roger Liberman, a son of Dora and Szmarja Liberman of Antwerp, Belgium.
Rabbi Stanley Bramnick, a cousin of the bridegroom, officiated at the Equitable Building in New York.
Ms.
Evans, who is keeping her name, is a lawyer at the First Fidelity Bancorporation in Newark.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from New York University.
Her parents are life insurance agents at the Equitable Life Assurance Society, the insurance company, in White Plains.


Suzanne Mangold, S. J. Schlesinger
Suzanne Beth Mangold, the daughter of Doris Meyer of New York and the late Ernest J. Meyer, was married in New York last evening to Sanford J. Schlesinger, the son of Ruth Schlesinger of New York and the late Irving Schlesinger.
Justice Beatrice Shainswit of New York State Supreme Court officiated at the Surrogate Court House.
Mrs.
Mangold-Schlesinger is a partner in the law firm of Mangold &amp; Young in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Adelphi University and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


IN SHORT FICTION
THE PRESLEY PAPERS  MONDO ELVIS  Edited by Lucinda Ebersole and Richard Peabody.
St.
Martin's, paper, $12.95.


Jan. 2-8: One of Their Own; Gay Candidate in California Hopes to Use Discontent
The 1992 Presidential election was a heady time for the gay electorate.
Its overwhelming support at the ballot box and $3.5 million in donations helped elect Bill Clinton.
The new President promised to lift the longstanding ban on homosexuals in the military.
But Mr.
Clinton nipped and tucked at his original plan under pressure from the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Congress, bitterly disappointing gay voters, who now seem determined to elect their own to high office.


Parking Worries Block Plans For a Clinic
A plan to open a health clinic for Russian immigrants has been put on hold indefinitely amid protests from Manhattan Beach residents, who said it would create a parking disaster.
Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center officials last week began studying other possible sites outside Manhattan Beach on which to build the clinic, which would serve 8,000 patients, said Harold Harris, a hospital spokesman.


The Drug Makers Are Listening to Prozac
FOR six years the antidepressant drug Prozac has been lifting the spirits of millions of Americans and thousands of Eli Lilly shareholders.
Sales of the drug reached a record $1.2 billion worldwide last year, helped by word of mouth and the best seller "Listening to Prozac," in which a psychiatrist describes the drug as making his patients more calm, confident and cheerful.
And some industry executives see a far larger market as more doctors prescribe the feel-better products even for problems that are not clinical depression, to patients from college students to nursing-home residents


New Rules For Heat Eligibility
NOW that the coldest winter months have arrived, the county has announced that eligible individuals may apply for financial aid to help defer some of their home-heating costs.
This year, under a 10-year-old federally financed plan known as the Home Energy Assistance Program, eligibility guidelines have been broadened so that more applicants can be helped, said Lillian Bloom, a benefits supervisor for the County Department of Social Services, which administers the heating-assistance program in Westchester.


E. H. Regier, Pope B. Ward
Elizabeth Holbrook Regier, a daughter of Holly R. Sturges of Rowayton, Conn., and James Regier of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Pope Briley Ward, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter O. Ward Jr. of Lynchburg, Va.
The Rev.
Christine Whittaker performed the ceremony at St.
John's Church, Georgetown Parish, in Washington.


In Defense of Class Actions
To the Editor:
The focus of "Millions for Us, Pennies for You" (Dec. 19) on the "abuses" of a single law firm -- Beigel &amp; Sandler -- unfairly tarnishes a dedicated and important segment of the bar.
Class-action lawsuits allow for the efficient and economical prosecution of claims that would otherwise have to be prosecuted through numerous individual lawsuits.


More Right Than Wrong With Skate Judges
To the Sports Editor:
Lisa Luciano's heart is in the right place and so are a few of her conclusions ("Pandora's Box of Problems for Figure Skating," The Times, Dec. 5, 1993).
But some things she said deserve comment.


Why 'The Red Shoes' Is Still a Hit -- on Film
WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR THE enduring appeal of the 1948 film "The Red Shoes," a spell that can even compel some to attempt an ill-fated Broadway musical of the same name?
The secret of the film's success was its atmosphere.
Vividly, magically, the creative team of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger recast the exotic myth of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes (1909-29) in their own era.
Yet at the same time, the movie's surface glamour reflected the postwar disillusionment of a specifically European sensibility.


Natalie Molostwoff; Ballet Director, 90
Natalie Molostwoff, a former executive director of the School of American Ballet, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 90.
The cause was cancer, said Nathalie Gleboff, the current executive director of the school, which is affiliated with the New York City Ballet.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A Campus crossfire: battles over budgets and university downsizing.


Safeguards Already in Pension System
To the Editor:
Daniel F. McGinn's call for "second opinions" for actuaries pressured into unreasonable assumptions by companies eager to reduce pension contributions ("To Guard Pensions, Shield Actuaries," Viewpoints, Dec. 26) ignores the many safeguards still in the system.
Actuarial mathematics has developed financing methods that adjust for bad assumptions.
The Internal Revenue Service even provides a range of interest rates for what it calls "current liability" calculations.


Tripped Circuit Breakers and Fuses Can Prevent Fires
ELECTRICAL emergencies call for prompt, sometimes immediate action.
Unless the response is correct and safely performed, serious injury or fire can result.
Winter, when electrical usage is heavy, is a time to be especially alert for mishaps.
A tripped circuit breaker or blown fuse is probably the most common electrical emergency.
Generally, several lights or appliances fail at the same time.
That is usually a blessing in disguise.
Both breakers and fuses are safety devices that interrupt power to a circuit when it malfunctions, helping to prevent a fire.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
I read with interest and thoroughly enjoyed the essay by Dick Teresi regarding author photos.
His analysis of current trends was generally on the mark, but I think he neglected a major point.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  FOR CLINTON, NERVOUS HOSTS  News analysis: European nations that President Clinton will visit on his trip recognize that this is a critical moment.
Europe is beset by problems, but leaders also see his actions as having caused strains.  1  CLINTON TRIP HIGHLIGHTS STABILITY  On his trip, President Clinton will seek to promote the United States as a force of stability for an uneasy Europe and a politically divided Russia.
It will be an opportunity for him to cast himself as a statesman.  6


The Ever-Expanding Realm of Queen Latifah
Ask Queen Latifah, the rap singer, actress, and entrepreneur, about the notion that network sitcoms about blacks are demeaning to black viewers, and her eyes flash with annoyance.
"I don't buy into that," says Latifah, whose anti-violence, pro-woman (and occasionally expletive-studded) lyrics have made her a dominant figure in the rap world.


Serbs Call Truce But Keep Shelling
Hours after unilaterally declaring a cease-fire, Bosnian Serbs resumed their shelling of Sarajevo's airport today, preventing Bosnia's Muslim President from attending peace talks in Germany with the President of Croatia.
The cease-fire had been called by the Bosnian Serbs after the United Nations Security Council issued a statement late Friday condemning the Serbs, Muslims and Croats for the recent surge in fighting in Bosnia.
It particularly condemned the Serbs' "relentless bombardment" of civilian targets in this besieged city this week.


The New Road to Acapulco
WHEN the Mexican Government officially opened its new superhighway to Acapulco last summer, the temptation to head to the coast for the weekend proved irresistible.
To a New Jersey native used to running to the Shore the parallel seemed obvious.
What better way to get accustomed to my new home here in Mexico than to load the kids into the car and drive the three and a half hours the President of Mexico promised it would take to get from Mexico City to the blue shores of Acapulco?
One of the biggest surprises of moving was finding out that just because we lived below the Tropic of Cancer didn't mean it was going to be hot, even in the middle of August.
Because of Mexico City's altitude (over 7,500 feet) it was always so cool that we walked around the house wearing sweaters and we slept with socks on.


What Do Men Want? A Reading List For the Male Identity Crisis
THE finger of feminist accusation has been pointed at many different parts of the male anatomy, but the favorite objects of scorn are man's robotic brain, his granite heart and that thing between his legs.
Men are defective: brutal, competitive, exploitative, insensitive, disconnected from meaningful social relationships, out of touch with their feelings and oblivious to things they do not want to hear.
It is impossible to get them to do housework, even when they are unemployed.
Why not simply replace the unit?
They just lie around and make noise.
Feeding them is an act of charity.
Or so the indictment goes.
Recently some oblivious insensitive men have begun to notice that feminists don't like them.
A few have even made New Year's resolutions to reinvent themselves into new males.
Sticks and stones may break your bones, but when it comes to male-bashing (or defending) it is words that sell.


FRANCE'S RELEASE OF 2 DISMAYS U.S.
The United States has voiced dismay with France's decision to send home two jailed Iranians who are wanted on murder charges in Switzerland.
State Department officials said on Friday that the decision was "inexplicable," adding that they were concerned that France was trying to buy off Iran in its decision to repatriate two men charged with assassinating an Iranian dissident outside Geneva in 1990.


Nina Silver, Miguel de Echegaray 4th
Nina Jane Silver, the daughter of Allan Silver of New York and Patricia H. Granados of Bowie, Md., was married yesterday to Miguel Alejandro de Echegaray 4th, the son of Dr.
Lynne Echegaray of Norman, Okla., and the late Miguel Echegaray.
Rabbi Lawrence Siegel performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
Ms.
Silver, 23, is keeping her name.
She is the director of sales for National Access Television, a satellite broadcast company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father writes children's stories in New York.
Her mother is the coordinator of financial systems at Sinai Hospital in Baltimore.


Winter Storm Leaves Thousands Powerless in Its Wake


You Don't Have to Fight
INSIDE Eugene Rubin's powder-blue office, its ceiling marred by peeling paint and water stains, are a set of child-sized chairs and a family of puppets.
It is here amid the public-housing projects and bustle of Manhattan's Lower East Side that Mr.
Rubin, the guidance counselor at Public School 188, an elementary school with 500 students, tries to discover why a pupil has hit one of his peers or withdrawn into silence.
"The bottom line of counseling for me is building trust," Mr.
Rubin said.
"It may take awhile, but once the trust is there you'd be amazed how these children open up and share their feelings."


The Global Olympic Village
Striped leggings, trousers and skirts are giving fashion a speedy, active sports look.
The stripes are a sign of a new generation searching for a fresh fashion identity.
Adapting jogger's trousers, bicyclist's racing tights and skier's stretch pants makes use of the stripes to give the illusion of a sleek, elongating silhouette when worn with short jackets and the all-important ankle boots.
One young woman, top left, tore apart jogging pants and sewed them back as a skirt, with the original foot zippers in place.


'What Do Our Eyes Tell Us?'
To the Editor:
Let us go then, you and I, where Michelangelo is spread out across the sky, like a patient etherized upon a table.
In other words, let's plant our feet on the floor of the Sistine Chapel, tilt back our heads and gaze up into the vault.
In his essay "Cleanliness Isn't Always Next to Godliness"  [ Dec. 12 ] , Michael Kimmelman finds the so-called restoration of the Sistine ceiling "persuasive." He gently chides James Beck for suggesting otherwise.
But what do our eyes tell us?


Ms. Cartelli, Mr. Pareles
Mary Anne Cartelli, a lecturer in Chinese at Hunter College, was married on Thursday to Jonathan William Pareles, the chief popular music critic of The New York Times.
The civil ceremony was performed at the Municipal Building in New York.
Ms.
Cartelli, 41, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony R. Cartelli of Trumbull, Conn.
The bride graduated from Oberlin College and received Master of Arts and Master of Philosophy degrees in East Asian languages and cultures from Columbia University, where she is a doctoral candidate.
She was a Fulbright scholar and a fellow of the American Council of Learned Societies in Hong Kong and China in 1991-92.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
111.80
111.90
125.40
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7283
1.7382
1.6475
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3183
1.3251
1.2823
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4930
1.4760
1.5415
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$386.25
$390.50
$356.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Boston Chefs: A Family Tree
GENEALOGY counts in Boston -- in the restaurant business no less than in the old brick mansions on Beacon Hill.
Among contemporary Boston chefs and restarateurs, the ancestral line begins with Jasper North End.
Despite his comparative youth, Mr.
White is the acknowledged dean and godfather of Boston's notable chefs.
Lydia Shire of Biba was once his sous-chef at the Bostonian and at the Parker House.
Ms.
Shire begat Gordon Hamersley, her former sous-chef who has just opened the splendid new Hamersley's Bistro in the South End.
Mr.
Hamersley, in turn, engendered Jody Adams, his former assistant, now the acclaimed chef at Michela's across the Charles River in Cambridge.
Meanwhile, in another line of descent, Todd English, who started off at Michela's, has established his own bustling restaurant, Olive's, in Charlestown -- across the river but still part of Boston.
And Barbara Lynch, Mr.
English's former chef at the mini-bistro Figs, which he also owns, is now in charge at Rocco's downtown, while Paul O'Connell, until recently Mr.
English's sous-chef, has just opened his own restaurant in Brookline.


SUNDAY, January 9, 1994; Movies No One Needs
The cold war is over.
Arabs and Israelis are talking.
If only Hollywood would promise never to do another remake.
Not a chance.
In the works:
Oliver Stone's "Planet of the Apes." As Charleton Heston said, "You maniacs!"


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 9, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
47
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
2
6
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
3
91
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions during a trial.
4
7
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) A serial killer in Washington.
5
8
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
6
2
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
7
95
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
8
12
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The Battle of Gettysburg.
9
54
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
10
7
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
11
18
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
12
1
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
13
3
THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her Colorado hometown.
14
6
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The detective Arkady Renko returns to Moscow after the fall of Communism.
15
4
DESIRE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) The medieval romance of a lady and a knight.
16*
5
PRIVATE PLEASURES, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A scientist's discovery results in sex and violence among a group of Floridians.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
17
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
10
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photographs by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
3
531
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
4
47
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5
11
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A guided tour of a nuclear warship and the world of which it is a part.
6
4
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
7
36
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $8.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.
8
6
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
9
117
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
10
21
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies.
11
14
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
12
11
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
13
1
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
14
6
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
15
24
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President of the United States.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
15
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
9
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of cartoons.
3
6
MTV'S BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, by Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil. (MTV/Callaway/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters.
4
3
THE CHICKENS ARE RESTLESS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A new collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Giants Look to Bailey for Guidance on Wild-Card Walk
The wild-card road to the Super Bowl, like another more talked-about avenue, is paved with all kinds of good intentions.
Every team that qualifies for the playoffs as a wild card, like the New York Giants for example, talks about trying hard and taking one game at a time and all that other stuff that sounds nice to say.
There is one Giants player, though, who has talked the talk and walked the wild-card walk along the entire potholed road a wild-card team must travel even to get to the Super Bowl, let alone win it.
Linebacker Carlton Bailey, who played with the 1992 Buffalo Bills team that made it to the Super Bowl as a wild card, is almost a piece of history and, the Giants hope, a good-luck charm.


Struggle Over Use of Group's Name Divides Perot Followers in New York
The New York ranks of United We Stand America, Ross Perot's grass-roots organization, have become so divided that its members can no longer agree on who owns the rights to its increasingly ill-fitting name.
A few weeks ago, lawyers in Mr.
Perot's Dallas headquarters ordered a group of former Perot supporters to stop using the name United We Stand America New York.
But the dissidents, many of whom were at the core of Mr.
Perot's local campaign organization in 1992, were the first to incorporate the group in New York, and recently demanded that Mr.
Perot's organization stop using the name in the state.


Lucerne
This picture-book city on the multipronged Lake of Lucerne in the heart of Switzerland is busily rebuilding the covered wooden Chapel Bridge, its 600-year-old landmark, which burned down last August.
Only 33 of the 111 old paintings on triangular tables under the bridge's tiled roof were saved; copies of the icons are now being made from photos.
City Hall has promised the bridge, which spans the Reuss River where it flows out of the lake's northwestern tip, will be reopened in March.
In truth, no part of the structure went back to the 14th century when it was first erected as part of Lucerne's fortifications.
Over the centuries sections of the bridge were replaced whenever they had decayed or suffered damage.
The paintings depicting religious legends and historic battles were repeatedly restored.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Is Upset  Unseeded Paul Haarhuis upset the fourth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday in the semifinals of the Qatar Open in Doha and will play Stefan Edberg for the title.
Edberg, seeded third, struggled for 2 hours 22 minutes before beating Gilbert Schaller, 6-4, 6-7 (5-7) 6-4, in the other semifinal.
Ivanisevic said an injury to his serving arm forced him to change his tactics. (AP)


The Quiz
Color is an integral part of our lives.
Not only does it add variety, stimulation and beauty, but it expresses how we feel.
To see color, we need light, which reflects different colors on different wavelengths.
Most objects appear to have color because their chemical structures absorb certain wavelengths of light and reflect others.
Physics aside, we also think in terms of colors: We "see red," we're "green with envy," or we feel "purple passion." And "once in a blue moon" we can ace a quiz.
So give it a try; who knows, your prospects may be rosy.
By Fran Handman
1.
The colors that appear in a rainbow are called the color spectrum.
What are its colors that are visible to the human eye?
2.
Part of the spectrum is invisible, comprising rays of various wavelengths.
What are their names and why are they invisible?
3. Which color in the visible spectrum has the shortest wavelength? The longest?
4.
A colorant is any substance that imparts color to a given product like ink, paint, crayons or chalk.
When is a colorant a dye and when is it a pigment?
5. Define and name the primary colors.
6. What colors of light are blended to make white light?
7. What colors in paints are mixed to make black?
8.
All but one of the following colors -- cerulean, azure, amber, cobalt, cornflower -- are similar; which is the exception, and why?
9.
Match the following terms with their correct definitions: (a) tone, (b) shade, (c) tint; (x)mixing gray with a color, (y) mixing white with a color, (z)mixing black with a color.
10.
A monochromatic color scheme is a) one color; b) shades of gray or brown; c) shades, tones and tints of a single color.
11.
Match the following terms with their definitions: (a) hue, (b) value, (c) chroma; (x) The amount of light reflected from a colored object; (y) measurement of saturation of a color; (z) a particular shade or tint of a given color.
12. At what age can infants first see colors: 2 months; 3 months; 6 months?
13. Why can't humans see color in dim light?
14.
The most common type of color-blindness is the inability to see (a)any color; (b) red and green; (c) yellow and blue.
15. Only men may be color-blind: true or false?
16. Black is worn worldwide to indicate mourning: true or false?


McDonald's Finds There's Still Plenty of Room to Grow
THERE was the kind of buzz that retailers can strive for but never guarantee when McDonald's opened for business in this small town some 60 miles west of Chicago at 6 A.M. on Dec. 20.
Customers began pulling into the new restaurant's drive-through service lane by 3 A.M. and were backed up out the driveway and around the block long before the first order was taken.
Out front, packs of teen-agers chatted animatedly in the frosty pre-dawn darkness while the handful of parents among them observed that the same kids seemed to find it impossible to get out of bed on school days.
By lunchtime, one customer had made three visits, and many others had come by twice.


Many Factors Influence A Property's Value
Dr.
Goon's letter fails to deal with reality.
First, Dr.
Goon notes that Robert L. Beebe (general counsel to the State Board of Equalization and Assessment) is apparently saying it is unfair that houses with the same price are paying different property taxes and that the state board will remove the unfairness by forcing communities to reassess as if this is in error.
While Dr.
Goon has understood Mr.
Beebe correctly, he appears to dismiss this important consideration on which the remainder of his example rests.
It is the policy of this state that properties of a similar nature within a taxing jurisdiction be assessed at an equal percentage of fair market value.
Dr.
Goon would have us believe that the largest single component in determining total fair market value is the difference in property taxes.
Dr.
Goon, does it matter whether House A has 1,500 square feet of space and House B has 1,600 square feet?
Or whether House A has two bedrooms and House B three?
Or whether House A has two bathrooms and House B only one?


Jan. 2-8; Car(toon)s for the Next Generation


HARD SELL
It has been almost as instructive to read the letters (Nov. 28, Dec. 5) regarding Diane Keaton's "Hard Sell" as to read her essay itself.
The tone of the responses is reminiscent of that of the outraged alcoholic who has been told he drinks too much.
Her critique of our consumerism is more valid now than ever.
If we see no self-indictment in the current happy refrain of "shop till you drop," then we are sleepwalking indeed.
If we have stepped over the line from achieving a better way of life to drowning in senseless consumption, so much the better for the economy.
After all, we worked hard for all that.
DEBORAH EVERETT Brooklyn


Raucous Board Finds Peace
Once paralyzed by protests so bitter that its meetings turned into free-for-alls requiring a heavy police presence, Community Board 14 has been conducting its business in relative peace for the past four months.
The board was the target of a three-year campaign by the African People's Political Club of Flatbush to increase the number of blacks on the largely white board and increase services in heavily minority areas.
Backed by the community organizer Sonny Carson and the lawyer Colin Moore, the protesters, some of whom were involved in the volatile boycott of a Korean grocery on Church Avenue, disrupted meetings with threats and anti-Semitic remarks.


Jamin Koslowe and Shana Bak
Shana Bak, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Bak of Monsey, N.Y., was married Monday to Jamin Koslowe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil H. Koslowe of Silver Spring, Md.
Rabbi Irving Koslowe, the bridegroom's paternal grandfather, officiated at the Westchester Marriott Hotel in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Koslowe, 21, is a candidate for a master's degree in mathematics education at Columbia University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yeshiva University.
Her father is an associate professor of mathematics at City College in New York.
Her mother, Miriam S. Bak, is the principal of Bat Torah Academy in Suffern, N.Y.


Bratton Asks Police Aides For Resignation Letters
Fifteen of the highest-ranking officials in the New York City Police Department have been told to submit undated letters of resignation by noon tomorrow and to be ready to assess their strengths in discussions with the new Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, this week, the department's chief spokesman said yesterday.
A memo from Mr.
Bratton, who becomes Commissioner tomorrow, ordering all of the department's nine deputy commissioners and six bureau chiefs to submit the resignation letters was personally delivered to them on Friday by the Chief of Department, David W. Scott.
Chief Scott has already been chosen by Mr.
Bratton to be promoted to First Deputy Commissioner, a post he will assume on Jan. 18.


Ruth Marcus, J. D. Leibowitz
Ruth Allyn Marcus, a White House correspondent for The Washington Post, was married yesterday to Jonathan David Leibowitz, the chief counsel to Senator Herb Kohl, Democrat of Wisconsin.
Rabbi Max Tickin performed the ceremony at the Galleria in Washington.
Ms.
Marcus, who is 35 and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Arnold and Judith Marcus of Livingston, N.J.
Her father retired as the director of regulatory affairs at Bristol-Myers Products in Hillside, N.J.
Her mother is an accountant in Union, N.J.


Strike a Pose
To the Editor:
I was surprised that Dick Teresi neglected to mention Harold Halma's famous photograph of Truman Capote on the dust jacket of "Other Voices, Other Rooms." That photo is probably more familiar than the book it accompanies.
ANDREA BATTEL  Rutherford, N.J.


Key Concerns For a Safe Trip
TRAVELERS are apparently spending time worrying about statistically remote air safety issues when that time would be better spent on more immediate problems.
That is to say, people who worry about being trapped in a plane crash should be concerned instead with finding out if their rental car has seat belts or air bags.
In 1992 there were 31 deaths aboard planes in four accidents involving commercial airlines operating in the United States and American lines operating overseas.
For each 100 million aircraft miles flown this produced a fatal accident rate of 0.08 and a fatality rate of 0.62.
By contrast, 39,235 people died in motor-vehicle accidents in the United States in 1992, for a far higher fatality rate of 1.75 for each 100 million vehicle miles.


Hungary Officially Informs U.S.  It Accepts Compromise on NATO
President Clinton's offer of a new defense partnership between Eastern Europe and NATO that could eventually lead to full membership in the alliance inched forward today when Hungary became the first to tell the United States that it had formally accepted the proposal.
The United States Representative to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, leader of a delegation to Eastern Europe to explain the initiative, announced at a news conference that Hungary had assented to the American offer at a Cabinet meeting.


Stacy Dawn Miller, Adam M. Katz
Stacy Dawn Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Miller of Manhasset, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Adam Mitchell Katz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Katz of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Irving Rockoff performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Katz, 25, is an associate at Blumenthal &amp; Lynne, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Fordham University.


IT'S A WONDERFUL SCIENCE
Economics is hardly my favorite social science, but your Sunday feature "It's a Wonderful Science" (Dec. 12) is after the wrong villain.
The shorter hours "movement" was begun by workers and union leaders, at least in this country, and was already alive and well here at the start of the 19th century, if not before.
In fact, most economists, together with the business community, have been against it ever since, using some of your argument.


Mr. Cuomo Asks for Another Go
What we are seeing in Gov.
Mario Cuomo's decision to seek a fourth term is a deliberate downsizing.
The unaccustomed modesty of his announcement -- almost too late for Friday's 6 o'clock news -- matched the modesty of the program he set before the Legislature in Albany earlier in the week.
A man known for soaring rhetoric now speaks only of his gritty determination to see New York through a clinging recession.
Unspoken, of course, is his hope to end his political career with a broader range of achievements than he could possibly have claimed had he chosen to retire next January.


MAKING A DIFFERENCE
If all it takes for Ellen Lewis to have a "particularly bad day" is to hear a remark like "He can't wait to ride on the bus -- like all boys," she is in for some tough times.
I've seen thin skin before, but I could read the classified through hers.


Irish Are No. 1
To the Sports Editor:
Florida State won the Kickoff Classic.
The Seminoles were undefeated until they met Notre Dame in November.
That game was not as close as the score indicated (31-24).
Notre Dame was undefeated the whole season except for the last five seconds of the B.C. game.


A Face Lift Before Demolition?
The building stands out among the bustling stores and restaurants of Broadway in the West 90's.
It has been empty for about eight years, and two fires have left it with holes in the concrete blocks that sealed the windows and doors.
Graffiti has spread over the walls, and panhandlers congregate in front of its vacant first floor.
But the Healey Building, at the corner of 94th Street, may get a short-term face lift and maybe even some temporary tenants, said Neil Sroka, who represents Pergola Properties, which owns the building with Bradford N. Swett.
They have owned it for about 10 years, he said, and most of that time has been spent in a legal battle to buy the Symphony Space building, which covers the rest of the block.


Jan. 2-8: The Old Bosnia Story; More Resignations, And More Shells on Sarajevo
The prolonged tragedy of Bosnia was further cemented in both symbols and substance last week.
Two symbols -- of dissent over the West's response to the conflict in the former Yugoslavia -- were the announced departures of the commmander of United Nations peacekeeping forces and a State Department expert on the Balkans.
The substance was Serbian artillery, lots of it, raining down with renewed fury on Sarajevo and killing dozens.


Confusion on Retirement Plan Payouts
To the Editor:
Regarding Mary Rowland's article "Planning to Collect in Retirement" (Your Own Account, Dec. 12), holders of 401(k) plans at least have the option of turning to the paying company for guidance.
The situation, however, is truly murky for holders of self-directed individual retirement account rollovers, which are subject to pretty much the same distribution rules.


Gwathmey House In East Hampton
To the Editor:
I cannot imagine that my friend, Charles Gwathmey, claimed that his 1968 house for his father, in East Hampton, L.I..
"showed for the first time a modern house that was not imitative or historicist"  [ "The One, but Not the Only," Nov. 14 ] .


A Midterm Assessment of Mayor Zaleski
IN this tough and gritty riverfront city, where a disgruntled populace has elected successive administrations in and out of office with increasing frequency in recent years, Mayor Terence M. Zaleski -- a lifelong Boy Scout and an admitted zealot when it comes to Yonkers -- says he is determined to succeed where others have failed.
His stated goals: to resuscitate an ailing economy and revitalize the city's shabby image.
Half-way into his first four-year term of office, Mayor Zaleski, a Democrat, has won an equal share of disapprobation and loyal support for his work as the city's first chief executive in 50 years under a strong-mayor form of government.
While supporters applaud their leader's tough stand on issues like corruption in government and fiscal responsibility, detractors say the Mayor has been autocratic and unable to build a consensus with critical power blocs in the city -- among them, the City Council, the Board of Education and local labor unions.


Businesses Help Educate Workers
JOHN COPANEC JR., 24, an employee of the Hibbert Group in Trenton, thought he had left education behind at the end of high school six years ago.
Then he signed up for a refresher course in basic math that was taught at his workplace by an instructor from Mercer County Community College, and his attitude changed.
"The math course worked so well that I went on," he said.
Since finishing his first course, Mr.
Copanec has taken classes in public speaking, reading comprehension and writing at Hibbert, a marketing and commercial printing company.


Maya Culture: Tour And Yucatan Cruise
Maya culture is the focus of a coming tour to Belize and a cruise around the Yucatan coast of Mexico.
Four trips to Maya ruins in Belize are offered by Steppingstone Environmental Education Tours.
The eight-night visits, which focus on astronomy and its integral role in ancient Maya life, are escorted by Derrick Pitts, an astronomer and vice president of the Fels Planetarium and Herman Smith, an American archeologist working in Belize.
They are scheduled to depart on Feb. 5, March 12, May 14 and Aug. 6.
Participants stay at three resorts in Belize and visit Maya sites at Xunantunich, Cahal Pech and Caracol plus the Belize Zoo and Guanacaste National Park.
They also take part in star-gazing sessions.
The land price is $1,729 a person in double occupancy and includes meals, sightseeing and local transportation.
Steppingstone Environmental Education Tours, (215) 493-4802 or (800) 874-8784.


Yale Cellist Also Offers Show of Paintings
THE visual as well as the musical sides of the creative spirit of Aldo Parisot will be evident next weekend in New Haven.
The cellist, a Yale School of Music graduate, has been on the Yale faculty since 1958, and well over a dozen of his former and present students will be assembling to play a pair of concerts in Sprague Memorial Hall.
But they and the audiences will also be able to enjoy a rare gallery showing of Mr.
Parisot's paintings in the theater lobby. (It was Carleton Sprague Smith, a member of the family for which the hall is named, who persuaded the young Mr. Parisot to leave his native Brazil in 1946, and arranged for him to attend Yale on full scholarship.)


NEWS FROM THE FRONT: THE GUIDEBOOKS OF TWO GENERATIONS
BORN of the 60's counterculture, the original Whole Earth Catalog and its subsequent editions (1968-1981) were informed by a playfully rebellious, "not in the mainstream and proud of it" spirit.
The Millennium Whole Earth Catalog, to be published next fall, seems to have shed some of this contrarian edge for a straightforward, informative focus on computers and other leading-edge topics.
Here are some excerpts from the old and new editions.
The Original
ON EATING MUSHROOMS: "Finding a strange, slimy, luminous colored growth on dark rotting wood is surprise and pleasure; to extend that experience into identifying it and possibly eating it is even better."


Suspended Coach, Suspended Animation
Serving the second game of a five-game suspension tonight, Islander Coach Al Arbour was able to watch the action, and inaction, from a seat in the stands, giving him a different perspective on his struggling team.
Had he paid for a ticket, Arbour might have felt cheated.
The Islanders put on a dreadful performance in losing by 6-0 to the improving Hartford Whalers before 12,225 at the Civic Center.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
U.S. Dogs in Taiwan
AT Cornell University, Brett Aaron majored in history and minored in Chinese food.
"I loved chicken with cashew nuts," said Mr.
Aaron, who consumed quarts of the delicacy near his home in Roslyn.


Yanks Couldn't Send Players to This Camp
Oops. Never mind. Rescindez l'invitation, s'il vous plait.
The Yankees, it seems, committed a faux pas and had to backtrack at the last minute.
They had asked certain of their players to attend a minicamp at their minor league complex in Tampa, Fla., this week, but they had to rescind the invitations quickly last Friday when they were advised that the camp violated the collective bargaining agreement.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on Oct. 31 about David Gergen referred imprecisely to the circumstances of a speech given at a convention of the American Medical Association in 1992 by Jeffrey B. Levine, the medical correspondent for CNN.
Mr.
Levine says that he was not a paid speaker and that in lieu of a fee, the A.M.A. made a contribution to the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Mr.
Levine wrote to The Times on Nov. 4; this correction was delayed by a miscommunication among editors.


G.M.'s Pension Plan Adds Stock to Cash
To the Editor:
Lawrence White misleads readers about the General Motors Corporation's plan to address its unfunded pension liability in "G.M.'s Bookkeeping Game" (Op-Ed, Dec. 18).
Professor White maintains that cash is better than stock, but ignores that G.M.'s stock contribution will be made to supplement billions of dollars in cash contributions to our plans.


V-Mail Trouble
HARRY SCHWEDOCK, a telecommunications analyst in Ben Lomond, Calif., has an idea, a novel idea: voice mail for the dead.
Dropping into the starchy, familiar drone of a telephone recording, he demonstrates: "For contributions to the deceased's favorite charity, press 1. For information about the reading of the will, press 2. If you're the ex-wife of the deceased, please hang up and try again later."


Rounding Off a Central Park Edge
For almost 17 years, the Darien Dinner Theater was a major attraction in Fairfield County, a place where suburbanites could enjoy a Broadway-style show without trekking into Manhattan.
"People came by the busloads from all over the state and from Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New Jersey and Westchester to have dinner and see a great show," said David Hawes, general manager for Corbin Associates, the theater's landlord.
But those days are over.
Various operators of the theater have failed, and its latest incarnation as the Club Carousel has also folded.
Its operator, Michael J. Sullo of Milford, is the target of investigations by several state agencies.
A Night to Forget
By all accounts, the theater reached its low point on New Year's Eve.
Joyce and Daniel O'Neill of Shelton came that night, looking forward to dinner, dancing and a show.
But for the first two hours, all they got for their $165 was salad, rolls and a television set rolled onto the stage for entertainment.
There were only 30 people in the audience.
"The whole atmosphere was strange and unprofessional and it became apparent we weren't going to get what we paid for," Mrs.
O'Neill said.
"Our night was completely ruined."
After being denied a refund, they complained to the police and the Better Business Bureau.
The theater's landlord has taken Mr.
Sullo to court, seeking more than $150,000 in back rent.
On Wednesday Mr.
Sullo, who also worked as an insurance agent and investment broker, was arrested on charges of writing bad checks and bilking a client out of more than $40,000.
On Friday the State Banking Commission accused him of defrauding his brokerage customers.
When some of those customers asked for their money, the commission said, Mr.
Sullo told them he had diverted it to run the theater.
The failure of the theater has upset many in Fairfield County.
It opened in 1977, and despite ups and downs, remained in business until 1992.
Last September it reopened as Club Carousel. 'A Real Tragedy'
"There was an abundance of excellent theater there over the years, and it's a real tragedy what's happened," said Douglas Bora, a local actor who appeared in Club Carousel's only major show, "South Pacific."
"I did my first show as a child actor in 1928 and in all these years I never saw anything like the monstrosity that the theater became in its closing weeks," Mr.
Bora said.
"We need a dinner theater there, and I just hope that somebody will come along and open it up again and return it to its previous high quality."
Mollie Klaff Passero, a former actress who appeared in one of the theater's earliest shows, said, "It was a marvelous place to see a musical -- it was practically like being on Broadway"
Ms.
Passero, the owner of Klaff's Lighting and Decorative Hardware Stores in Norwalk and Westport, said, "The theater's closing has left a major void."
Despite his legal and financial problems, Mr.
Sullo denied any wrongdoing.
"The Carousel closed because it just didn't do well and that's all there is to it," he said.
"I'm not going to make any other comment about all of these allegations other than to say that in the end I will be completely vindicated. I don't owe anybody anything." Bait and Switch
But former Club Carousel employees, who have filed complaints with the State Labor Department to recover more than $60,000 in back pay, say Mr.
Sullo mismanaged the theater and often lied to customers.
"It was a bait-and-switch scam where we would put on a good show like 'South Pacific,' but then the next week we would put on a rinky-dink show and charge the same admission price," said Edward C. Moffat of Stamford, who said he was hired last summer as a bodyguard for the actors but ended up working as an unofficial manager.
Mr.
Moffat said the Club Carousel's first show, "South Pacific," starring Jamie Farr, closed a week early in November because the theater lacked the money to pay the actors.
At Mr.
Moffat's suggestion, the theater said the show was closing because Mr.
Farr had to return to California because of the brush fires there.
"I didn't think a few white lies to the public would hurt," Mr.
Moffat said.
"But it got out of control. If I knew how far all of this would go, I never would have been involved." 'Very Disturbing'
Zalina Hoosein, senior business representative for Actors Equity, and Robert Malcolm, Mr.
Farr's agent, said they were upset when the theater's owners blamed Mr.
Farr for the show's closing.
"It was very disturbing to read all of that because there was only one reason the show closed early, and that was because there were insufficient funds to pay the actors," Ms.
Hoosein said.
Robert Rising of Trumbull, who had bought eight tickets totaling $466 for the final Friday performance of "South Pacific" -- which was canceled -- said he was unable to get his money back.
When he went to the club, he was told by a man who called himself John D'Agostino -- whom he said he later learned was Mr.
Sullo -- that he would have to take the matter up with the owner.
"He told me that Jamie Farr had some other obligations and that there was nothing he could do to refund my tickets," Mr.
Rising said.
"The whole thing sounded very strange and I knew something was terribly wrong."
Corbin Associates, the landlord, hopes the theater will reopen someday, but the company said it may have to consider other uses for the site.
The northeast corner of Central Park will soon have an entrance that will rival the ones in the fancy neighborhoods at the south corners.
Work will begin this month on a project to transform the corner, Frawley Circle, from a dusty traffic snarl to a true circle filled with trees and a fitting home for a grand statue dedicated to one of the legends of Harlem, Duke Ellington.


Clinton Leaves for Europe After Mother's Funeral in Arkansas


The Russians And the Poles Are Coming
MORE foreign students than ever enrolled at American colleges and universities last year, including a record number from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
A total of 438,618 foreigners studied in the United States during the 1992-93 school year, according to a recent report by the Institute of International Education.
The number is 4.5 percent higher than the previous year.
Most foreign students were from Asian countries, including 40,000 from China and Japan.
But the number of students from Eastern Europe was up 42 percent, and the former Soviet Union sent 25 percent more students than in 1991-92.


Carroll's Search for Jets Coordinators Starting at Home
The Jets' new head coach, Pete Carroll, yesterday labeled three of his assistants "the strong candidates" for the key roles of offensive and defensive coordinators.
It was Bruce Coslet's refusal to yield the game plan and play-calling to an offensive coordinator that led to his dismissal Friday morning.


Bold Vision or Pipe Dream?
THE NEW MIDDLE EAST By Shimon Peres with Arye Naor. 224 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
* COBBLE HILL
Opponents of the conversion of a small park into an eight-level garage have filed a lawsuit against the city and several government agencies in a last-ditch effort to stop the project.


Cecilia Casale, C. T. Fernandez Jr.
Cecilia Mary Casale, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph V. Casale of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Carlos T. Fernandez Jr., a son of Marcia Fernandez of Port Chester, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Fernandez.
Msgr.
Charles W. Stubbs performed the ceremony at the Westchester Country Club in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Fernandez, 26, is a consultant at User Technology Services Inc., a computer consulting company in Norwalk, Conn.
She graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.


Russian Entrepreneurs Aren't All Gangsters
To the Editor:
In "What's Good for the Mafia Is Good for Russia" (Op-Ed, Dec. 26) Michael Scammell argues that the appearance of "slick wheeler-dealers" in St.
Petersburg and Moscow is a harbinger of economic freedom.
Perhaps, but his comparison to American robber barons of the last century is not constructive.


SUNDAY, January 9, 1994; The Case for Celibacy
Celibacy.
It's the answer to the nation's problems.
Not for teen-agers.
Asking teen-agers to stay celibate is like asking politicians to stay honest.
No, celibacy for elected officials.
It may sound crazy, but it's the only way.
Consider the recent flap over yet more rumored infidelities on the part of President Clinton when he was in Arkansas.
Admittedly, the story faltered after a strong start.
But it just shows how quick the nation -- well, the press -- is to get all high-minded and moralistic about lubricious behavior.
And confused.


A 10-Month Battle for a Drug-Free Home
For the residents of 152 Manhattan Avenue, this holiday season was a chance to celebrate -- if not peace on earth at least peace in their building.
Their 10-month battle with the drug dealers and users who once clustered in the building's hallways and elevators seems to have been won.
Even the Christmas tree they hung from the ceiling in the entrance hall declared a kind of victory, since this is the first season that residents could remember feeling safe enough to decorate the building, at the corner of 107th Street.


Old Scores; Left Behind, Mexico's Indians Fight the Future
PHILLIP McDONALD, a young Canadian tourist who had been making his way around Mexico for some weeks, was sitting in the tree-shaded square at the center of this colonial city, drinking tequila and watching the last of the New Year's fireworks with friends when he noticed a column of uniformed young men and women with rifles marching into the plaza.
"We had no idea what was going on," he recalled.
"It was New Year's Eve; it didn't make sense. But they definitely had a plan."


Yes, It's Winter. But Don't Forget the Trees.
TREES are dormant now and they will remain so until they start to leaf out in late April and May.
Because they are dormant, this is a good time of year to think about having them pruned, cabled or braced and checked.
Or if they are property liabilities, they may even have to be cut down, a sad case.
But this drastic step is necessary particularly if the tree is diseased in its core and has rotted.
There are two basic reasons why trees are trimmed when they are dormant.
The most obvious one, of course, is that the deciduous trees are leafless and it is easy for the arborists to see what branches need to be cut out.
Getting to the twigs and limbs is simplified.
The other reason is that the trees will not bleed.
That is the sap is not running inside the tree's core.
When the sap is flowing up the trunk, it will ooze from any cuts and run down the trunk making an unsightly mess.
Though this bleeding does not harm the tree, the appearance often worries homeowners and quite often insects are attracted to the sap causing a secondary problem.


On Sunday; A Real Hero Lives to Mock A Painted God
THE metallic cold and slate-gray winter day makes Queens seem like Moscow, with color bled away to oblivion and people mincing miserably along icy sidewalks.
All the more difficult for Morris Hershman to enter the heated premises of the P.S. 1 Museum in Long Island City and return to his past, to the monstrously sycophantic world of Soviet Realist art and the days of Stalin worship.
"Look at this," he says with disgust, confronting the primary redness and propaganda glisten of Soviet paintings that spill out, in Queens as in Moscow, across the enveloping grayness of existence.
"Such nonsense," he says, staring at the sentimentalizing of his persecutor's crinkly smile, the iconic Stalin, the despotic wolf rendered in radiant sheepskin by lackey artists now as dead as Stalin.


Banks Learning to Make Loans to Help Poor Areas
It was Small Business Day at the Fordham Road branch of the Chase Manhattan Bank.
The bank, once run by David Rockfeller, is trying to find new customers among the shopkeepers and small-factory owners in lower-income areas.
Millie Peartree was the first person on line this bright day in December.
A director of the Christ Jesus Baptist Church in the Bronx, her congregation, founded a year ago, wanted to buy a brownstone from New York City so it could stop meeting in the Pastor's house.


Ashley Quarrier and Eamon Moran
Ashley Elizabeth Quarrier, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hullihen D. Quarrier Jr., and Eamon Hugh Moran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Liam Moran of San Mateo, Calif., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
J.
Donald Waring performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Cranbrook in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.


An Informal Bistro With an Elegant Touch
THE most recent change at the old Union League Club of New Haven has seen the elegant Robert Henry's restaurant on the premises metamorphose into the more casual Union League Cafe.
Much as we lament the passing of one of the state's most distinguished restaurants, the new establishment, owned and run by the daughter of the previous Robert Henry's and her husband, the chef, is perhaps more in keeping with mid-1990's eating fashions and prices.


Wall Street; A Discount Broker at the Head of the Class
INVESTORS have loved shares of Charles Schwab &amp; Company over the past year, bidding them up more than 80 percent.
That's about twice the percentage gain of powerhouse Merrill Lynch, No. 2 performer, which wasn't exactly limping itself.
But the giant discount brokerage apparently holds special appeal to investors -- for its innovation as well as its stock returns.
Recently, its founder and chief executive managed to snare a laurel for accomplishments in somebody else's industry.


What Did You Do on New Year's Eve?
Some partied at Le Cirque. Some waltzed at Grand Central. And some ran in Central Park.


Debate on Golf Course In Liberty State Park
I am delighted to see an article on the future plans for Liberty State Park, but there is much to be added to help decide the controversy.
Let me first make clear that we who are in opposition to the golf course are not anti-golf; we feel that it shouldn't be in Liberty Park, but that there are at least two other places with the needed acreage that would do as well.
I was born and raised in the Bronx and moved to Jersey City in 1981.
Being an environmentalist and conservationist most of my life, I knew of the park for many years before moving here and enjoyed many hours of hiking and bird watching there.


Conservation: An Art of Its Own
To the Editor:
By the time James Beck's book is available in this country, I hope many people will have noted some of Michael Kimmelman's statements, especially this: "Restoration may prolong the life of an artwork but no conservator can restore it to youth, contrary to what the public is often led to believe."


TODAY IN The City
HOW ALBANY WORKS A guide to power in the State Capitol.
Ten principles to explain the game.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT When mastodons roamed Little Neck, Queens.
What happens to the Christmas tree in Rockefeller Center?
Pages 5 through 8.


Man's Best Friend and (Perhaps) Successor
I guess it all started sometime in the eighth century B.C.
Homer had a problem.
His main character, Odysseus, wasn't exactly turning out to be sympathetic.
The Greek chieftain had just come home from sacking Troy.
And -- as if that weren't bad enough -- he was getting ready to murder a large number of house guests.
First, he planned to disguise himself as a beggar.
Then he was going to be insulted by the house guests.
Then he was going to kill them all.
So the great storyteller did what had to be done: he introduced the dog.
Argos hadn't seen his master for 19 years.
He was lying in a dung heap, covered with fleas; but when he heard the old man's voice, he raised his head, wagged his tail and dropped his ears.
Then he died.
Dogs in books and movies have been doing this, or something like it, from that day to this one.
They look at us, and they see good.
Nobody else can see it, but they can.
Often the effort kills them.
Sometimes they just have puppies.


Industry's New Schoolhouse
THEY PARK beneath the gray Toledo sky and slog toward the Chrysler Assembly Plant and the droning production line, as their fathers and grandfathers did when the factory was the Willys Overland plant.
But as these workers approach the looming walls and smokestacks they are greeted by something new.
It is a Harley-Davidson motorcycle, resplendent in glistening chrome.
Beside the bike is a young woman, warmly suggesting something few real men could refuse: Sign up here, she says -- for a class in motorcycle mechanics.
The class is presented after work, free, in one of the company classrooms.
If you don't like motorcycles, how about a real estate license or learning WordPerfect?
And if the worker lacks the basic reading or math skills to master the course -- no problem.
Tutors are waiting to help.
"If we just offered reading and math, no one would participate," said Jerry Huber, the plant manager.
The company had to de-stigmatize remedial training, making it "non-threatening."


Karen Strutin, David Nitkin
Karen Jill Strutin, a daughter of Barbara Strutin of White Plains and Gary Strutin of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to David Barry Nitkin, the son of Herbert and Dianne Nitkin of Randolph, Mass.
Rabbi Shira Milgram officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Nitkin, 27, is studying for a master's degree in teaching at Boston University.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the owner of Plastic Works, a chain of home-furnishing stores in New York and New Rochelle.
Her mother is a saleswoman at Remin's, a women's clothing store in New Rochelle.


Hannah Storen, Dan Hicks
Hannah Lynn Storen and John Daniel Hicks, sports broadcasters for NBC in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church in New York.
The Rev.
Timothy Tighe performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
The bride, 31, who is known professionally as Hannah Storm, is the daughter of Mike Storen of Atlanta and Hannah Storen of Houston.
She graduated from the University of Notre Dame.


South African Election Is Campaign of Paradoxes
They have Bill Clinton's poll taker and media man.
They have mock elections and focus groups.
They have a strategy group to cope with surprises and a briefing committee to keep the candidates in sync.
They have a slogan that is almost generic: "Now Is the Time." They have Nelson Mandela sun visors.
On paper, the African National Congress campaign is a juggernaut, the very model of a modern vote-harvesting machine.


A Portrait Artist Roams The Streets
"HOMELESS PEOPLE DO NOT ALWAYS LOOK BAD," Howard Schatz writes in the catalogue for his show "Homeless: Portraits of Americans in Hard Times." It is on view at the International Center of Photography Midtown (Avenue of the Americas and 43d Street) through Jan. 21.
Mr.
Schatz photographs the dignity and beauty he finds in street people all over the country.
"Homelessness rarely happens by choice," he says.
"They just don't know how to get out from under." He carries a dark backdrop to pose his subjects against "so that no other information -- locale, street signs, other people" will distract from his "eye to eye" encounter.


Oracle and Bell Atlantic Plan a New TV Service
The Oracle Corporation, a Silicon Valley data base software company, and the Bell Atlantic Corporation will announce this week that they plan to establish a commercial interactive television and home shopping service, several people familiar with their plans said today.
A number of cable and telephone companies have announced plans for experimental trials of similar systems.
But the Oracle-Bell Atlantic effort, which the companies will begin before the end of 1994 in the Washington area, is one of the first publicly announced commitments to a permanent interactive system.
Licensing Arrangement
The two companies are said to be planning to send movies as well as other interactive services over the telephone system, using a technology being developed by Bellcore, the research arm of the regional Bell operating companies.
The agreement to be announced on Wednesday is said to involve a licensing arrangement for Bell Atlantic to use Oracle software.


People Feel Free to Speak Off the Record; Journalists Also Learn
To the Editor:
The position you take in your editorial "Don't Call It Journalism" (Jan. 4), berating journalists who attended the Renaissance Weekend at Hilton Head, S.C., with President Clinton and other policy-makers, is unduly extreme.


Sonny Sloan, 68, Dies; Public Library Trustee
Sonny Sloan, a driving force behind several philanthropic programs at the New York Public Library, died on Saturday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 68.
The cause was cancer, said her former husband, Howard Sloan.


CHRONICLE
Love and marriage are blooming in the Friars Club.
MARIAN B. PHILLIPS and NORMAN KOSARIN are to be married there on Feb. 19 in what would be the first wedding between Friars and the happy culmination of a romance that began at the club.
Mr.
Kosarin, 62, a product and packaging designer whose creations include the Pillsbury Doughboy, was on the admission committee of the club, on East 55th Street in Manhattan, when Ms.
Phillips, 46, an entertainment lawyer, joined four years ago.
The couple met at the traditional welcome party for new members.


Press
THE big newspaper here, The Orange County Register, has been ridiculed by Newsweek for having "gone New Age." The newspaper's reporters specialize in topics like Southern California traffic, shopping, pets and hobbies.
Its front page offers large photographs and pastel-colored charts, sometimes reducing important news events to little boxes that the editor calls "commercials" for more in-depth treatment inside.
If you are offended by what may sound like a lack of journalism purity, The Register's top executives have something to say: too bad.


NBC Claims a Gain in the Fight for Young Adults
Only in the television business can a show ranked 60th in the Nielsen ratings become a symbol for a network's rebound.
The network is NBC and the show is "Sea Quest, DSV," a futuristic adventure series about an undersea vehicle, at 8 P.M.
Sundays.
The show, a consistent disappointment to NBC by creative standards, opened last fall to enormous ratings success but has since declined.
In its time slot, it trails the longtime CBS hit, "Murder, She Wrote" and is in a close battle with a new ABC series, "Lois and Clark."


What Clinton Won't Find in Russia: Misty-Eyed Nostalgia for Jeans and Coca-Cola
Back in the old Soviet days, an American-Soviet summit meeting was a time for the Kremlin's propaganda machine to go into overdrive with a torrent of shows, books and articles about the United States.
No matter that most of it was tendentious stuff about the "Negro problem" or American "militarism" -- nobody listened to any of that.


Moses Gunn Memorial
A memorial tribute to the stage and screen actor Moses Gunn is to be held on Sunday at 2:30 P.M. at the Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village.
Frances Foster, Woodie King Jr., Archie Shepp and Douglas Turner Ward are among those scheduled to take part.
Mr.
Gunn died on Dec. 17 at the age of 64.


The Troubles of 'A Perfect World'
Just about everyone in Hollywood was convinced that the film "A Perfect World" would emerge a winner.
How could it miss?
The movie paired two of the world's biggest stars, Kevin Costner and Clint Eastwood, whose last few films were financial bonanzas.
Audiences at early screenings gave the film high marks.
Some critics said that Mr.
Costner had given one of his finest performances in years, while Mr.
Eastwood's direction of the movie was praised as the high point of his career.
Mr.
Eastwood, Mr.
Costner and the studio that produced the movie, Warner Brothers, waited for crowds to line up at the box office.
They didn't.
The movie, which was released just before Thanksgiving, has grossed a tepid $30 million.


Wagner Legacy Survives in Counsel to Giuliani
A LARGE ceremonial guest book was kept in the front foyer of Gracie Mansion when Robert F. Wagner Jr., then still known as Robert F. Wagner 3d, was growing up there during his father's three terms as Mayor.
"I peeked into it, and noticed that the name of Robert F. Wagner 3d appeared on almost every page," Philip Hamburger wrote in 1954 in The New Yorker.
"I gathered that almost every time the Mayor's oldest son enters the Mansion, he signs his name."


You Can Feel It but Not See It: Figure It Out and You Survive
Phil Simms has learned to throw the ball differently in the wind and cold of Giants Stadium.
Still, when it's blowing 17 miles an hour and the temperature is 23 degrees, miserable is miserable.
"Today ranked up there in the top three worst-weather days I played in," Simms said after the Giants' wild-card playoff victory today.


8 Officers Hurt in Scuffle at Harlem Mosque
Eight police officers were injured in a brawl with a crowd of worshipers at a mosque in Harlem yesterday after a robbery was reported there, the police said.
It was unclear how many worshipers were injured, or exactly what sequence of events led to the scuffle.
No one could be found at the mosque when a reporter visited late last night.


Nicklaus and Mickelson Share Spotlight
The symmetry to the final round of the Mercedes Championships at La Costa is inescapable.
The best old player in the world and the best young player in the world each prevailed in their respective divisions.
Jack Nicklaus, 53, beat the seniors and Phil Mickelson, 23, beat the regular tour players -- renewing once again the inevitable comparisons between the Bear and his heir.
Mickelson, who grew up in nearby San Diego, parred the second extra hole to beat Fred Couples in sudden death.
Mickelson and Couples, 34, each closed with 68 to finish regulation play at 12-under-par 276.
Nicklaus also closed with a 68 and finished at 9-under-par 279, one stroke better than Bob Murphy, who bogeyed the final hole for a round of 72.


Treasury Auction Schedule Has Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.14 percent.


The Giants Force a Fumble and a San Francisco Trip
IN the Frigidaire of Giants Stadium, having the wind was better than having the ball.
And now, with the Giants leading, 17-10, early in the fourth quarter, the Vikings had both.
After catching a deep pass over the middle from quarterback Sean Salisbury, wide receiver Cris Carter was slashing across the Giants' 23-yard line when he tried to stiff-arm strong safety Myron Guyton.
Myron who?


Study Sought on All Testing on Humans
The Clinton Administration is being pressed to delve yet deeper into the record of Federal research using human subjects, a push that could perhaps lead to a comprehensive review of the nation's research ethics during the past half-century.
What began as a discussion of radiation experiments related to the nuclear weapons program during the cold war, and promoted by Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary as part of an initiative to reveal her agency's atomic secrets, has already expanded to include radiation experiments conducted by several agencies and involving thousands of subjects.


Review/Dance; A Party That Isn't Quite Over
Onafhankelijk Toneel of Rotterdam, which made a widely praised New York debut last year as part of the U.S.-Netherlands Touring and Exchange Project, was back at the Theater for the New City on Friday night with a new full-evening piece.
Choreographed by Ton Lutgerink, "Happy Endings" took an imaginative look at a group of men and women who wander into a party at an old movie theater that is about to be demolished.
In effect, they are stranded in the theater lobby on the eve of its destruction, playing out movie roles under the eyes of two women, one of whom owns the theater.
They escape in the end, leaving the owner and the theater custodian behind.
It has been a hectic night, but reality awaits them beyond the crumpled screen.


It Didn't Say Anything About Ice Skating


Bridge
The best way to discover how the experts bid is to study Bridge World Standard, which has just been revised for the third time.
For a free copy of the new version, send a stamped, self-addressed business envelope to The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
The details of the system are based on the votes of 100 experts who answered a questionnaire.
If they are divided, the votes of readers are taken into account.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about an agreement between the United States and France on Western involvement in Bosnia and Herzegovina misidentified Alain Juppe.
He is France's Foreign Minister, not the Defense Minister.


Review/Dance; Jazzing Up for a New Generation
The New York City Ballet has just invented what it calls a "new generation" series to lure young audiences into the theater.
The premise, still to be proven, is that the downtown crowd is put off by tutus but will be attracted by streamlined bodies in leotards dancing to John Cage, Minimalist composers, jazz and even Stravinsky.
Add a few kinky images from George Balanchine in ballets like "Bugaku" and the whole thing just might work.
In any case, the first of these three special programs on Friday night at the New York State Theater offered a treat.
It isn't every day that Branford Marsalis and a rightly billed all-star jazz band (including Marcus Roberts on piano and Jon Faddis on trumpet) start jamming at intermission and whip a ballet audience into an appreciative frenzy.


Robert J. Schack, 49, Expert on Family Law
Robert J. Schack, a lawyer with the Attorney General's office of New York State, died late last month at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49.
His father, Dr.
Jerome Schack, said his son's body was found in his apartment on Thursday and that the apparent cause of death was cardiac arrest.


Long Haymes Carr Gets Nabisco Job
The Nabisco Foods Group has named Long Haymes Carr Lintas in Winston-Salem, N.C., to handle the American print and outdoor media planning and buying portion of its estimated $10 million account.
Those media functions, for brands including Oreo, Ritz, Grey Poupon and Life Savers, were previously handled by an in-house media service department at the group's parent, RJR Nabisco in Winston-Salem, until that department was eliminated in October.


EX-CHIEF OF B.C.C.I. TO BE EXTRADITED TO U.S. FOR TRIAL
Reviving the stalled investigation of one of the largest global frauds in history, Federal prosecutors announced today that one of the two top executives of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International would be extradited to the United States to stand trial on criminal fraud charges.
As part of an agreement with the ruler of Abu Dhabi, who had been the largest shareholder of B.C.C.I., American investigators will also be given, for the first time, broad access to the bank's secret records and to 10 other former bank executives who had been inaccessible.


Small Miracle in a Siege: Safe Water for Sarajevo
For more than a year, the simple act of drawing a glassful of precious water here has meant risking life itself.
But now, after months of secret design, construction and transport of boxcar-size purification and pumping systems, an American aid agency is ready to turn on the taps in the homes of thousands who have been parched since the summer of 1992, when Serbs began cutting power to pumps that deliver water from a spring behind the Serbian lines.


Director Addresses N.C.A.A. Convention
Somewhere between the bold steps of reform and the politics of refinement, the delegates to the 88th National Collegiate Athletic Association convention listened to Cedric Dempsey, their new executive director, attempt today to combine the senses of challenge and reassurance in his first state of the association address.
"We legislate with the very best of intentions," Dempsey said in his first week on the job, "but we are not perfect and the world is not static. If this association is to continue to be successful, we must be dynamic and willing to recognize and accept change. We can do this without fear of destroying what has been accomplished in the first half of this decade."


RESULTS PLUS
SHORT-TRACK SPEED SKATING  New Team for Flaim  Eric Flaim, a 1988 silver medalist in long-track speed skating, was the No. 1 pick yesterday for the short-track Olympic speed-skating team.
Flaim, 26, who started training for short-track racing a year ago, set an American record in the 1,000-meter time trials on Saturday with a time of 1 minute 30.78 seconds in Lake Placid, N.Y.
Andy Gabel, Randy Bartz and John Coyle and 16-year-old Tony Goskowicz also clinched spots on the team.
Cathy Turner, the 31-year-old gold and silver medalist in the 1992 Albertville Games, won the top spot on the women's team after setting American records in the 500-meter race (46.53) and the 1,000-meter time trial (1:38.18).
Also making the team was Amy Peterson, a silver medalist in the 1992 Games. (AP) LONG-TRACK SPEED SKATING  Two Records Are Set  Rintje Ritsma of the Netherlands and Gunda Niemann of Germany broke world point records as they won overall victories yesterday at the European speed skating championships in Hamar, Norway.
Ritsma totaled 156.201 points after winning three events -- the 500, 1,500 and the 5,000 meters -- in the men's four-race series at the Viking Ship Olympic Hall, site of the speed skating events in next month's Winter Games.
Johan Olav Koss of Norway prevented Ritsma from making a sweep by winning yesterday's final 10,000-meter race in 13:51.39.
Koss was second in the final overall standing with 157.257 points.
Third was Falko Zandstra, the two-time defending champion from the Netherlands, with 157.686 points.
Niemann, the Olympic champion in the 3,000 and 5,000, won the final 5,000-meter race in 7:14.35 for her second victory in two days and had 167.282 points after the four events.
Svetlana Bazhanova of Russia finished second over all with 170.263 points. (AP) ALPINE SKIING  1-2 Norwegian Finish  Finn Christian Jagge, the 1992 Olympic champion, led a 1-2 Norwegian finish in a World Cup slalom yesterday in Kranjska Gora, Slovenia.
Jagge gave Norway its first World Cup triumph of the season with two flawless runs down the slushy Podkoren course.
Alberto Tomba of Italy, who fell during Saturday's giant slalom, was in contention until late in the second run yesterday, but he straddled a gate with his left ski and was disqualified.
Jagge, who didn't post the fastest time in either run, finished in 1 minute 43.46 seconds.
Ole Christian Furuseth was second at 1:43.51. (AP) Schneider Takes Slalom: Vreni Schneider won the slalom in Altenmarkt, Austria, giving the Swiss skier her 47th World Cup victory.
With her Austrian rivals suffering their worst day in nine years, Schneider cruised to her third slalom victory of the season.
Schneider posted the fastest times in both runs down the Unterbergalmhang course, compiling a total time of 1 minute 36.41 seconds.
She finished .57 seconds ahead of Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden. (AP) TENNIS  Edberg Stops Haarhuis  Third-seeded Stefan Edberg won his first title in nine months, beating unseeded Paul Haarhuis, 6-3, 6-2, yesterday in the Qatar Open in Doha.
Edberg, ranked No. 5 in the world, needed only 74 minutes to defeat the 42d-ranked Haarhuis.
Edberg hadn't won a title since the Madrid clay-court event last April.
He gained the only break of the first set in the eighth game and went on to win in 34 minutes. (AP) Victory for Davenport: Second-seeded Lindsay Davenport rebounded after dropping her only set of the week and defeated Florencia Labat of Argentina, 6-1, 2-6, 6-3, to win the Australian Women's Hardcourt tournament in Brisbane.
The 17-year-old American has risen in the ranking from No. 171 to No. 20 in 10 months. (AP)


Valerie Rosenwasser, James Hoffman
Valerie Michele Rosenwasser, the daughter of Marjorie Wollan and Arnold R. Rosenwasser, both of New York, was married yesterday to James Douglas Hoffman, a son of Elaine Weiler of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Benjamin Hoffman.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 29, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the shoe buyer for Gucci, in Secaucus, N.J.
The bride's mother was until recently an executive director for Clinique International, the cosmetics concern, in New York.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.


Prudential Accounting Firms Sued
The potential liability from the fraud scandal at Prudential Securities has spread with the filing of a lawsuit seeking $1.1 billion in damages from each accounting firm that reviewed financial records from the investment house's biggest series of limited partnerships.
The class action filed late Friday brings new accusations of fraud involving the partnerships.
The suit names Arthur Andersen &amp; Company and Deloitte &amp; Touche, the successor to Touche Ross &amp; Company.
Andersen and Touche were the accountants for the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships, which raised about $1.4 billion from more than 130,000 investors across the country in the 1980's.


Essay; Absent At the Creation
"Nothing is more contemptible," Joseph Alsop told me when I took up this line of work, "than a columnist without a Weltanschauung."
A coherent worldview is tough to come by these days because the main threat to freedom has shifted from militant Communism to what John Leo has named "ethnomania," more tribalism than nationalism.
It is exploding around Bosnia, the test NATO is failing, and is advancing in what used to be the Communist bloc.


With Streaks on Line, Devils Shoot All Blanks
Perhaps the Devils were due for a spiritless performance after winning four in a row and seven of nine, but one would have to search deep to find a worse game the Devils have played this season than tonight's 4-0 loss to the Capitals.
Rick Tabaracci earned the shutout for Washington with 32 saves, his second shutout of the season and fifth of his career.
Chris Terreri was the victim at the other end, allowing the four goals on 23 shots.


NATO Plan Welcomes New Eastern Partners
To the Editor:
"U.S. Opposes Move to Rapidly Expand NATO Membership" (front page, Jan. 2) tells us who is on what side of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization debate.
You also inadvertently show how badly that debate has been defined in the West.
You misleadingly portray our leaders as debating this choice:


Out and About In Brussels
Following are the highlights of President Clinton's trip to Brussels.
Local time is six hours ahead of Eastern standard time.
TODAY  9:45 A.M. local time (3:45 A.M. Eastern standard time) Opening session of the summit meeting by leaders of the 16 nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, at NATO headquarters outside Brussels.


Corrections
The Where to Find It column in The Home Section on Thursday, about sources of traditional office supplies, misstated the telephone number of Lexmark International, which makes and markets I.B.M. typewriter products.
It is (800) 358-5835.


Giuliani Exhorts Reno To Call a Crown Hts. Jury
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, bitterly complaining about the Justice Department's handling of the killing of a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights, urged Attorney General Janet Reno yesterday to impanel a Federal grand jury to investigate the 1991 killing.
Appearing on the WNBC-TV program "News Forum," Mr.
Giuliani, who was once the third-highest ranking official in the Justice Department, said it was "incomprehensible" that the Attorney General had not yet decided whether to impanel a grand jury in the stabbing death of Mr.
Rosenbaum.


Hamilton Is Leader Of the Giant Charge Against the Vikings
Last week, after the Dallas game, Keith Hamilton had his head handed to him by the coaching staff.
It appears the coaches weren't too happy about how Hamilton was more concerned about trying to sack quarterback Troy Aikman than stopping running back Emmitt Smith.
They want Hamilton to be a complete defensive end, not just a pass rusher.
This week, of course, there will be no complaints about Hamilton's play.
Or the performance of anyone on the defense for that matter.
Hamilton was a factor against the run as the Giants held the Minnesota Vikings to just 79 yards rushing.
But the defensive end added two sacks, and with one more by the other end, Mike Fox, it turned out to be a good day for the line and the defense.


After Decade of Big Losses, USA Today Has First Profit
Critics called it McPaper. Fast-food journalism. And worse.
But USA Today, pretty weather map and all, has survived.
And now, the newspaper that an analyst once labeled "the most unprofitable newspaper in the history of the world" is making money.
It just completed its first profitable year.


L.T. Has a Foot Out the Door
Lawrence Taylor may not be ready to say publicly that he is going to retire, but after the Giants' 17-10 victory over Minnesota today, he sure sounded like a player who is on his way out the door.
He talked about thanking the fans, about how he has no regrets in 13 years.
He said that if this was his last game at Giants Stadium, this was the way he wanted it to be: with the fans cheering his name and the Giants winning a big playoff game.


Journalist Slain in Township Attack on Black Leaders
Gunmen in a volatile black township sprayed automatic rifle fire this afternoon at a delegation that included two top leaders of the African National Congress, killing a photographer and wounding two other journalists and several bystanders.
Bodyguards safely whisked away the officials, who included Cyril Ramaphosa, the secretary general of the African National Congress, and Joe Slovo, chairman of the South African Communist Party, as armed supporters of the congress responded to the assault with a blaze of rifle and pistol fire.


New Jersey Legislators To Address Florio Vetoes
The 205th New Jersey Legislature returns for its last voting session on Monday in what could be one of the most contentious meetings of the Republican-controlled body's two-year run.
The meeting will be devoted to considering the rejection of some recent bills by Gov.
Jim Florio, including one that would increase the tax on gasoline and home heating oil by 1.65 cents a gallon to pay for upgrading underground fuel storage tanks.
Some large fuel companies have said that if the money is not made available, they will have to stop deliveries to customers who have not upgraded their tanks, including some gas stations.


Westward Ho! Giants Circle Wagons and Hold Off the Vikings
At halftime, with the Giants trailing the Minnesota Vikings, 10-3, in the bitter cold, some of the veterans had seen enough.
Michael Brooks, Lawrence Taylor, Howard Cross and several others made it known to some of their young teammates that this wasn't spring practice at College U. There were man-to-man talks, some speeches and even some screaming as those who had been there before told those who hadn't that they had better get their act together.


NATO's Low Bosnia Flights Feed Talk About Air Strikes
NATO warplanes enforcing the no-flight zone over Bosnia and Herzegovina flew at unusually low altitudes over Sarajevo today, dropping flares used to thwart heat-seeking antiaircraft missiles.


Review/Dance; Balanchine and Brahms By New York City Ballet
Two grandly scaled ballets by George Balanchine to music by Brahms were featured in the New York City Ballet's performances on Saturday.
The splendors of "Liebeslieder Walzer," presented in the evening, have nothing to do with sheer numbers.
There are only eight dancers in the cast.
And the score requires only two pianists (Jeananne Albee and Richard Moredock, on this occasion) and four singers (Ruth Golden, Cynthia Rose, Joseph Evans and David Evitts).


Talbot Makes U.S. Team, but the Olympics Can Wait
There was a moment last month when Kristen Talbot, 23, learning that her brother, Jason, 19, had contracted a potentially deadly disease, told him she would give up her pursuit of making the United States Olympic speed skating team to be with him.
"No, Kristen," Jason said.
"I know how hard you've been training. I know what this means to you. You have to keep on."


Cooking Light Chooses Editor
Cooking Light magazine has appointed Doug Crichton, its executive editor, as editor.
He replaces Katherine Eakin, who has been named a senior foods editor at Oxmoor House books.
Cooking Light and Oxmoor House are run by the Southern Progress Corporation, a division of Time Warner Inc.


Tip O'Neill Supporters Pay Last Respects


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Producer Prices . . .
December  Thursday  Retail Sales . . .
December  Consumer Prices . . .
December  Personal Income . . .
December  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Industrial Production . . .
December  Business Inventories . . .
November


Shifting Winds Fan Fires in Australia


CHRONICLE
ANDY ANSELMO , a singer who has appeared on Broadway, in nightclubs and on television and radio programs around the country, never saw himself teaching until the late 1960's, when he decided to leave the road.
"It happened by accident," he said the other day.
But it is as a teacher that he is to be honored at a 70th-birthday celebration at the Roundabout Theater Company on Jan. 17.
Proceeds from the reception, performance and supper, called "A Superstar Salute to Andy Anselmo," are to benefit the Singer's Forum, the vocal training studio on West 19th Street that he founded with John Harris 17 years ago.
Some of his students will sing -- or speak -- at the festivities, including Geraldine Fitzgerald, Liza Minnelli, Mary Tyler Moore, Mandy Patinkin, Joanne Woodward, Julie Harris, Billy Stritch, Maureen O'Sullivan and Jo Sullivan Loesser.


Rising Violence in Somalia Throws U.N.'s Role Into Question
Less than three months before the American troop withdrawal from Somalia is scheduled to be completed, increasing banditry, attacks on relief workers and the rearming of clan-based factions around the country are putting into question the future role of the United Nations and relief agencies, American and United Nations officials say.
A senior United Nations official said last week that the organization planned to reduce its troop strength from 28,000 to about 15,000 after the American pullout, which is to be complete by March 31.
By that time, all the other Western contingents as well as the large Turkish force will have pulled out, leaving the Pakistani and Indian contingents as the main guarantors of security for United Nations and relief-agency operations.
The commander will be Lieut.
Gen.
Aboo Samah Aboo Bakar of Malaysia, who is to replace a Turkish general, Cevik Bir, this month.


People Feel Free to Speak Off the Record
To the Editor:
The New York Times hosts off-the-record sessions -- lunches, teas, coffees -- with public officials all the time.
New York Times men and women regularly attend off-the-record briefings at such organizations as the Council on Foreign Relations.
Members of your Washington bureau frequently go to dinner parties that are off the record.


State Tax Revenues
Higher tax receipts this fiscal year have heartened state governments worried about budget gaps in fiscal 1995.
But recent gains in revenue from taxes on sales and financial services will be eaten up in the rising cost of services, tax officials say.
Increased revenue prompted Governor Cuomo to propose cutting or eliminating some business taxes, but the state will still face a $1.5 billion budget shortfall for its fiscal 1995, beginning April 1.
In New Jersey, Governor-elect Christine Whitman has promised a dramatic cut in income taxes.
While the state's revenues rose 3 percent this fiscal year and another moderate increase is forecast for fiscal 1995, Mrs.
Whitman will have to deal with a budget gap of at least $800 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
One of the top two B.C.C.I. executives will be extradited to the U.S. to stand trial on criminal fraud charges, prosecutors said, potentially opening a new window on the bank scandal.
As part of an agreement with the ruler of Abu Dhabi, who had been the largest shareholder in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, investigators will also receive broad access to secret records and to other former executives who had been inaccessible.  [ Page A1. ]


The Pleasures of Talk In the Dance of Life
To the Editor:
Re "Playing by the Antioch Rules" by Eric Fassin (Op-Ed, Dec. 26): It is good to read a sensible understanding of the Antioch College sexual offense policy, "which requires students to obtain explicit verbal consent before so much as a kiss is exchanged."


Casino Boom Along Gulf Coast Brings Fears of Glut and High Toll
Anyone who doubts the astonishing economic effect of the nation's headlong dash toward legalized gambling should come to this quirky hodgepodge of moss-draped live oaks and white-columned mansions, ragged beach and cheap bars that has been turned into a boom area by the arrival of eight major casinos over the past two years.
But if the Mississippi Gulf Coast from Biloxi to Bay St.
Louis is a revealing window onto the economic power of legalized gambling, now a $30 billion nationwide business that has tripled in a decade, its experience is also raising two questions with national implications: how many communities can expect to make money on gambling -- and at what cost?


Compassion Is the Best Medicine
We don't have a health care system but rather a disease cure system.
The public believes and many doctors behave as if most illnesses are curable.
We think of the body as if it were a machine with replaceable parts: defects can be identified, removed and replaced through treatments such as organ transplants, drugs and gene therapy.
With a few exceptions, this is not the case.
The expectation of cure has led to an explosion of invasive, expensive and often risky interventions that have at best marginal effects on survival.
We have focused too much on diseases and too little on the people who have the diseases.


Amy Goldstein, Daniel Jaffe
Amy Rose Goldstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Enoch A. Goldstein of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel Millard Jaffe, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Jaffe of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Debra F. Pine officiated at the Rodef Shalom Temple in Pittsburgh.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of Rochester and received a master's degree in public management from Carnegie Mellon University.
She is the administrative coordinator for the public programs and services department of the Carnegie Museum, in Pittsburgh.


Jameson L. Baum, Jeffrey Hirshfield
Jameson Lynn Baum, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
S.
James Baum of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Lee Hirshfield, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Hirshfield of Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi James Prosnit officiated at the Puck Building in New York.
Ms.
Baum, who is keeping her name, is a jazz flutist and composer in New York.
She graduated from the New England Conservatory and is studying for a master's degree at the Manhattan School of Music.
Her father is a retired surgeon.


Pentagon Nominee Withdraws Name
Morton H. Halperin, President Clinton's embattled choice to head a new Pentagon position for peacekeeping policy, has withdrawn his name for the job, Administration officials said today.
The nomination of Mr.
Halperin, a 55-year-old former director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union, stirred a level of passions unusual for a mid-level position, as conservatives attacked the liberal positions he had staked out through three decades.
Mr.
Halperin reversed his initial support of the Vietnam War, fought with the Nixon Administration during the Watergate scandals and criticized many American spying operations abroad.


McCallum Sails Past Broncos for 3 Touchdowns
Napoleon McCallum is not the Raiders' leading rusher, but he is their highest-ranked one.
He is a former lieutenant in the United States Navy, a former officer at sea who, after today, is also accomplished on land.
His three touchdown runs helped propel Los Angeles over the Denver Broncos in a wild-card playoff game this afternoon, and the only people prouder than Al Davis right now are the shipmates who used to salute him.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 AGREEMENT REVIVES B.C.C.I. CASE
Federal prosecutors said that a top executive of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International would be extradited to the United States to stand trial, reopening the stalled investigation of one of the largest financial frauds in history.
A1


Review/Pop; Multicultural And Political Messages
The Kitchen's double bill on Saturday night, part of its Gruppen II festival, was pretty dismal.
Zusaan Kali Fasteau, a saxophonist and flutist, had people huddling in the lobby, and Julia Heyward's songs, often politically driven, had a grinding flair for the obvious.
Ms.
Fasteau opened the show, and although she has an overabundance of instrumental virtuosity, she hasn't figured out a context in which it sounds good.
Ms.
Fasteau has lived around the world and assimilated music from India, Japan, and Arabic and black Africa.
She can play, too: on various flutes Ms.
Fasteau, backed by the bassist William Parker and the drummer Michael Wimberly, echoed the various textures of what she had studied, and with idiomatic control.
An old beef about improvised music says that it is more fun to play than to hear; in her case it might be true, as her pieces showed little or no narrative development, making them dull.


Review/Pop; Disparate Voices in Alternative Rock
The Thread Waxing Space presented a fairly resistible quadruple bill of alternative-rock bands on Friday night, headlined by Guided by Voices, a group led by a schoolteacher from Dayton, Ohio.
The band members looked old and a bit out of place by New York's club standards; bald spots and button-down shirts shared the stage with an occasional tattoo.
But they showed that within the confines of alternative rock, there's some space to be different.
Where some of the opening groups seemed infatuated with the idea of rock more than by rock itself, Guided by Voices actually rocked; heads bobbed a bit, and if the audience had been a touch less reserved, people might actually have danced.
But Guided by Voices had something going on besides the big beat that turns a weekend night into something transcendental: it had melodies.
The lead singer, Bob Pollard, singing and talking in an English accent and stumbling around as if he'd been on the receiving end of a case of beer, sang melodies that were just on the fringes of memory.


Edward P. Bemberg; Brewery Executive, 76
Edward P. Bemberg, former chairman of the Rheingold Brewery in New York, died on Friday at his home in Buenos Aires.
He was 76.
A spokesman for the family said the cause was liver cancer.


Richardson, Myers Chosen by Orioles
The Baltimore Orioles baseball team has selected Richardson, Myers &amp; Donofrio Inc. in Baltimore to handle its account, which had been at Trahan, Burden &amp; Charles in Baltimore for four years.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


INSIDE
Somalia's Future in Doubt
Increasing violence in Somalia is raising questions about whether the United Nations and relief groups can maintain their roles there.
Page A3.
An Attack in South Africa
Shots fired in a South African township at a group that included high-level African National Congress officials killed a photographer.
Page A3.
Pockets of Urban Violence
While the number of homicides continues to drop in New York City, some areas are bucking the trend with a disproportionate share.
Page B1.
Giants and Raiders Win
The Giants beat the Minnesota Vikings, and Los Angeles defeated the Denver Broncos in the N.F.L. playoffs.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Review/Television; Back to Free-Spirited San Francisco of the 70's
With the six-hour "Armistead Maupin's Tales of the City," public television is doing precisely what it should be doing.
This evening through Wednesday at 9 P.M., PBS is broadcasting a first-rate mini-series that commercial television wouldn't touch on a dare.
In fact, "Tales of the City" comes to American television only because Channel 4 in Britain decided to produce it, getting some financial input from station KQED in San Francisco and the "American Playhouse" series, one of a handful of PBS entities still capable of showing some courage.
The setting is San Francisco in 1976.
Mr.
Maupin's characters -- part factual, part fictional -- began appearing that year in his San Francisco Chronicle newspaper columns.
They became players in a print soap opera that was later collected into a series of best-selling books.
Now, Richard Kramer, one of the senior and most accomplished writers on the series "Thirtysomething," has adapted, with remarkable fidelity, the first of the Maupin books.


Senator Wants Special Counsel
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan is the first Democrat to seek a special prosecutor to investigate the Clintons' real estate dealings.
Page A8.


For Consumers, Multimedia Shines
Like many of the 79,000 people attending the four-day Winter Consumer Electronics Show, which opened here Thursday, Aaron Hill, a 19-year-old college student, came for a glimpse of the interactive multimedia technology he has heard so much about.
Mr.
Hill, a self-proclaimed gadget lover, did not walk away disappointed.
After testing a variety of new multimedia computers, CD-ROM software and multi-user video games, he proclaimed, "This is the start of a revolution that my generation has been waiting for."


Post Office Sends Requests to Agencies
The United States Postal Service said that as expected it had sent to an unspecified number of agencies requests for proposals to handle its estimated $80 million account, which has been handled for almost 20 years by Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
Art Shealy, a spokesman for the Postal Service in Washington, said on Friday that a decision was expected in midsummer.
The agency's current contract, which was for five years, was extended in October through March 31.


Horse Sense
"We have free roam of the city, like we had since 1625 up until 1989," a carriage horse driver exulted to a Times reporter earlier this month.
What he and his fellow drivers had been freed from was a law that recognized that this is not the New York of 1625 and that carriage horses don't belong on the clogged and clamorous streets.
Local Law 89 sharply limited the hours when the carriages could operate and the areas in which they could travel.
It was approved with great enthusiasm by the City Council in 1989.
A few years later the Council had a mysterious change of heart and voted to weaken those restrictions.
But Mayor Dinkins wisely vetoed the measure.


Who Would Survive a Merger?
The man who first agreed to the sale of Paramount Communications Inc. may soon find himself out of a job.
Paramount's chairman, Martin S. Davis, is believed to have forged an initial alliance with Viacom Inc. in part to insure his future role at the merged companies.
But he may not remain at Paramount even if his former ally, Sumner M. Redstone, chairman of Viacom, wins the pitched takeover battle against QVC Network Inc.


All-Points Alert Wakes Up The Knicks
The Knicks finished what they started last night.
Instead of playing tentatively in the fourth quarter, the Knicks played with purpose.
They moved the ball crisply, resulting in pretty passing plays that led to layups.
And whenever the Portland Trail Blazers threatened, New York responded.


Condom Gains and Losses; Parental Veto in New York
The New York City Board of Education is scheduled to vote tomorrow on a proposal that would allow parents to prevent their children from receiving condoms in school.
Although we would prefer on health grounds that condoms be available as widely and freely as possible, there is little choice but to allow a parental "opt out"; a recent court ruling upholds the right of parents to say no.
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines has proposed a reasonable opt-out plan that may allow the condom distribution program to continue with minimal disruption.
The board approved the program in 1991, at the urging of then-Chancellor Joseph Fernandez, to prevent the spread of AIDS.
About 3 percent of the nation's teen-agers are in New York City, but teen-agers here account for 20 percent of all reported cases of adolescent AIDS in the country.


1993 Homicides Fewer but More Clustered in New York City
From the rectory of the St.
Jerome Catholic Church in the South Bronx the Rev.
John Grange hears gunfire every night on the streets below.
"We used to do about a funeral a month here," Father Grange said.
But with shootings and other tolls of urban life, he said, "now we do a funeral a week."
But on the east side of Manhattan, in the neighborhood of United Nations diplomats and quiet streets of exclusive apartments, the gunfire might as well be in a distant city.
"We all feel sorry and feel bad about all the crime and violence in the city," said Gloria Sandmeyer, who lives in Tudor City.
But as for crime in her neighborhood, she said, "We don't think about it much."


Linda Drummer, Daniel Richter
Linda Drummer, a daughter of Morris and Judy Drummer of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Daniel Mark Richter, a son of Marshal and Marilyn Richter of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Milton H. Polin officiated at Congregation Ohr Torah in North Woodmere, L.I.
The bride, 22, graduated summa cum laude from Brooklyn College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is studying for a doctorate in social psychology at the University of Maryland.
Her mother is the emergency room supervisor at Parkway Hospital in Forest Hills, Queens.
Her father owns M. Drummer Jewelers in New York.


Bobby Pratt, 67, Dies; A Jazz Instrumentalist
Bobby Pratt, a jazz pianist and trombonist, died on Friday at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 67.
The cause was heart and kidney failure, said Chuck Folds, a friend.


Texas Sect Trial Spurs Scrutiny of Government
Ten and a half months after the apocalyptic ministry of David Koresh became known around the world with a deadly gun battle between his followers and Federal agents, 11 surviving members of his sect are to go on trial on Monday to face murder charges.
Although even prosecutors have suggested that there is much confusion about who actually fired the fatal shots -- and though three defendants were not present during the gun battle -- 10 men and a woman are all accused of being part of a broad conspiracy to kill Federal agents during a raid last Feb. 28 by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


Market Place; A Closer Look Shows Viacom's Bid Still Falls Short Of QVC's.
CALL it the power of a misleading headline.
Or blame the desire of money managers to get home at a decent hour on a Friday night.
Whatever the reason, the great takeover war for Paramount Communications will drag on for two more weeks, despite the fact that Viacom decided not to come up with an offer that was better than the one QVC Network had made.


No Headline
I have a great personal debt of nearly 40 years' standing to this country because it was a Belgian, Adolphe Sax, who invented the saxophone. -- PRESIDENT CLINTON, on arriving in Belgium.  [ A6:4. ]


Review/Dance; Physical Side of an Emotional World
Doug Varone mixed pleasure and pain to powerful effect on Saturday night, when Doug Varone and Dancers performed in the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater.
On the evidence of this program, he is that rare choreographer with a gift for expressing emotion through dance.
The three premieres on the program have no clear narrative.
They brim with pure, often high-energy physicality, for the most part letting stories be told through the relationships of the bodies sharing the stage, through gesture, and through movement that seems in its crudeness to be almost antithetical to dance.
In "On the Field of Destiny," a harrowing solo set to music by John Adams, Mr.
Varone's twisted, hunched, bulky body perfectly expresses insanity shot through with a madman's poignant clarity of purpose.


Books of The Times; Vivid Memories of a Life Left Behind
A Drinking Life A Memoir By Pete Hamill 265 pages. Little, Brown and Company. $21.95.


Trail Dudley Blazed Still Angers N.B.A.
Chris Dudley wanted to get out on the road, be with the guys, maintain the feel of the game.
"He wanted the per diem," said Harvey Grant, poking his nose into Dudley's business, making a rich man's joke.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in The Home Section on Thursday, about handwriting on home furnishings accessories, misattributed the song "They All Laughed." It is by George and Ira Gershwin, not Cole Porter.


Rotary Pay Phones Return, This Time to Foil Drug Deals
At Eighth Avenue and West 45th Street are three pay telephones.
A man looks at the first, shakes his head and goes to the second.
He rolls his eyes and moves to the third.
Finally, he shrugs, shoves in a quarter and dials -- methodically putting his index finger in the little hole by each number and turning the dial seven times.
"I don't like it," said the man, Jimmie Tomlin.
"It takes too long to dial and I've got places to go."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Nov. 27 about competition in the long-distance telephone market misstated an analyst's estimate of the industry's profit margin.
Ronald L. Altman, a telecommunications analyst at Furman Selz Inc., calculated that the long-distance industry had a profit margin of 15 cents on every dollar of revenue, not 85 cents on the dollar.
This correction was delayed by a reporter's oversight.


Parking Rules
Because of snow and ice on the streets, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Moynihan Urges Prosecutor To Study Clinton Land Deal
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York today became the first Democrat to publicly urge Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate President Clinton's involvement in an Arkansas real estate venture linked to a failed savings and loan.
Mr.
Moynihan suggested that the only way to clear the air of questions that have been building about the President's involvement in the venture, the Whitewater Development Company, was for Mr.
Clinton to "get some good lawyer working on that issue while we go ahead on other things."


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Carolina Fght Corp Merry Ld &amp; Invt Inc Phillips Pete Co TUESDAY  AAR Corp Bank New York Core Inds Inc Helene Curtis Inds Inc Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lgt Weyerhaeuser Co WEDNESDAY  Birmingham Steel Corp NCH Corp Southwestern Pub Svc Co US Life Income Fd Walgreen Co THURSDAY  Idaho Pwr Co Liz Claiborne Inc Lubys Cafeterias NWNL Cos Rubbermaid Inc FRIDAY  Aluminium Co Amer Mellon Bk Corp SUNDAY  Adams Express Co Petroleum &amp; Res Corp


U.S. Stores Of Conran's In Chapter 11
Marvin S. Traub and his partners in the Conran's Habitat home-furnishing stores said yesterday that the chain they optimistically acquired 14 months ago in hope of a turnaround had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
"We expected to lose money for 12 to 18 months, but we found conditions worse than we thought," Mr.
Traub, the longtime chairman of Bloomingdale's, said in a telephone interview.


Vikings' McMahon Receives A Scare
At age 34, he is still wears a long gold earring in his left ear and blue sunglasses in the dark.
The old defiance is still there.
So is the resiliency that has allowed him to return, seemingly every few weeks, from a broken this or a dislocated that.
But Jim McMahon is no phony tough guy, and he was scared today during his Minnesota Vikings' 17-10 playoff loss to the Giants.
On the second play of the second half, with the Vikings nursing a 10-3 lead, McMahon dropped back to pass.
As he threw incomplete, the Giants' Mike Fox smashed into him from behind, and a split second later Keith Hamilton hit him from the front.
McMahon's head was bent back.


For Democrats, a Void After Cuomo?
For the Democrats, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's decision to seek a fourth term has forestalled a messy succession battle this year but raised a thorny long-term question: can the party groom new candidates to carry their mantle when he finally does leave office?
If Mr.
Cuomo wins in November, completes his term and then steps down, as many of his aides expect, he will have been Governor for 16 years -- the second longest tenure for a governor in state history.


Healing on Parole; Doctor and Ex-Prisoner, He Treats Others on Probation
Leaning forward across the metal desk in his windowless, closet-sized office, Dr.
Alan Berkman is trying to ferret out the medical history of his next patient, a 23-year-old addict named Pedro R.
"Were you ever in the hospital for something else?" he gently probes.


UConn May Move Up After Top Teams Topple
Will Connecticut, the new comet of the Big East Conference, approach the Top 10 of college basketball?
The new Associated Press poll, to be released today, is certain to have important changes -- at least near the top -- because last week's No. 1 team, Arkansas, lost on Saturday and so did No. 4, Kentucky.


After Snow, Cold Alone Isn't So Bad
Heads and shoulders braced against the freezing wind, the Falzone family trudged through the chunks of ice and snow drifts outside Giants Stadium yesterday, the parents laden with blankets, the two boys wrapped so that little more than their cold-chapped cheeks showed.
Wicked a day as it was, there were no complaints about the cold from this bunch.
It was kickoff time.
Pointing a gloved finger at her heavily bundled sons who waddled toward the stadium behind their father, Angela Falzone, of Wilkes-Barre, Pa., said, "It was too cold to tailgate, but they wanted to be here, so we came."


CLINTON IN EUROPE: Reporter's Notebook; Hi, Brussels! Meet Mr. Clinton (et al.)
It just wouldn't do for a President to travel alone.
But the sheer number of aides, advance men and hangers-on accompanying President Clinton in Europe this week has made his life in the White House seem something of a monastic exile.
At Zaventem Airport here this morning, it was not just Air Force One but its identical twin, another specially outfitted 747, that touched down to disgorge the American entourage.
The passengers, well over 300 of them along with scores of Secret Service agents, brought such a redundancy of expertise that if Mr.
Clinton tires of his national security adviser and Secretary of State, he need only turn to the deputies of each.


Review/Music; An Ivy League Folk Singer With a Dash of Defiance
If forced to describe Ruth Gerson, a 23-year-old singer and songwriter from New York, in 25 words or less, one could call her a folkish, Ivy League cross between Natalie Merchant and Patti Smith with a dash of the youthful Grace Slick thrown in for spice.
Ms.
Gerson, who appeared at Cafe Sine (122 St. Marks Place,) on Friday evening with a four-member band, has received the sort of heady word of mouth that young performers dream of, but that can backfire if it is callously exploited.
In her performance on Friday evening at the tiny East Village club, where she will appear again on Saturday and on Jan. 22, 28, and 29, she exuded a bracing mixture of defiance and open-heartedness and a songwriting talent that is arresting although far from fully developed.


Harding, the Talented but Troubled Champion, Is Going for a Bigger Title
Once she caught her breath, which wasn't easy given a hacking attack of asthma, Tonya Harding called herself the Charles Barkley of figure skating late Saturday night, then proceeded to verbally slam-dunk her competition at the coming Winter Olympics.
"I'm going there to win," Harding said shortly after winning her second national championship.
"This time, I'm not going away with anything less than the gold."


Fighting Violence Gives Aid To Neediest
The 14 students who sat in the front row of the auditorium at Intermediate School 61 in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, joked and jostled one another like children in junior high anywhere.
They spun yarns about their holiday vacations, which they unanimously pronounced "boring." But when the the subject turned to life at school, their words could have been mistaken for those of war-weary soldiers or veteran police officers.


GEORGIA ENDORSES AN OLYMPIC PARK
Despite the protests of residents who will be displaced, the State of Georgia will begin developing a 72-acre Olympic park in downtown Atlanta on a site now occupied largely by distressed residential and commercial properties.
At a news conference on Friday with Mayor Bill Campbell of Atlanta and Olympic officials, Gov.
Zell Miller said he had decided to endorse the plan, which was proposed by the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games, the private corporation that will stage the 1996 Summer Games.


Review/Music; An Amalgam of the Avant-Garde
There has always been an element of playfulness in the American musical avant-garde, an almost innocent-seeming toying with instruments or manners or styles that has accompanied the movement's more dark, obsessive and uniform political and social visions.
Nothing is sacred, much is amusing, and anything goes.
This aspect of American musical life is being celebrated in a six-concert series at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, that endson Saturday night.
The series, organized by Ben Neill, the Kitchen's music curator, doesn't really deserve its Germanic and portentous title, Gruppen II (the subtitle, as for Gruppen I last season, is "Chamber Music for the 21st Century").
At least on paper, the program promises a mix of jazz, Minimalism, new age, rock, hardware experimentation and art music, which may not produce anything more coherent than an evident determination to avoid too much coherence.


Debra Gold, R. J. Fischgrund
Debra Susan Gold, an assistant counsel to the New York City Schools Chancellor, and Robert Joel Fischgrund, a computer consultant in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Stanley Platek performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Fischgrund, 29, graduated from the State University College at Oneonta, N.Y., and received a law degree from Hofstra University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
David and Anna Gold of Orange, Conn.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A New Campaign Says There's No Place Like Home, No Matter What Kind, for Ethan Allen Furniture.
EVERYBODY doesn't like something, but nobody doesn't like Ethan Allen.
The fanciful misquotation is not meant to suggest that Ethan Allen Inc., the home furnishings manufacturer and retailer, has the temerity to appropriate the long-running slogan promoting the likability of Sara Lee's baked goods.
Still, a campaign that the company is introducing certainly makes a similar claim.


Principal Faces Charges as Parents Seek Truth
For the last 15 years, Harvey Possner has walked into Public School 154 in Brooklyn to preside as principal over the difficult and delicate task of filling the minds and fueling the aspirations of its students.
Today Mr.
Possner is to walk into a Brooklyn courthouse to face charges that he criminally assaulted four of them.


NATO Plan Welcomes New Eastern Partners; Yalta All Over Again
To the Editor:
For every Central European -- Hungarian, Pole, Czech or Slovak -- the word Yalta, the place where the leaders of the Allied Forces met in 1945, has only one meaning: the time and the place where the West sold them out to Stalin and the Soviet Union.
Yalta gave them and their countries a 44-year imprisonment.


Jinxed by Ice, London-Bound Travelers Try Again
Although the bone-rattling weekend weather caused delays for travelers across the New York region, few were as inconvenienced as the 270 passengers who were booked on a Virgin Atlantic Airways flight from Kennedy International Airport to London's Heathrow Airport at 7:15 P.M. on Friday.
By late yesterday afternoon, they had spent more than 13 hours on airplanes and were still in New York.


Geese, Not Gulls, Hold Key to Bacteria Mystery
To the Editor:
You report Dec. 29 that New York City's Commissioner of Environmental Protection, Albert Appleton, has finally decided to do something to keep the geese away from our reservoir system by scaring them off with booms and flashes.
I wonder why it took so long to enact this policy.


Henry Sayles Francis, Former Art Curator, 91
Henry Sayles Francis, a former curator of painting, prints and drawings at the Cleveland Museum of Art, died on Tuesday at Springfield (Vt.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 91 and had lived in Walpole, N.Y., since retiring from the museum in 1967.
The cause was heart failure, the museum said in a written statement.


Cheryl Agulnick, K. B. Hochberg
Cheryl Lynn Agulnick and Kenneth Bruce Hochberg, painters in Kutztown, Pa., were married last evening at the Hotel du Pont in Wilmington, Del.
Rabbi Laurence Malinger officiated.
The bride, 32, graduated cum laude from Temple University and received a master's degree in fine arts from the University of Wisconsin.
She is also an assistant professor of art at Kutztown State University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald M. Agulnick of West Chester, Pa.
Her father is a senior partner in Crawford, Wilson, Ryan &amp; Agulnick, a law firm in West Chester.


Accounts
*
Canyon Ranch, Tucson, Ariz., to Weiss, Whitten, Stagliano, New York, to handle advertising for its fitness vacation resorts in Tucson and Lenox, Mass., previously handled by Great Scott Advertising, New York, which closed.
Billings were estimated at $1 million to $2 million.


Patents
A CONTROVERSIAL inventor, Jerome Lemelson, and a Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist, Lester Thurow, are expected to announce today the establishment of a program that will award annually the largest cash prize ever given to an individual inventor.
The prize, the amount of which is expected to be announced today at a lunch at the "21" Club in New York, is part of a $6.5 million innovation and invention program to be directed by Mr.
Thurow at M.I.T.
The program is endowed by Mr.
Lemelson, who holds 500 patents, more than any other living American.


A Longtime Polluter Is Linked to Oil Spill
The owner of the barge that is leaking oil onto Puerto Rico's beaches is part of a single family's network of marine hauling businesses that have been repeatedly cited in the last two decades for polluting New York and New Jersey waterways.


Corrections
The quarterly mutual funds table last Monday in the special Outlook '94 issue of Business Day misstated the quarterly and annual performance of the Trak group of mutual funds, a fund family sponsored by Smith Barney Shearson.
Because the Trak group declined to provide information on distributions to holders, its funds should have been omitted from the table.


Macy Vows To Remain Independent
In a satellite conference call to employees of R. H. Macy &amp; Company on Friday, Myron E. Ullman 3d, the chairman and chief executive of Macy, vowed to keep the company independent and whole despite Federated Department Stores' desire for a merger.
A videotape of the call was made available yesterday, and while Mr.
Ullman did not say much that he had not said already, he spoke forcefully and with what appeared to be great conviction, contending that he would be able to keep Macy away from competitors.


Tale of Bank's Founding Rivals Land Claim
To the Editor:
The intriguing Edwards clan claim to 77 acres of lower Manhattan and a $27 billion secret trust fund in the Chase Manhattan Bank derived from the profits on that land (news article, Jan. 1) has a fatal flaw.
As a bank spokesman you quote points out, the pirate Robert Edwards, who purportedly opened the account, died in 1780 before the bank was founded.
The story of the bank's founding, however, is even more amazing.


Review/Music; Guitar and Soprano for an Evening in Spain
It is hard to think of music with richer raw materials than that of Romantic Spain and its Latin-American derivatives.
The drama and dignity of the Phrygian cadence, the wildly expressive melisma of Moorish origin, the delicate sensuousness of the guitar: all create pressure on composers to keep these assets intact.
Perhaps one reason German music, to take one example, has been explored more widely and deeply than Spain's is that its folk materials are relatively uninteresting and therefore lend themselves to easy manipulation.
Saturday evening's concert by Sharon Isbin and Benita Valente at the Metropolitan Museum offered guitar solos and songs with guitar accompaniment.
An evening's worth of "Spanish style" has its dangers, for once one sees past the natural riches one begins to question how interestingly they are being used.
In the case of "El mirar de la maja," one of the six Granados "Tonadillas escritas en estilo antiguo," the answer would be wondrously well.
To the irresistible melodrama of Spanish music, this song adds something profound.
Its dignified despair has haunted this listener all his life.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 14 about Fordham Heights Academy, an alternative public high school in the Bronx, referred imprecisely to the use of metal detectors at another school.
They are not permanently installed at DeWitt Clinton High School, but hand-held metal detectors have been used there.


Leaking Barge Has Ties To Polluter in New York
The company that owns the barge that is aground and leaking oil onto Puerto Rico's beaches is linked to a single family's network of marine hauling businesses that for more than 20 years has been repeatedly cited for its pollution of New York and New Jersey waterways.
Over the years, businesses operated by the Frank family of New York and New Jersey have been found guilty of negligently spilling hundreds of thousands of gallons of oil in dozens of incidents, of illegally dumping sewage sludge and of operating tank vessels that were improperly licensed or poorly maintained.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week: Crescent Airways Corp., Lawrenceville, Ga., an initial public offering of two million units, each unit representing two shares and one redeemable warrant.
Thomas James.


CLINTON IN EUROPE: Clinton, in Brussels, Offers Commitment to Europe; On Eve of NATO Talks, President Tries to Ease Fears That His Focus Is on Asia
In the first hours of his first visit to Europe as President, Bill Clinton sought tonight to reassure a continent full of skeptics that the United States remains committed to the Atlantic partnership and determined to resist the siren song of isolationism.
Surrounded by rich carvings and sumptuous tapestries in Brussels' 15th-century City Hall, Mr.
Clinton told an audience of more than 200 mostly young people, drawn from 30 countries, that Europe "is our most valued partner" in the economic and political spheres as well as in military affairs.


Schubertiade Programs For 1994
The sixth installment of the Schubertiade at the 92d Street Y is to be devoted to Schubert's vocal music and chamber works.
The April series will include three concerts featuring the baritone Hermann Prey, and as in previous years, there will be a symposium, pre- and post-concert discussions and other events related to the programming.
The Schubertiade is to begin on April 17 at 1 P.M. with a five-hour symposium, "Perspectives on "Winterreise," followed by a performance of the "Winterreise" cycle by Mr. Prey and the pianist Leonard Hokanson. An interview with Mr. Prey, who is the artistic consultant of the Schubertiade, and a panel discussion moderated by Joseph Horowitz, the series' artistic adviser, is to follow the performance. Mr. Prey will hold a master class on "Winterreise" on April 19.


Jay Blackton Is Dead; A Music Director, 84
Jay Blackton, a music director for movies and Broadway shows, died on Saturday at Granada Hills Community Hospital in Granada Hills, Calif.
He was 84 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Louise.


Jennifer C. Weis, David J. Miner
Jennifer Carole Weis, the daughter of Drs.
Peddrick and Judith Weis of Maplewood, N.J., was married yesterday to David James Miner, a son of Ilene Miner and Martin P. Miner, both of New York.
Rabbi Herbert Weiner performed the ceremony at the Highlawn Pavilion, a restaurant in West Orange, N.J.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 24, graduated from Skidmore College.
She received master's degrees in psychology and education from Columbia University.
She is a substance-abuse counselor in New York at Volunteers of America.


Condom Gains and Losses; More Candor in Commercials
In 1987, a consortium of hospitals, health centers and six branches of New York City Planned Parenthood developed a commercial featuring a young man, a young woman, soft music and a soft voice saying: "Birth control -- from saying 'no' to taking the pill. You're too smart not to use it." Innocuous, right?
Not to local broadcasters.
All of them turned the ad down.
"This is . . . the sort of subject matter some portion of our audience would consider intrusive into their moral or religious beliefs" was a typical response -- and the commercial was shown only in the Buffalo area.
Seven years later, viewers of four major TV networks and several cable networks can see a condom leap from a chest of drawers just as a couple -- genders unspecified -- are about to make love.
They can see a woman and a man, rapidly undressing and half out of breath, and hear the woman's cool rejoinder when, in answer to her question, the man confesses to having forgotten protection.
"Then forget it," she says.
They can do this because the Clinton Administration has committed itself to persuading youngsters to use condoms or practice abstinence in this frightening age of AIDS -- and because Americans are finally beginning to accept the fact that sexual activity, however ill advised or premature it may be, is for most young people close to inevitable.


Israeli Rights Group Critical Of Arab Slayings of Arabs
In a rare criticism of Palestinians, an Israeli human rights group said today that Palestinian political leaders bore responsibility for the killing of hundreds of Arabs in the occupied territories who were accused, falsely in most cases, of collaborating with Israel.
The rights group, B'Tselem, said that the militant Hamas movement had carried out most of the killings, and that the Palestine Liberation Organization, Israel's partner in peace talks, had done almost nothing to stop them.


Mideast Talks: What Happened?
The lengthening delays in the Middle East peace talks are disheartening to Israelis, Palestinians and others around the world whose hopes soared with the announcement of the historic September framework peace agreement.
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization resume talks today on the transition to Palestinian rule in Gaza and Jericho.
Quick agreement is unlikely, though the first Israeli troop withdrawals are now nearly a month overdue.
Many who thrilled to the prospect of peace knew that the details would be particularly devilish because the framework left so many points intentionally vague.
Still, both sides accepted the core principle of expanding Palestinian self-rule under a P.L.O. flag.
How then did the atmosphere become so acrimonious, with Israel now openly challenging P.L.O.
Chairman Yasir Arafat's reliability and legitimacy as a negotiating partner?


P.L.O. Delegate Sees Accord With Israelis on Troops Soon
A senior Palestinian official said here today that an agreement could be reached with Israel within three weeks on a limited withdrawal of its troops from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
"We could really draft in half an hour the Israeli scheduled withdrawal, the Palestinian police deployment, the transfer of civilian authorities over most of the areas, the military and security routines on roads and on the border and the safe passages between Gaza and Jericho," the official, Nabil Shaath, said before going to the Red Sea resort town of Taba.


No. 10 Purdue Survives Seton Hall Zone
Purdue 69, Seton Hall 67
Making key free throws in the final minutes yesterday enabled Glenn Robinson to overcome a poor shooting performance, beat a determined Seton Hall squad and give 10th-ranked Purdue its best start ever.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ROTARY PAY PHONES RETURN TO FIGHT CRIME
Three decades after buttons began to replace rotary dials on American telephones, time has reversed itself at about 250 outdoor pay phones in New York City.
Responding to appeals from community groups trying to stop drug dealers from using public phones to do business, Nynex, formerly New York Telephone, has brought back old-fashioned dialing.
A1.


Abroad at Home; What Might Have Been
Madeleine K. Albright, the U.S. delegate to the United Nations, went last Thursday to a garbage dump outside Vukovar in Serbian-occupied Croatia.
At that site Serbian forces are believed to have buried the bodies of 200 Croatian hospital patients they killed after capturing Vukovar.
The mass grave was "a symbol of the Yugoslavian war's inhumanity," Ms.
Albright said.
But Vukovar is a symbol of something else, too: the American and European weakness that has encouraged the Serbs in their campaign of terror.


Broncos Blink. Raiders Speed Past.
Here is the way one player described it: he said that his team was like a bunch of old army tanks out there on the Los Angeles Coliseum grass this afternoon and that the other team was like a collection of speedy Ferraris.
Denver and the Raiders.
Rematch in the playoffs.
The Raiders ambushed the Broncos by 42-24 before 65,314 fans in the Coliseum.


People Over 50 Disregard Safeguards Against AIDS
Older Americans who are at risk for contracting AIDS tend not to use condoms and are less likely than younger people to be tested for the virus, a new medical survey has found.
Men and women over the age of 50 seem to think they will not be infected with the disease, researchers said, even though 10 percent of AIDS cases, including those of gay men, are diagnosed each year in that age group.
The highest rate of heterosexual transmission of AIDS occurs in people over 50, they said.
The survey was conducted by Dr.
Ron Stall and Dr.
Joe Catania of the University of California in San Francisco and is described today in the Archives of Internal Medicine.
Younger people seem to be getting the message about ways to protect themselves against AIDS, Dr.
Stall said.
But for older people there has been no public health warning.
"When have you ever seen an AIDS poster with a wrinkled face?" he said.
Focus on Specific Risks
To find out what older Americans are doing to protect themselves against AIDS, the researchers culled 3,188 interviews with people over the age of 50 from large national surveys on the disease.
"We focused on heterosexuals and looked for specific risk factors," Dr.
Stall said.
Ten percent of the men and women said they had had multiple sexual partners or a blood transfusion in the 1980's before AIDS screening was widely available, Dr.
Stall said.
Despite these risk factors, he said, older people were six times less likely to use condoms and five times less likely to have tests for AIDS than people in their 20's with similar risk factors.
"We heard a lot of people say 'Thank God, this wasn't around in my day,' " Dr.
Stall said.
"But it is around in their day. It's such a horrible epidemic. It's easy to deny your own risk."
Doctors tend to ignore AIDS risk factors in their older patients, said Dr.
Mitchell Feldman, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of California at San Francisco.
"They assume older people don't have sex and are not at risk," he said.
"But not only are they having sex, they are not taking precautions."
People over the age of 50 have consistently accounted for 10 percent of AIDS cases since the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention began keeping track of the numbers.
More than 33,000 people over 50 are now infected with AIDS.
Education programs about H.I.V. for older Americans are badly needed, Dr.
Feldman said.
They would reduce the risk in that age group, he said, and "trickle down" to younger Americans who may take their own risk of contracting AIDS more seriously if they see their parents taking protective measures.


NATO Plan Welcomes New Eastern Partners; Russian Scare Tactics
To the Editor:
"The sizable vote for an ultranationalist in Russia's parliamentary elections," a Dec. 29 article from Moscow maintains, "is providing the Government with a further weapon in its campaign against the extension of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to Central and Eastern Europe."


Temerlin McClain Gets Subaru Account
After living together for three months, Subaru of America and Temerlin McClain are getting married.
The auto maker, in an unusual arrangement, announced in October that Temerlin was tentatively awarded its account after a monthlong review that left the agency as the only finalist.
If all went well, Subaru executives said then, Temerlin would be officially deemed the successor to Wieden &amp; Kennedy of Portland, Ore., which had the account for 28 months.


Lisa Copeland, Owen Crowley
Lisa Joanne Copeland, the daughter of Jacqueline Copeland of Irvington, N.Y., and the late Alfred Copeland, was married yesterday to Owen M. Crowley, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald Crowley of Branson, Mo.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Ms.
Copeland graduated magna cum laude from Wesleyan University and is studying for a master's degree in public health at Columbia University.
Her father was an investment analyst specializing in public utilities with Lehman Brothers in New York.


Gun Exchange Expanding
A gun-exchange program that proved successful in the 34th Precinct in upper Manhattan is scheduled to begin today in a precinct in Brooklyn that led the city in homicides last year, the police said yesterday.
The guns-for-gifts program is to start at 10 A.M. in the 75th Precinct station house at 1000 Sutter Avenue in the East New York section, said Officer Peter Friscia, a police spokesman.
According to unofficial Police Department statistics, the 75th Precinct led the city in homicides in 1993 with 126.


Soweto Journal; De Klerk's New Weapon: 'Spears' of Black Revolt
The three grew up together in Nelson Mandela's neighborhood of Soweto.
Together in 1976, the year a student uprising electrified this black township on the outskirts of Johannesburg, they smuggled themselves out of the country and trained as guerrillas against the white Government.
"I swore that I was going to fight and bring my people out of their injustice," recalled Joshua Nxumalo, who abandoned his job as a novice traffic policeman to train as a commando in the African National Congress underground army, Spear of the Nation.


Keenan Is Not Concerned By Sudden Ranger Slump
This didn't happen overnight, and Mike Keenan knows it.
The Rangers didn't wake up Saturday morning at a hotel in Montreal with a suddenly weak power play and a sluggish offense.
And the loss that night to the Canadiens, 3-2, at the Forum, really didn't come as that much of a surprise.
The Rangers are in a slump.
It is a small slump, not a big one -- two losses in a row, three in four games, four in the last eight.
New York still holds first place over all in the National Hockey League, it is still the team to beat, but beating them seems to have become somewhat easier over the last couple of weeks.


Review/Television; Returning to the Scene of a Vietnam Bloodletting
Tonight's edition of "Day One" is given to a retelling of a bloody 1965 battle between American and North Vietnamese troops in the Central Highlands of Vietnam.
Although "They Were Young and Brave" makes use of newsreels and recollections of both sides, the focus is on the experiences of a few American veterans of the Seventh Cavalry who returned last year to the place where 234 of their comrades and thousands of North Vietnamese died during the four-day battle.
If you are left with the feeling that their war stories have been told before, you're right.
Harold G. Moore, a retired general who commanded the American battalion as a lieutenant colonel, collaborated with a former war correspondent, Joseph L. Galloway, on a book about the battle, "We Were Soldiers Once . . . and Young" (HarperCollins ), and both men figure prominently in tonight's report.


World Economies


Clemente's Oldest Son the Keeper of the Flame
Henry Aaron, Babe Ruth, Willie Mays will forever be affiliated with home runs, Nolan Ryan, Cy Young, Sandy Koufax with power pitching.
Roberto Clemente, for all of his Hall of Fame credentials, will most certainly be remembered not only for his baseball prowess, but for the gifts he gave to mankind.


On Trail of Global Fraud: How Bank Case Unfolded
1972: A Pakistani banker, Aga Hassan Abedi, establishes B.C.C.I.
Its leading backers include Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan of Abu Dhabi.
March 4, 1991: The Federal Reserve Board accuses B.C.C.I. of secretly and illegally buying control of First American Bankshares, the largest bank holding company in Washington, and B.C.C.I. agrees to give up its stake.
The Bank of England retains Price Waterhouse to investigate B.C.C.I.


Fight in Urban Wilderness: Park or Campus?
On a hillside near this town on the edge of the San Fernando Valley, Dave Brown gazed across a vast, oak-studded meadow and envisioned a weekend paradise of park land for city dwellers.
Just below him, on the grounds of a sprawling ranch once owned by King Gillette, the razor magnate, Jeff Ourvan was busily pursuing his own dream of using the land for a expanded university campus with 3,400 students.
For nearly four years, the two visions have dueled in courtroom showdowns, high-powered lobbying efforts and expensive public relations campaigns.
It has become a battle for the heart of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area, one of the most ruggedly beautiful urban wilderness areas in the nation, yet also one of the most threatened.


A Languishing Morris Ready to Be Tested
Whatever happened to Chris Morris?
That's a question that even the 6-foot-8-inch small forward has been asking himself lately as he languishes on Chuck Daly's bench with more experience in a Nets uniform than any other player on the team's roster.


Mass Is Celebrated for the 125th Anniversary of New York Foundling Hospital


Order on Medicaid Abortions Surprised President
The Administration's plan to require Medicaid coverage of abortions in cases of rape or incest was disclosed before anyone had told President Clinton of the order, and he was furious at its premature disclosure, Administration officials said today.
After he was briefed on the policy, Mr.
Clinton raised no objections, the officials said.


An Artist's Proposal to Wrap The Reichstag in Fabric Gains
Leaders of the German Parliament may vote as early as this week on the artist Christo's application to wrap the Reichstag building in fabric, one of the leaders says.
Peter Struck, a leader of the opposition Social Democratic Party, told a television interviewer on Sunday that his party would press for a favorable vote at a meeting set for Thursday.


Jay Blackton, 84, Music Director Who Won Oscar for 'Oklahoma!'
Jay Blackton, who was the music director for a string of hit shows in the golden age of the Broadway musical and who won an Academy Award for scoring the 1955 film of "Oklahoma!," died on Saturday at Granada Hills Community Hospital in Granada Hills, Calif.
He was 84 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Louise.


Company Briefs
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Fairfield, Conn., said its Industrial and Power Systems unit had received an order worth nearly $35 million from the Carolina Power and Light Co., Raleigh, N.C., for nuclear power plant equipment.
KEYSTONE FINANCIAL INC., Harrisburg, Pa., said it had completed the acquisition of the outstanding stock of WM Bancorp, Cumberland, Md.


Cave Find Shows Man And Apes Coexisting
VIETNAMESE and American anthropologists have discovered a jumble of fossils pointing to the likelihood that early humans and a surprisingly large number of other primate species lived in close touch with each other 250,000 years ago.
The fossils, which include at least two previously unknown species, represent a period in human history long believed by many scientists to have coincided with a major decline in the diversity of hominoids, the primate group that includes apes as well as humans.
Human beings themselves were suspected of having played a role in this supposed decline by helping to drive other hominoids to extinction.


Whitewater: No Longer a G.O.P. Plot
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's call for a special prosecutor, now joined by several prominent Democratic colleagues, puts a hole in the White House's argument that the furor over President Clinton's Arkansas land dealings is nothing more than a Republican vendetta.
The senators seem not to have been swayed by the argument put forth by Vice President Al Gore and other designated White House damage controllers that a special prosecutor isn't necessary because there is no specific charge against the President and Mrs.
Clinton.


Yeltsin Extols 1921 Rebellion, Denouncing Its Repression by Lenin
In a report meant to strike a new blow at the memory of Lenin and to undermine latter-day Communists, President Boris N. Yeltsin today officially rehabilitated the victims of the deadly Bolshevik repression of the Kronstadt uprising of 1921.


A Smaller, Better World
Ask many Americans about their ancestors and you'll be told that their great-grandfather was one of seven and their great-grandmother the fifth of nine.
They themselves, however, will most likely be parents of two or three at most.
Why?
Because, like the residents of other industrialized countries, they know that smaller families mean bigger futures -- and are able to act on that knowledge.
Fortunately for them, and for an increasingly impoverished planet, much of the third world has arrived at the same conclusion.
As the demand for contraceptives rises, so the birth rate in countries like Thailand, Morocco and Bangladesh is dropping.


METRO DIGEST
HEALTH PLAN SEEN HURTING NEW YORKERS
In a sweeping critique of President Clinton's health plan, Governor Cuomo warned New York State employees that under the proposal they would generally have to pay more for less comprehensive benefits than they now have.
A14.


Pope Praises the Achievements of Italy's Old Guard
At the start of a decisive week, Pope John Paul II launched himself combatively today into Italy's muddied political debate, urging Italians to cleave to Christian values, eschew separatism and see some good in a political elite disgraced by Europe's worst corruption scandal.
The Pope's statement, in a letter to Italian bishops, came two days before a parliamentary vote of confidence in the reformist Government of Prime Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.
The vote is expected to lead to elections that will force new political lineups on a nation whose old guard has disintegrated, but whose newcomers are still sorting themselves out.


Beyond That Rainy Day
The raincoats that will provide protection from spring's showers are now trickling into the stores.
They offer new as well as tried-and-true ways to keep dry while looking cheerful on doleful days.
Many shine with a metallic glow.
Some have a graphic intensity with stripes so strong they seem to vibrate.
Others, in quietly classic shapes like the balmacaan, the trench coat or the bathrobe, function as all-purpose spring coats.


BE Aerospace Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Slain Heiress Buried as Some New Details Surface
As new details emerged about her mounting fears that her husband might attack her, Anne Scripps Douglas was remembered today as a dedicated mother at a funeral Mass here.
Four hundred mourners filled the nave of St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, where Mrs.
Douglas's body lay in a cherrywood coffin draped with a pall embroidered with gold.
The mourners saw one of her two daughters from a previous marriage, Anne Morell, step up to the pulpit while a cousin, Brooke Morell, read a brief letter the daughter had written but did not want to read herself.


Controversial Yet Convenient; Board to Vote on Condom Plan Today
Diallo Robinson, a senior at East New York High School of Transit Technology, is a regular customer of the school counseling room where condoms are free for the asking.
He finds it convenient to pick them up during lunch hour, and says, "I feel more comfortable getting them from somebody I know."
Mr.
Robinson is among the thousands of students in 126 New York City High Schools who, two years after the city became the first in the nation to distribute condoms on demand as a tactic against AIDS, have made it part of their routine to request condoms at school.
But the condom policy is about to change.


The Charade in Brussels
As far back as anyone remembers, the leaders attending NATO summit meetings have put on a display of Western unity, no matter how contentious the issues.
So we can confidently expect that at this week's meeting, the Clinton Administration's first, the allies will "resolve" differences and convey a sense of cohesion to the outside world.
But useful as such contrivances were during the cold war, when Moscow might have exploited differences in the alliance, the substitution of image making for policy making now threatens NATO itself.
A show of unity this week would come at a high cost: the almost certain failure to face the crucial issue confronting the alliance.


Review/Recital; Fassbaender in Program Of Wolf 'Morike' Songs
Twenty-five Hugo Wolf songs at a single sitting turned out to be not enough.
When "Der Feuerreiter" -- rumbling, frenetic, very nearly hysterical -- brought Brigitte Fassbaender's Alice Tully Hall program to a close on Sunday afternoon, one almost regretted there were not 25 more.
Wolf's piano style seems to reinvent itself from song to song.
Vocal lines ride the back of his poetic texts, rejecting reassuring symmetries and the calm predictability of strophic repetition.
Thus the second verse of "Das verlassene Magdlein" turns the music of the first verse almost upside down: new harmonic schemes, reworked melody shaped to accommodate the changing language.
Eric Sams writes in the New Grove Dictionary of Music that "Wolf's art is a means of framing, embodying, presenting, enacting the life of words." Not a bad description.


Prices of Treasury Issues Mixed
Prices of Treasury issues were mixed yesterday, as investors failed to follow through on last week's rally, which had been stimulated by a December jobs report that showed economic growth was easing.
The 30-year bond was down 10/32 , to 1004/32 , sending the yield up to 6.24 percent, from 6.22 percent on Friday.


Well, There Goes the Neighborhood
IN a way, the Schneiders are not entirely alone.
Along the Mongaup River's Rio Dam, just above their house, the eagles have landed.
And tourists, hoping to glimpse the majestic birds, are coming around.
Some end up at the Schneiders' door, lost.


Books of The Times; An Eastern Visitor in London's Impolite Clutches
The Man From Japan  By Clive James  173 pages. Random House. $20.
Michael Crichton, the author of the sensationalistic potboiler "Rising Sun," is hardly alone in his interest in Japan.
In fact, as Japan has assumed an increasingly high-profile role in the world of trade and economics, the Land of the Rising Sun has become a ferocious magnet for Western novelists.
Brad Leithauser ("Equal Distance"), Jay McInerney ("Ransom") and John Burnham Schwartz ("Bicycle Days") have all portrayed young Americans coming of age in Japan, while T. Coraghessan Boyle ("East Is East") and Meg Pei ("Salaryman") have chronicled the adventures of young Japanese men abroad in the United States.
In each case, Eastern and Western customs, values and sensibilities are contrasted and compared; in each case, a hero's search for identity is played out in an alien land.


Nation of Islam Speech Creates Tensions at New Jersey College
To the Editor:
A Dec. 29 article describes well a speech given by Khalid Abdul Muhammad and its devastating aftermath at Kean College of New Jersey.
Kean has had the potential to promote an honest multicultural atmosphere and a curriculum that respects its diverse population.
Instead it has created a climate of racial tension and divisiveness among administrators, faculty members and students.


Chess
It is inevitable that the most distinctive weapon in a player's arsenal will usurp all the attention directed at him.
If devil-may-care attacking play is his forte, his games that illustrate this will be the ones that get published.
Yet some of his followers may finally begin to wonder what he does when he cannot brazenly walk a tightwire of attack.
Take Alexander Shabalov, United States co-champion for 1993.
Like everybody else, the 26-year-old Pittsburgh grandmaster is bound to take his turn with the black pieces every other game in the tournament.
And that means he must appear in the defender's role, despite his penchant for turbulent aggression.
When he faced the California grandmaster Larry Christiansen in Round 9 of the title tourney in Long Beach, Calif., on Dec. 12, he took the opportunity to show that he defends well, too.


Tip O'Neill, Longtime House Speaker, Is Buried


Thomas Is Named To Dream Team II
ISIAH THOMAS was named yesterday to the United States squad that will compete in this summer's world championships in Toronto and is expected to be the core of the American team for the 1996 Atlanta Games.
USA Basketball announced yesterday Thomas would replace TIM HARDAWAY, the Golden State guard who tore a knee ligament in October.


49ers' Defense Showing Made-for-Hampton Tag
The San Francisco 49ers did not have a bye last week; they had training camp.
Quarantined for four days, the offense was re-taught how to pick up the blitz, the defense was re-taught how to tackle and Coach George Seifert publicly called the team "pathetic."
If that slap on the wrist wasn't enough, the 49ers learned Saturday that the Giants are up next.
It is their worst possible scenario.
If Houston's Gary Brown and Philadelphia's Herschel Walker enjoyed San Francisco's arm tackles over the holidays, wait until Rodney Hampton sees them.


Health Plan Rift
In a critique of President Clinton's health care plan, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has told New York State employees that under the proposal they would generally have to pay more for less comprehensive benefits than they now have.
In a letter being distributed this month to all state employees, Mr.
Cuomo says the Clinton plan would dismantle an excellent insurance program that covers more than one million New Yorkers.
Article, page A14.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Leo Gomez, third baseman, on a one-year contract.


Correction
An article yesterday about President Clinton and Russia misidentified the author, Peter Reddaway, in some editions.
He is professor of political science at George Washington University.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  NUCLEAR ACCORD WITH UKRAINE  President Clinton announced in Brussels that the United States, Russia and Ukraine had agreed on the destruction of Ukraine's entire nuclear arsenal: 175 long-range missiles and over 1,800 warheads.
A1


In NATO Talks, Bosnia Sets Off A Sharp Debate
The NATO summit meeting opened today with continuing tensions over Bosnia -- mostly between France and the United States -- that competed for attention with the signing of a document opening the alliance's doors to the countries of Eastern Europe.
President Francois Mitterrand called on the allies to reinforce United Nations peacekeeping troops in the former Yugoslav republics.
French commanders, who lead the largest United Nations contingent in Bosnia and Herzegovina, have also chafed at the reluctance of the allies to use air power to stop the shelling of Sarajevo.


Prudential Settlement Complicated
Allegations of fraud against the accountants in a series of limited partnerships sold by Prudential Securities are raising questions about the future of a $120 million class-action settlement reached with the firm over those partnerships, lawyers said yesterday.
But even if the settlement survives unscathed, lawyers said, the allegations, contained in a civil suit, could drag the accounting firms, Arthur Andersen &amp; Company and Deloitte &amp; Touche, into some of the thousands of pieces of litigation the Prudential fraud scandal.


THE NATO SUMMIT: Reporter's Notebook; Clinton Sizes Up Team: Summit, Yes; Sumo, No
Weighty matters were on the mind of President William J. Clinton (for so the President is being called on his European trip) this morning as he entered the meeting room where he and other leaders of the alliance were to discuss partnership with countries that used to be Communist, the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and so on.
So he approached Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, a man who carries more weight than any other European leader these days.
"I was thinking of you last night, Helmut, because I watched the sumo wrestling on television," the President told the puzzled Chancellor.


Waiting for an Electronic Safe-Deposit Box
THE hard disk drive in my subnotebook computer is about the size of a deck of playing cards.
It is a marvel of miniaturization, with delicate mechanisms that would impress a Swiss watchmaker.
It can store more than 200 megabytes of information.
The tiny hard disk holds my entire office and a large chunk of my personal life.
My calendar is in it, my contact and telephone lists, all my programs and files, my journal, my links to other computer networks, even my color Quicktime videos of the kids.


Corrections
An obituary on Jan. 9 about Andrei Sedych, a Russian-American journalist who edited the New York daily newspaper Novoye Ruskoye Slovo, mistranslated its name.
It is New Russian Word, not World.


Investors Seem to Favor Offer From QVC
Wall Street appears to believe that QVC Network Inc. will win the bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc., judging by how the stocks of the companies involved in the deal performed yesterday.
On Friday, Viacom Inc. raised the cash portion of its bid for Paramount to $105 a share for 50.1 percent of the company, topping QVC's cash offer of $92 a share for 51 percent.
Still, many stock traders were not pleased with Viacom's new offer.
They argued that when investors included the stock portion of each offer, QVC's total bid was still higher than Viacom's.


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article on Dec. 21 about holiday performances of Handel's "Messiah" misstated the given name of the tenor soloist in a performance at St.
Thomas Church in Manhattan on Dec. 14.
He was Gregory Carder, not Philip.


A Gene Named Sonic
NAMING the varieties of hedgehog genes, which play a key role in embryo development, has been a source of friction among research teams.
One group wanted to give the varieties numbers, another letters.
Dr.
Clifford J. Tabin, a developmental biologist at Harvard Medical School, suggested they name each newly detected gene after a species of real hedgehog.
This scheme stuck for the first three genes, which were designated Indian hedgehog, moonrat hedgehog and desert hedgehog.
But when Dr.
Robert Riddle, a postdoctoral fellow working in Dr.
Tabin's lab, detected what proved to be the most fascinating hedgehog gene of all, he rebeled against the system and decided to call the gene Sonic hedgehog, after a character in a Sega computer game.


Cold War Chill Lingers Downwind From a Nuclear Bomb-Testing Site
In a 1955 Government brochure distributed to people living near the nuclear weapon test site in the Nevada desert, an official greeted readers by telling them, "You are in a very real sense active participants in the nation's atomic test program."
That part of the program, atmospheric testing, ended in 1963.
Yet many who still live in the area consider themselves as "active" as ever, victims of the cold war and survivors of decades of disease and death that they are certain were caused by exposure to radioactive fallout.


McCormick &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Trying To Keep A Lid On Ryan
Buddy Ryan was called on the carpet yesterday -- again -- by Houston Oiler management that wished its defensive coordinator would end his tirades against Kevin Gilbride, the offensive coordinator.
As the Oilers started preparations for Sunday's playoff game against the Kansas City Chiefs in Houston, Ryan, by order of the owner, Bud Adams, met with General Manager Mike Holovak.
Head Coach Jack Pardee was there, too.


New Approach to Museum-Show Design
For most Americans, Motown means an infectious beat and great rhythm-and-blues singing.
That's the Motown story: one hit after another coming out of Berry Gordy's talent factory.
Ralph Appelbaum sees it a little differently.
"Clearly there's the story of Berry Gordy," he says.
"But there's also the story of Detroit, which was a terminal of the Underground Railway and of the northern migration in the 20th century."


Observer; Man Here Took the Bait
Several months ago the authorities at the Mark Twain house in Hartford, Conn., asked if I would come and make a speech.
I said yes. What would you have said?


2 Ways to Make Your Case Quickly
WITH presentation graphics programs, business people create reports and charts to be shown as computer displays like color slides, or as printouts or actual slides.
Major programs feature numerous options for those who have the time and inclination to master them, but also offer quick ways to work.
I tried four popular programs, two for Microsoft Windows and two for the Macintosh, hardly looked at the manuals, and created four charts in spare moments.
This is a summary of the Windows experience.
Harvard Graphics
With Harvard Graphics 2.0 for Windows, start by selecting the New Presentation option.
That leads to several steps.
First, you pick the style.
There are 12 basic styles -- title, bullet, pie, organization chart and others -- that add up to 31 with all their variations, plus a custom template to design your own.
I decided to make an organization chart and was offered four variations: a two-dimensional vertical box, a three-dimensional vertical box, and two-dimensional and three-dimensional horizontal boxes.
Next, there was a form to fill out, one that varies according to the earlier selection.


Bridge
For players in the New York metropolitan area, the tournament year always begins with the Tri-State Regional Championships at the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y.
This year, for the first time, it will last a full week.
This is the schedule of major events:
Today, Flighted Knockout Teams 8 P.M. and continues.


Classical Music in Review
Marina Piccinini and William Wolfram  Flutist and Pianist Kaye Playhouse
Finding substantial recital repertory for the flute is not always that easy, yet one could think of no more interesting program or more interesting musicians to play it than the one offered by Marina Piccinini and William Wolfram on Friday evening.
This flute and piano concert was part of the New Soloists Six O'Clock series, which is free to the public.


50 Million Smokers Say, 'Give Us a Break'
To the Editor:
"Smoke Rises" (editorial, Dec. 27) is superior and self-righteous in tone, for example, referring to "Americans who can't get through a conversation or a coffee break without a cigarette" and wishing that smokers would "keep their lethal habit to themselves."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A start-up airline doesn't promise the world, only a somewhat reduced level of aggravation.
IT may still take a few minutes short of forever to get through its computerized switchboard to a real person, but Ultrair has nevertheless taken a step toward truth in airline advertising with a campaign that bills the start-up carrier as "the least annoying airline."
Whether it fulfills that promise is for its passengers to say.
But if nothing else, the $3 million campaign by Romann &amp; Tannenholz Advertising of New York at least acknowledges that flying is, more often than not, annoying.


Blast Jury Sees Defendant's Items, in Detail
In the wake of the World Trade Center bombing, F.B.I. agents mounted searches of two apartments in Jersey City where one suspect, Mohammed A. Salameh, lived at different times in the months before the explosion took place.
Yesterday, as the trial of Mr.
Salameh and three other defendants accused of the bombing entered its 17th week, agents took the stand to show the jury what they found.
It was a diverse and sometimes puzzling haul of evidence, the exact meaning of which might have to await the lawyers' summations, when courtroom procedure will allow the prosecutors to give their theory as to how each piece of evidence fits into the larger pattern.


New Phase For Inquiry On B.C.C.I.
A joint team of investigators from the Justice Department, the Federal Reserve Board and the Manhattan District Attorney's office will go to Abu Dhabi next week to begin the next stage of their investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan said yesterday.
The trip is one result of a settlement reached last week and announced on Sunday between American prosecutors and Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan, the ruler of Abu Dhabi who had been the largest shareholder of B.C.C.I.


Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Colman J. Barry, 72, Priest Who Directed St. John's in Midwest
The Rev.
Colman J. Barry, a priest who was the former president of St.
John's University in Collegeville, Minn., and the historian of the first century of the university, died on Friday at the St.
Raphael's Retirement Center at St.
John's.
He was 72.
The cause was cancer, the university said.


Review/Theater: Stitches; Of Stardom and a Tyranny of Images
In "Stitches," the corrosively funny, if overextended, comedy by the brother-and-sister team of David and Amy Sedaris at La Mama E.T.C., irony doesn't take the form of a wink but of a steady, wide-eyed gaze that flattens everything to the absurd dimensions of a macabre animated cartoon.
The story of a pretty, popular high-school girl who becomes a television star after her face is mutilated by the propeller of a power boat, "Stitches" portrays an America in which life is a series of media-conditioned reflexes.
Actually, the play itself feels like the product of minds shaped by an unceasing stream of disjunctive images -- from old movie melodramas, perky sitcoms, hypnotic commercials and gritty tabloid news shows -- given bizarrely equal weight by the small screen that disseminates them.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Magic Whips Rockets  Shaquille O'Neal and Anfernee Hardaway scored 28 points apiece, and the Orlando Magic used a 13-0 fourth-quarter run to break open a close game and defeat the Houston Rockets, 115-100, last night in Orlando, Fla.
Orlando outscored Houston by 17-4 in the first eight minutes of the final period, and became just the fifth team in 30 games to shoot at least 50 percent against the Rockets.
O'Neal made 13 of 19 shots, grabbed 7 rebounds and blocked 1 shot.
Houston's Hakeem Olajuwon had 26 points, 11 rebounds and 5 blocks.
Tree Rollins, an Orlando assistant who was activated earlier in the day, played 8 minutes and had 2 points, 2 rebounds, 1 steal and 1 blocked shot. (AP) 76ers 99, Celtics 94: Jeff Hornacek had 31 points and 10 rebounds as the 76ers overcame slumping Boston in Philadelphia. (AP)


The Ice Palace
New York has so much of everything -- so many subways, skyscrapers, races, creeds, controversies, pizzerias, bodegas and dim sum parlors -- that it is only right that it has so much weather.
Only a few summers ago the temperature and humidity were, for forty days and nights, comparable to those along the Amazon; several recent Aprils have featured snowstorms; and no year goes by without threat either of drought or downpour.
So of course New York is now an ice palace.
It's just putting on another face, that's all.
This face, however, is especially seductive, so much so that it defeats common sense.
Wisdom dictates that one stay inside with the couch, the radiator and the television set -- but wisdom hasn't got a chance against a closer look at a crystalline city.
On Sunday morning, once-naked trees were sheathed in glitter, evergreens wore spangles and eaves dripped stalactites.


Economist Is Said to Be Favorite for Fed Position
Three of President Clinton's top economic policy aides are advising him to nominate George L. Perry, a Brookings Institution economist, to the seven-member Federal Reserve Board, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Perry, who has recommended caution in raising interest rates, would replace Wayne D. Angell, one of the board's most outspoken advocates of raising rates in response to early signs of inflation.
Mr.
Angell's term expires at the end of this month.


Electronic Journal Is Indexed
FOR the first time, the standard international index for papers published in medical journals, Index Medicus, will now include reports published electronically.
The first electronic journal to be indexed is The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials, started 18 months ago to speed up news about life-saving drugs and treatments.
It is produced by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, which also publishes the journal Science, and the Online Computer Library Center Inc. of Dublin, Ohio.


People
*
Kathleen Hall, executive vice president and director of media and marketing services at Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, Providence, R.I., was promoted to partner and chief operating officer, succeeding Fran Kelly, who resigned to consider offers from two agencies based in Boston.
Edward Binder, senior vice president and account group director, was named to the additional new position of director of client services.


The Day the Rains Came to Australia


Dow Soars 44.74 and Hits 4th Straight Record Close
Stocks soared to yet another high yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average hitting its fourth consecutive record close.
The Dow jumped 44.74 points to close at 3,865.51, led by stocks of cyclical companies that benefit most in an expanding economy.
Already in 1994, the widely watched index of blue-chip stocks has advanced 3 percent.
Trading continued to be heavy, with 319.4 million shares changing hands on the New York Stock Exchange, thus exceeding 300 million shares for the fifth straight session.


Study Backs Safety of Whooping Cough Vaccine
IN a new study that may help diminish a longstanding dispute about the safety of the standard vaccine against whooping cough, researchers have found that the vaccine does not lead to increased risk of serious neurological illness.
The federally financed study, the largest of its kind in the United States, involved 218,000 children up to 24 months old in Oregon and Washington who were studied for a one-year period, beginning Aug. 1, 1987.


CHRONICLE
Since it began publishing three months ago, the weekly newspaper Her New York (which was a daily for its first three weeks) has become known for the tumultuousness of its staff changes.
By early last week, five women had occupied the editor in chief's office at the newspaper, which was started by the publisher Steven Hoffenberg to cater to working women.


Staff Builders (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Rice Against Collins: A Magnificent Matchup
Jerry Rice, the best receiver in football, knows all about Giants cornerback Mark Collins.
He has the utmost respect for him and isn't going to be fooled into thinking that because Collins has two sprained knees he'll be able to take advantage of the injuries.
"He's very physical," Rice said of Collins.
"Well coached. Doesn't really blow assignments. He's been around for eight years and he's a great defensive back.


In an Era of Change, Polish Film Industry Struggles to Stay Vital
At a recent conference in France on the future of European film, the Polish director Krzysztof Zanussi took a pessimistic line.
Freedom, he said worriedly, had proven a very mixed blessing for the Polish film industry: protective barriers had been lowered and Hollywood had conquered all.
"Before, we were dominated by the Russians," he said.
"Now, it's the Americans."
With an inflation rate of 35 percent and steady devaluation of the zloty, with a worldwide recession and uncertain experience in developing private enterprises, the Polish film industry might indeed seem in trouble.
Its best-known directors -- Mr.
Zanussi, Krzysztof Kieslowski, Agnieska Holland and Andrzej Wajda -- either lie low or work abroad.
In 1993, the 10 most popular films in Poland were American.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about a trustee of the New York Public Library who died on Saturday misspelled her first name in some copies.
She was Sonny Sloan, not Sunny.


Kerrigan May Be Back On Skates Within Days
Nancy Kerrigan should begin skating again within a week after a magnetic resonance imaging test on her injured right knee yesterday showed no damage to the kneecap or ligaments, the doctor who examined Kerrigan said.
"We are optimistic," Dr.
Mahlon Bradley, who examined Kerrigan in Peabody, Mass., said in a statement.
"The swelling in the knee has stabilized and there is an improved range of motion, although the quadricep muscle is still weak. She has a 75-degree range of motion right now. That is double the range she had at my last examination, 24 hours ago."


Volt Information Sciences Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Dec. 23 with an article about classical-music radio misstated the revenues generated by classical broadcasts in Houston.
The annual revenues of KRTS-FM and KRTK-FM, which carry identical programming on separate frequencies, are estimated below $1 million, not below $100,000 (the stations do not disclose their revenues).


Crowd of 1,700 Attends O'Neill Funeral
Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., a bread-and-butter Democrat who told his granddaughter that the Sermon on the Mount was "the greatest political speech ever written," was mourned at a funeral Mass today by ordinary neighbors from Cambridge and grand associates from Washington.
Seventeen hundred people attended the service at St.
John the Evangelist Church.
Among them were Vice President Al Gore, former Presidents Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter and more than 100 present and former members of Congress, including Mr.
O'Neill's two successors as Presiding Officer of the House, former Speaker Jim Wright and the current Speaker, Thomas S. Foley.


Stocks Fall After Blasts In Mexico
In its first trading session since several powerful bombs shook Mexico City and signaled a possible expansion of the violence in the southern part of the country, the Mexican stock exchange recorded its biggest one-day loss in six years today, dropping 166 points, or 6.32 percent.
The exchange, the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores, ended the day at 2,459.11.


Yanks: Bandages, Not Bats
The controversy over the mini-camp that cannot be a mini-camp took another spin yesterday when the Yankees insisted that they never intended to conduct organized workouts with players they had invited to Tampa, Fla., this week.
The Yankees maintain the invitations were solely for monitoring injuries.
After the invitations were extended to about 10 players off their 40-man roster, the Yankees were informed by the Player Relations Committee that such a camp violated the collective-bargaining agreement.


Retailers' Drive to Consolidate
If Federated Department Stores succeeds in merging with R. H. Macy &amp; Company, it would become the largest department store company in America -- but it would probably not hold the top spot for long.
Just as the number of major warehouse club operators has shrunk to two from five, some predict that by the end of the decade, the country will be populated with only three big department store operators and a smattering of niche players.


Promotions at Sony Music
Sony Music Entertainment Inc. announced several internal promotions of executives yesterday at its various record and entertainment divisions.
Mel Ilberman, president of Sony Music International since 1992, will become chairman of the division.
Mr.
Ilberman, 65, has been an executive at Polygram and RCA Records.


A Suspect in Summer Abduction of Girl
After months of searching the woods and cornfields outside Utica, N.Y., the New York State Police said yesterday that they had a prime suspect in the abduction of a 12-year-old girl who disappeared last summer on a mile-long bicycle ride between her home and the church where her father is a lay minister.
The suspect is a 43-year-old man who was arraigned yesterday in Pittsfield, Mass., in connection with the murder of a 12-year-old boy whose body was found near Ithaca, N.Y., in 1990.


Nation of Islam Speech Creates Tensions at New Jersey College; The Price of Freedom
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 29 article on the speech of Khalid Abdul Muhammad does not accurately explain the cause of divisiveness at Kean College.
The substance of your article is, I believe, from the view of my colleague and fellow psychologist Hank Kaplowitz, whom you quote: "The Kean campus has become a hotbed of anti-Semitism in recent years." This is not so.


Knicks Coming Up Short
The Knicks are hurting personnel wise.
The Los Angeles Clippers, their opponent, are not.
That is just about the only thing going for Mark Jackson's team coming into Madison Square Garden tonight.
The Clippers, who have lost 5 straight games and 9 of their last 11, won both meetings with the Knicks last season.
But tonight's game should provide a breather for a depleted New York squad that has three players on the injured list and will probably be without Anthony Mason.


2 Hospital Chains to Join; 2 H.M.O.'s Also Merging
Continuing a surge of consolidations in the face of growing market and political pressures on the price of health care, two of the country's largest investor-owned hospital chains and two big managed-care insurers announced separate merger agreements yesterday.
Healthtrust Inc. of Nashville, the nation's second-largest hospital chain, said it would acquire Epic Holdings Inc., based in Dallas, in a deal it valued at $1 billion in cash and assumed debt.


Ford Ousts Driver Who Praised Rival
The Ford Motor Company has dismissed a test driver who praised a pickup truck built by the Chrysler Corporation in a recent newspaper article.
Ford said the worker had a history of absences and was unwilling to work seven days a week.
The driver, Roland Davis, said he had worked for Ford from Jan. 19, 1993, until he was discharged on Wednesday, the first day he was asked to report to the test track since the article appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 21.


It's Auld Lang Syne For Giants And 49ers
They are, as Lawrence Taylor said, old friends.
The San Francisco 49ers and the New York Giants have gone against each other so many times in the post-season, it's as if the 49ers are in the Giants' division.
But they aren't the kind of friends who invite the other over for dinner to meet the family.
There is respect, but that's about it.
If the past is any indication, when the Giants and 49ers meet on Saturday at Candlestick Park in a National Football Conference playoff game, it will not only be an exciting game, but, based on what the winner has done in the past, it could mean a Super Bowl trip for the victor.


A Move to Michigan
MAKHTAR NDIAYE, declared ineligible to play basketball for Wake Forest University because of recruiting violations, signed a letter of intent with Michigan yesterday and will suit up for the Wolverines on Thursday against Ohio State.


Croats and Bosnians Battle
Bosnian Government forces attacked Croatian-held villages near Vitez today for the second consecutive day in an attempt to seize a key road, United Nations officials and local radio reports said.
After talks in Bonn today with President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia said on Sarajevo television that the Croats had rejected his proposal for the complete withdrawal of Croatian forces from Vitez and nearby Busovaca in exchange for a pledge to keep the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Army out of the two towns.


Oberhof Shows Lugers Its Positive Side
Once again, Duncan Kennedy found himself surrounded in this quiet, thickly forested town.
Only this time, the group of Germans hemming him in wanted nothing to do with Nazi power, racial slurs or swift kicks to the ribs.
Nineteen fourth-graders and their accordion-wielding teacher descended today on the finish line of Oberhof's luge run to serenade the American Olympian to the strains of "Rennsteig," the anthem of the German State of Thuringia, and "Happy Birthday" (so what if Kennedy turned 26 in December).


From a Fortified Hilltop, A Clarion for Apartheid
Surrounded by two trenches, a fence topped with loops of razor wire, a four-foot wall of sand bags and a few men with guns, Johannes van der Walt cued an Olivia Newton-John record and prepared to read the news.
As usual here at Radio Pretoria, it was news from a parallel South Africa.


Supreme Court Roundup; Review Set on Medicare At University Hospitals
The Supreme Court agreed today to interpret a Federal policy aimed at curbing Medicare payments to hospitals affiliated with medical schools.
The policy is intended to prevent the hospitals from using the federally financed Medicare program to cover increased expenses of running graduate teaching programs for interns and residents.
Medicare provides health insurance for the elderly and disabled.
About $150 million in Medicare reimbursements are at stake in disputes between the Federal Government and some two-dozen teaching hospitals.


Helene Curtis Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


SOCCER
Deadline for Sites
FIFA has given the 24 finalists until Friday to decide on their training sites and hotel accommodations for the tournament.
Representatives from most nations have been searching feverishly in areas nearby the nine cities that will stage a monthlong tournament.
It appears that only two or three have made firm commitments on their choice of training sites and housing.
United States
After games this month against Norway, Switzerland and Russia, the Americans will join three other finalists -- Bolivia, Colombia and Sweden -- in a tournament at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami Feb. 18 and 20.
The tournament will consist of a doubleheader each day, with the Americans playing Bolivia on the first day and Sweden on the second.
The tournament will use the new point system adopted for the World Cup that calls for 3 points for a victory and 1 for a tie.
The team with the most points wins the tournament.
Claudio Reyna, who led Virginia to its third consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association championship, has joined the World Cup team along with Frank Klopas of AEK of the Greek First Division and Dario Brose, who played in the French Second Division.
He may play in Saturday's exhibition against Norway at Tempe, Ariz.
Reyna became the first player to capture the Missouri Athletic Club Sports Foundation award for the second year in a row as the outstanding player of the year.
The talented midfielder from Springfield, N.J., won the coveted award yesterday with almost twice as many votes as he did last year.
Through the Grapevine
Several of the 24 finalists are trying to schedule exhibition games before the tournament, which will start June 17 and end with the championship game July 17 in Los Angeles.
The United States, which will play its first-round games in Pontiac, Mich., and Pasadena, Calif., may play Greece at Giants Stadium in late May.
Italy may play a non-finalist -- probably Japan -- also at Giants Stadium around the time of the United States-Greece game.
Testimonial for Ukrainian
Romario of Brazil, Ronald Koeman of the Netherlands and Tom Brolin of Sweden are among several international stars who will play for a team against Sporting Lisbon in London tonight to honor Sergei Cherbakov, Sporting's injured Ukrainian star.
The 22-year-old Cherbakov is not likely to walk again after severely injuring his spine in a car crash in Lisbon on Dec. 5 following a dinner for Bobby Robson of England, Sporting's outgoing manager.
FIFA Seminar
Coaches and representatives from the 24 finalists will gather in New York Feb. 22-24 for a seminar conducted by FIFA.
"It will be a workshop type of thing," John Griffin, a spokesman for the United States Organizing Committee, said yesterday.
"We'll answer questions on how to do things before, during and after games." Ireland
About 20,000 Irish fans visiting the tournament will double as travel agents for the Emerald Isle.
The fans will be given T-shirts by the Irish tourism office to promote Ireland as a holiday destination for the millions of American citizens who claim Irish ancestry and others.
ALEX YANNIS


Doubts Ease on Protecting Ozone
A TEAM of atmospheric scientists has concluded from experiments and theoretical calculations that doubts about the ozone-friendliness of a group of compounds being substituted for ozone-destroying chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants are probably groundless.
The substitute compounds, called hydrofluorocarbons, or HFC's, have begun to replace chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants in some new air-conditioners and refrigerators.
Although HFC refrigerants do not work as well as the CFC refrigerants they are replacing, HFC's are generally regarded as harmless to atmospheric ozone.
Substitutes for CFC's
But doubts about the effects of hydrofluorocarbons on the ozone layer arose last March, when scientists at the University of Dublin suggested in a paper that molecular groups consisting of one carbon and three fluorine atoms -- groups formed by certain chemical processes involving HFC's -- might act as catalysts in destroying ozone.


Cuomo Says President's Health Plan Will Hurt New York Public Workers
In a sweeping critique of President Clinton's health plan, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has warned New York State employees that under the proposal they would generally have to pay more for less comprehensive benefits than they now have.
In a letter being distributed this month to all state employees, Mr.
Cuomo criticizes the Clinton plan, saying it would dismantle an excellent insurance program in New York that covers more than one million state and local government workers and their dependents.


UKRAINE GIVES IN ON SURRENDERING ITS NUCLEAR ARMS
President Clinton announced tonight that the United States, Russia and Ukraine had reached an agreement for the destruction of Ukraine's entire nuclear arsenal, 175 long-range missiles and more than 1,800 warheads.
He described the deal as "a hopeful and historic breakthrough" that would not only benefit the three signers but enhance world security.
If it takes effect -- and questions lingered tonight about important details of ratification and timing -- the agreement would mean that all three of the non-Russian republics left with nuclear weapons at the breakup of the Soviet Union would have undertaken to surrender them voluntarily.
Kazakhstan and Belarus, the other two countries, agreed last year to give up their warheads.
Accidents Feared
Ukraine was the most difficult case, and the negotiations on the deal continued by telephone through this morning.
Their success, Administration officials hoped, would help to reduce tensions between Moscow and Kiev, shore up the tottering Ukrainian economy and stabilize a shaky region.


Barge in Oil Spill Was Barred by New York
The barge that fouled San Juan with oil is one of 19 expelled from New York State waters nearly three years ago because of pollution violations by the owners, the Frank family of New York and New Jersey.
The family is still active in an on-shore oil business in New Jersey, but that state is trying to force it to shut down operations.
The Franks face $5 million in fines from New Jersey, and the state has entered the bankruptcy proceedings of one of their major enterprises, the Standard Tank Company, arguing that it should be dissolved, not re-organized, the state environmental prosecutor said yesterday.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the addition of dyes to diesel fuel reversed the identifying colors for two types.
Fuel high in sulfur and sold for uses off the road is blue; fuel low in sulfur and sold largely for tax-exempt highway uses is red.


20-Odd Years Later, Captain Is Removed
John McEnroe calls them the bluecoats, a buttoned-down fraternity that uses tennis for its vicarious thrills.
Andre Agassi says they're more worried about posing for banquet photo opportunities with Davis Cup players than supporting their matches.
The elite hierarchy of retired and semiretired business executives atop the United States Tennis Association's masthead have long weathered charges of promoting themselves, not the game.
Now they may be heading to court after allegedly having the hubris to rewrite Davis Cup history.


U.N. Sanctions Against Haiti Are Hampering Relief Efforts
The embargo on fuel and military supplies imposed on Haiti by the United Nations Security Council in October has prevented international relief agencies from delivering vital supplies of food and medicine to the poor in many outlying rural areas.
Worsening conditions among the poor can be seen in drought-stricken parts of the country like this hamlet in northwest Haiti.


SUBWAY PLAN ASKS RIDERS NOT TO GIVE MONEY TO BEGGARS
Citing riders' complaints about subway panhandlers, Transit Authority officials yesterday announced a new crackdown featuring a public-relations campaign that asks straphangers to help drive beggars out of the trains by refusing to give them money.
"We think it's largely a supply-and-demand issue," the Transit Authority president, Alan F. Kiepper, said at a news conference.
"If people stop giving in subways," he said, panhandlers will "go elsewhere and get treatment" or the other social services they need.


A Plea to Reno For Prosecution On Crown Hts.
Brooklyn District Attorney Charles J. Hynes pleaded with Attorney General Janet Reno today to make an exception to a longstanding Justice Department policy and quickly bring Federal civil rights charges against two men for the killing of a rabbinical student more than two years ago during the unrest in Crown Heights.
Mr.
Hynes's appeal, delivered in Ms.
Reno's office here, was the latest turn in the complex maneuvering over who should handle the politically difficult Crown Heights case.


Our Irrational Pastime: Division Setup Still Not Set Up
Less than three months before the start of the season, major league clubs and players still don't know if they will compete in two divisions in each league or three.
A negotiating session between labor representatives of the two sides yesterday produced slight movement but no agreement on divisional alignment and a proposed extra playoff round.


Strawberry Is Healthy
DARRYL STRAWBERRY attended the first winter workout of the Dodgers yesterday and said his chronic bad back was 100 percent.
"I've finally reached that point now where I'm healthy," he said before the workout at Dodger Stadium.
"It's been a long time since I've been able to walk out on the baseball field and feel good about myself coming into the season."


No Headline
"It's frightening that we have the M.T.A. telling people not to reach out a helping hand to people, especially in the winter. What they're doing now is trying to appeal to the ridership to turn their backs." -- DAVID GIFFEN, an advocate for the homeless.  [ B2:5. ]


Nation of Islam Speech Creates Tensions at New Jersey College; Rights Only for Some
To the Editor:
Elsa Gomez, Kean College president, makes a mockery of the First Amendment when she defends the Nation of Islam's Khalid Abdul Muhammad (news article, Dec. 29).
While the Constitution guarantees him the right to speak, however odious, it does not guarantee the right to use any particular college campus as a forum.
While Mr.
Muhammad's rights are safe at Kean, Jewish students were kept from picketing the theater.
DARYL R. ALTMAN  Lynbrook, L.I., Dec. 29, 1993


Charles (Chub) Feeney, 72, Dies; Ex-President of National League
Charles S. (Chub) Feeney, the high-spirited baseball executive who helped guide his family's Giants to two National League pennants in New York and one in San Francisco before spending 17 years as the league's president, died yesterday at California Pacific Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 72.
Mr.
Feeney, who had been admitted to the hospital a week ago after suffering a heart attack, died after a second attack, the hospital said.


Biologists Find Key Genes That Shape Patterning of Embryos
RARE indeed are the scientific findings that make jaws drop and spirits do cartwheels.
But the discovery of a class of genes, given the cheeky name hedgehog, has aroused the passions of developmental biologists so vigorously that their normal reserve and skepticism have dissolved, leaving them groping for ever-stronger ways to express the beauty and consequence of what has been divulged.
Three teams of scientists report in the current issue of the journal Cell that they have finally unearthed what developmental scientists have been seeking for the last 25 years, as they studied the implausibly complex sequence of events that allow a single cell, the fertilized egg, to effloresce into a complete animal.
They have identified the genes that act on the early embryo to lend it shape and pattern, transforming a nondescript comma of tissue into a vertebrate animal, with limbs and digits, brain and spinal cord, the body shape set from head to heel.


The Unfair Immigration Burden
A handful of states have been inundated by illegal immigrants and are unfairly bearing the costs that should be borne by the entire nation.
They deserve a helping hand when President Clinton submits his budget to Congress next month.
Only a few states -- California, Texas, Illinois, Florida, New York and New Jersey -- account for the vast majority of the estimated five million illegal, often poor immigrants who have entered the U.S. over the last decade.
California alone may account for half.
Cities like Los Angeles and New York have been pounded by costs associated with new immigrants.


Market Place; Aiwa weathers the recession with a tight focus and some luck.
EVEN in one of the hardest-hit sectors of hard-hit Japan, it is possible for a company with the right strategy, and a little luck, to grow and prosper.
That is the lesson provided by Aiwa, a manufacturer of audio equipment that has been a star performer among Japan's battered consumer electronics companies.
Its stock, traded on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, has outpaced the pack, doubling in price from a low of 950 yen last March to its close of 1,950 yen yesterday.


Classical Music in Review
Russian Chamber Chorus of New York  Christ and St. Stephen's Church
The sacred choral works of Tchaikovsky and Rachmaninoff are a singularly compelling presence amid the crowded galleries of Russian late-Romanticism.
If an idiosyncratic point of view might be permitted, I've always found more pleasure in pieces like Tchaikovsky's "Vespers" and Rachmaninoff's "Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom" than in the "Pathetique" or the Symphonic Dances.
Russian Orthodoxy cast a salutary spell on both composers; butterfly-mounted melodies, salon-tinged harmonizations and clattering transition passages yielded to an anonymous, seamless style in which Romantic melody found its epiphany as ancient chant.


Review/Dance; Urban Artworks, the Sequel
The second program of Urban Artworks, an ambitious festival of dance by new and familiar choreographers, got off to a fine start on Sunday afternoon at the Pace Downtown Theater.
The opening dance was "Better Left Unsaid," a recent work choreographed by Mary Bruce Blackburn and performed by her American Dance Ensemble company.
The piece, set to a score by Peter Jones, sent five young women boiling and tumbling through empty space and interlocking like puzzle pieces with one another's bodies.
The dance needed tightening.
But Ms.
Blackburn created an undercurrent of serene and troubled emotions to go with the dance's resilient physicality.
The performers, all compelling, were Jennifer Binford, Merceditias Manago, Amy Prensky, Wendy Samuels and Katrina Thompson.
"Come and Go," a carefully structured duet in which a man and a woman eventually draw close, hasn't gotten any livelier since it was presented last year in Dance Theater Workshop's Fresh Tracks series.
And Gloria McLean and Laurie De Vito have each done better work than the dances representing them here: Ms.
McLean's "Gods Are in the Floor," which she danced with her company, and Ms.
De Vito's "Last Breath of Memory" and "That Good Night," performed by her She-Bops and Scats company, led by Jana Hicks and Joni Weaver.


Donald Smiley, 78; Was Chief Executive Of R.H. Macy &amp; Co.
Donald B. Smiley, an Iowa storekeeper's son who retired as chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company in 1980 after 35 years, died on Sunday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 78 and a resident of Greenwich.
He had a stroke, his family said.


Session Ends In New Jersey, Vetoes Intact
The Republican-controlled Legislature failed today to override Gov.
Jim Florio's vetoes of bills that would have raised fuel taxes to pay for upgrading thousands of underground storage tanks and that required schools to stress sexual abstinence in family-life courses.
For backers of both bills the last voting session of the 205th Legislature was a blend of elation and dejection.
After the State Assembly voted to override the Governor on both bills, the Senate attempts foundered when Democrats refused to provide any votes.
The Senate Republican majority has only 27 members, the minimum needed for an override, and two were absent from the session.


Human Guinea Pigs Are American as Apple Pie; How Much Is Safe?
To the Editor:
A Jan. 1 front-page article reports that some scientists urge suspension of judgment on the disclosures of radiation tests using human subjects in the decades after World War II.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
St. Joseph's
Any team from, or playing in, Pennsylvania this past weekend had to deal with snow or ice that was dumped over the state.
But the experience of St.
Joseph's was something out of "Planes, Trains and Automobiles".


An Inflation Index Is Said to Overstate the Case
Researchers at the Bureau of Labor Statistics believe that its Consumer Price Index overstates annual inflation by up to six-tenths of a percentage point, a finding with implications for policy makers and the public.
The index showing December results is scheduled to be issued on Thursday.
For the latest 12 months, the rise in the index was reported at 2.7 percent, but the researchers say it actually rose by only 2.1 percent, meaning that inflation, for a variety of reasons, is being overstated by about one-fourth.
The same phenomenon is showing up, they say, in many other developed countries.


Mayor's Remark About Weather Offends Advocates for Homeless
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani appeared to make a joke yesterday while answering a reporter's question about what the city was doing to help the homeless in the cold weather, and some advocates for homeless people immediately criticized the remark as insensitive.
When the Mayor was asked at a news conference what the city was doing to accommodate homeless New Yorkers during the current freezing spell, he responded: "Well, we're working on warmer weather. Seeing if we can create some warmer weather. The Commissioner of Sanitation and the Department of Environmental Protection is trying to heat the entire city."


Husband Tells of Mutilation as Wife's Trial Starts
John W. Bobbitt testified in graphic detail today about how his wife cut off his penis as he slept.
But Lorena L. Bobbitt's lawyers said she was striking back after a marriage to her dream marine turned into "a reign of terror" with repeated rapes and beatings.
"The evidence will show that at the time of the event in question, at the time that Lorena Bobbitt cut off her husband's penis, that Lorena Bobbitt was a battered woman in the classic sense," Mrs.
Bobbitt's lawyer, Lisa B. Kemler, told jurors on the opening day of trial.
"Lorena Bobbitt believed she had no real means of escape."


Weekend of 'Quality Time' for Pentagon Officials
Call it a case of New Age management meeting the Defense Department.
Sixty senior and middle-level Pentagon officials quietly repaired to a former Roman Catholic convent in suburban Maryland last weekend.
At issue was not Bosnia, Somalia or the fate of NATO in the post-cold-war world.
Rather, these officials were chewing over the mundane but important financial and personnel workings of the Pentagon that consume the attention of most of its workers and most of its $262 billion annual budget.


8 Police Officers Hurt in Clash at Harlem Mosque
New York City's new Police Commissioner ordered an inquiry yesterday into the Police Department's handling of a confrontation between the police and members of a Harlem mosque in which eight officers were injured and one officer's gun was taken away.
Commissioner William J. Bratton said the internal investigation would examine the unorthodox way the episode concluded, why no one was arrested and why the officers, who were responding to a report of an armed robbery at the mosque, were not told that it was a "sensitive location," a designation intended to help prevent confrontations.


One Jury Tells Judge It Is Deadlocked in Murder Trial of Brothers
A jury in its 16th day of deliberating murder charges against Erik Menendez said today it was deadlocked, but a judge sent the jurors back to see if they could break their impasse.
Meanwhile, a separate jury in its 18th day of deliberating murder charges against Erik's brother, Lyle Menendez, indicated that it, too, was having difficulties.
It asked to hear again more than 400 pages of testimony that described the day of the killings.


Attorney General Addresses King Holiday Commission


It's Official Now: Rangers Are in a Slump
Mike Keenan didn't rant or rave or even act unhappy.
Mark Messier was calm and philosophical.
No one threw a stick or punched a locker or did anything to indicate that all is not perfect in the Rangers' world at this time.
But you can make it official: the Rangers are slumping.
They're playing sloppy hockey, soft hockey, and, at times, downright ugly hockey.
Last night provided a perfect example.


Part of Ameritech Account in Review
The Ameritech Corporation, the Midwest regional Baby Bell telephone company, said yesterday that it had placed in review the creative portion of its consumer telephone services account, which has been handled by Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago since 1989.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $50 million.


Patterns
Embracing What Works
The elements that seemed to be keeping fashion afloat through the last few years -- supermodels, basics, life-style marketing -- are now being cast as this era's villains.


Accounts
*
Pacific Link Communications Ltd., Hong Kong, to Bozell Hong Kong, to handle the mobile telephone producer and distributor's account, previously at J. Walter Thompson Hong Kong.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


New Russia Parliament: More of Same Expected
Three months after Russia's last Parliament came to a violent end, a newly elected Federal Assembly starts work on Tuesday amid signs that it, too, will become mired in confrontation and political grandstanding.
With its two chambers housed in separate buildings, even the opening-day ceremonies will take place on a divided note.
President Boris N. Yeltsin is to give a brief welcoming address to the Federation Council, or upper house, while Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin is to speak to the lower chamber, or State Duma, across town.


INSIDE
New Phase in Bank Inquiry
Federal and New York investigators will travel to Abu Dhabi to begin the next stage in the inquiry of the B.C.C.I. scandal.
Page D1.
Outrage Over Atomic Tests
People who lived near a Nevada nuclear test site remain angry at the Government despite the new openness on radiation tests.
Page A12.
Inquiry Into Mosque Incident
New York's new Police Commissioner ordered an inquiry into a confrontation between the police and members of a Harlem mosque.
Page B1.
Clue to Embryology
A newly discovered class of genes, given the name of hedgehog, are an important factor in early cell development.
Science Times, page C1.
Afrikaners' Radio Is Barred
The South African Government refused to renew the license for Radio Pretoria, setting the stage for a showdown with white militants.
Page A6.


Sports of The Times; The Giant Who Makes 'Em Miss
ON the game films that the Giants' offensive unit watches, every so often among all those collisions a linebacker suddenly seems to be filling the hole that Rodney Hampton is about to run through.
"But then Rodney will go around him untouched," Phil Simms was saying yesterday.
"We laugh about it."


Peace Corps Aid in Sub-Saharan Africa
To the Editor:
"Africa, Out in the Cold" (editorial, Jan. 2) overlooks the contributions the Peace Corps has made to development in African countries below the Sahara.
You thus overlook the contributions of 32 years and 54,000 American Peace Corps volunteers who have served in this region.


Middle-of-the-Roader Rides High With His Own Health Care Plan
With all the barons on Capitol Hill eager to get a piece of health care reform -- from Kennedy to Rostenkowski, Moynihan to Dingell -- it would be easy to underestimate a 39-year-old representative from Tennessee with nary a subcommittee chairmanship to his name.
But this is Jim Cooper's moment.


Fight Before the Bout
The first punches have been thrown two months before the heavyweight bout between MICHAEL BENTT and HERBIE HIDE .
The fighters traded blows in London yesterday as they posed for photographs to promote the March 19 bout, Bentt's first defense of his World Boxing Organization title.
Neither fighter was seriously hurt, although a small amount of blood dripped from Hide's lip.
BOB ARUM, co-promoter of the bout, said the incident was not staged.


N.C.A.A. Vote On Athlete Aid Irks Coaches
An impassioned effort by basketball coaches to restore a 14th scholarship to Division I men's teams, an effort that escalated into a symbolic appeal to provide greater opportunities for minority-group athletes, was decisively defeated at the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention today.
"Nobody won in this," said Judith Albino, president of the University of Colorado and the incoming chair of the agenda-setting Presidents Commission, who took a conciliatory approach and hoped the issue could be discussed again next year as part of a more complete package of financial changes.
But after an emotional debate ended with a vote of 191-119 against the increase of one scholarship per team, disappointed members of the National Association of Basketball Coaches and the Black Coaches Association were left to decide their response to a difficult defeat.


Reproductive Revolution Is Jolting Old Views
Suppose that Leonardo da Vinci were suddenly transported to the United States in 1994, says Dr.
Arthur Caplan, an ethicist at the University of Minnesota.
What would you show him that might surprise him?
Dr.
Caplan has an answer.
"I'd show him a reproductive clinic." he said.
"I'd tell him, 'We make babies in this dish and give them to other women to give birth.' " And that, Dr.
Caplan predicted, "would be more surprising than seeing an airplane or even the space shuttle."


Sydney C. Cooper Is Dead at 74; Police Official Fought Corruption
Sydney C. Cooper, a former New York City police commander who fought against corruption in the department, died on Sunday at his home in East Norwich, L.I.
He was 74.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Phyllis, who added that he had a history of heart problems.


NBC Wakes Up the Echoes for Five More Years
Notre Dame football will remain in NBC's ecstatic embrace through 2000.
Although NBC's five-year, $38 million deal with Notre Dame doesn't expire until the end of the 1995 season, the two sides yesterday announced their intention to remain married for five more years.
In addition, NBC agreed to air four Notre Dame basketball games yearly starting with the 1994-95 season.


'Guns for Gifts' Campaign Moves to East New York


Clinton's Damage Control Is Faltering
The White House officials and advisers who shape the Administration's public image have been hobbled in their effort to control debate over the Clintons' involvement in the Whitewater Development Corporation by President and Mrs.
Clinton, who have resisted internal calls for further investigation.
While Mr.
Clinton traveled to Arkansas to bury his mother and then left for Europe, his aides were meeting twice a day, appearing on television talk shows and trying to answer new questions about the Clintons' role in the Arkansas real estate company from 1978 to 1984.


Mexico Leader Names Negotiator To Seek Political End to Uprising
Signaling that Mexico may seek a political rather than a military solution to the armed rebellion that started in southern Mexico on New Year's Day, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari named one of the country's most powerful politicians today to negotiate with the rebels.
Mr.
Salinas also removed the Interior Minister, Patrocinio Gonzalez Garrido, who until a year ago was Governor of Chiapas.
He has been widely blamed for ignoring the widespread poverty and inequality toward the indigenous people there, which are considered the primary causes of the uprising.


U S West Adds to Voice and Video Network Plan
U S West Inc., in an expanded drive to bring home shopping and other "interactive" video services to consumers, said yesterday that it planned to spend $810 million to build a voice and video network by 1995, up from an earlier plan of $600 million.
The network would allow consumers to use modified remote-control devices and a small computer on top of the television set to search large data bases filled with movies or other information.
Such networks would combine the visual flair of television with the wealth of data now available only through computer services like Compuserve and Prodigy.


A Co-Worker Is Charged In Slaying of Drug Aide
A man who the police say helped arrange the $150 contract killing of an accountant in a Bronx drug rehabilitation program was arrested last night and charged with murder.
The police said last night that the investigation was continuing and that at least one more suspect was being sought.


Exel Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Nets Wary Even of Woeful Bullets
Kevin Edwards was lacing up his high tops after the Nets' practice today, joking with Chris Morris and P. J. Brown, when someone mentioned the Washington Bullets.
Suddenly, Edwards dropped his knots, removed the smile from his face and filled the locker room with a little straight talk.


Canadians Curbing TV Violence
Canadian broadcasters have resolved to reduce television violence, and the first casualty is "Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles."
A new broadcasting code, which took effect here on New Year's Day, bans shows with "gratuitous violence" and limits those that include scenes of violence "suitable for adults only" to the hours after 9 P.M.
The code also puts special restrictions on children's shows, demanding, for example, that on animated shows "violence will not be the central theme."


Corrections
An article on Dec. 23 about the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington omitted a word in quoting its director of communications, Naomi Paiss.
She said the museum's ultimate goal was to establish an "en masse understanding that we are not only about what the Germans did to the Jews but what people did to people."


By Design; Accessories for Spring
Each change in fashion has a ripple effect.
When clothes get paler and lighter, so do accessories.
So, the sheer cotton and linen clothes in neutral tones for the resort and spring seasons call for jewelry in natural colors and materials.
At Bergdorf Goodman, that means necklaces of amber, terra cotta, sea glass or crystal beads strung on long chains or leather thongs.
Among the most delicate are Heidi Abra's strands of sea glass and glass beads in different shapes and colors ranging from clear to the blues and greens of the Caribbean.
Donatelli Pellini's long necklaces are made of small terra cotta beads in shades of beige and brown.
Kathy Lecube hangs round chunks of amber on silver chains.
And Stephen Dweck uses combinations of jasper, quartz, golden seed pearls and soapstone.


Puerto Rico Tries to Protect Tourist Season From Spill
While Puerto Rican officials worked today to clean up the hundreds of thousands of gallons of heavy oil leaking from a grounded barge, they were also frantically working to prevent a disaster for its tourism industry.
Through faxes and telephone calls to tour packagers and travel agents around the United States, officials sought to dispel the notion that a large proportion of the island's beaches was despoiled by the gooey, black substance still escaping from the crippled barge, the Morris J. Berman, as it sat on a coral reef just 300 yards from the San Juan beachfront.


No. 21 Meets Cellar Dweller: Shade Your Eyes, It's Ugly
The bold and not so beautiful showed up to play hockey in a game between two of the National Hockey League's lowest-ranking teams tonight.
The Islanders, No. 21 over all, faced the last-place Ottawa Senators, No. 26, and stumbled to a 3-3 tie in front of 10,275 fans at the Ottawa Civic Centre.
Not surprisingly, both teams were glad to get a point, suffering as they are from injuries, primarily to their offensive threats.
But the Islanders could hardly have been happy squandering a 3-1 lead on two power-play goals.


Sales Rose in '93 For Licensed Goods
Retail sales of licensed merchandise in North America rose substantially to a record $66.6 billion in 1993 after two years of declines, according to the 17th annual licensing industry survey by the Licensing Letter, a newsletter based in Brooklyn.
The survey, published in the newsletter's January issue, attributed the growth in licensed merchandise sales, which rose 7.1 percent from 1992, to the popularity of cartoon and other characters and properties in the entertainment field.
Newcomers like Barney the dinosaur and items pegged to the film "Jurassic Park" joined standbys like the Warner Brothers "Looney Tunes" characters and the Marvel superheroes to generate $15.8 billion in retail sales in this segment.


News Summary
International
A team of investigators from the Justice Department, the Federal Reserve Board and the Manhattan District Attorney's office will go to Abu Dhabi to begin the next stage of their inquiry into the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.  [ Page D1. ]


Beit Shemesh Journal; To Israel! And the Trip Is Not Just for the Living
In 1993, more than 72,000 foreigners resettled in Israel.
For about 1,000 of them, this was unquestionably the final stop.
They came not to live but to be buried.
If there is another country with more noncitizens arriving in death, Rabbi Jay Karzen has not heard of it.


2 Officers Are Indicted on Injuries to Van Driver After Arrest
Two New York City police officers have been indicted on assault charges in a case in which a prisoner was left a quadriplegic after his head smashed into a Brooklyn station house door, the police said yesterday.
In a separate Federal civil suit, the Brooklyn man, Carlton Brown, has charged that the officers "violently shoved" him forward, causing his head to strike the door with such force that the bones of his vertebrae severely damaged his spinal cord.
Mr.
Brown, the driver of a van that illegally transported passengers, had been arrested after the officers found his driver's license was suspended, his lawyer, Robert Tessler, said.


One 3-Pointer Is Worth More for UConn
With the score tied, Doron Sheffer took an inbound pass from Kevin Ollie, paused, shot and sank a 3-point field goal for Connecticut.
The basket broke a 61-61 tie with four minutes left in the second half.
More important, it broke Syracuse's momentum, and the Orange never got it back as the Huskies went on to a 75-67 victory tonight at the Civic Center.
The winners thus completed within six days a three-game sweep of their most important Big East rivals, a feat few imagined possible a month ago.


Work for Lennox Is Shopped Around
Lennox Industries, the heating and cooling systems manufacturer based in Richardson, Tex., said yesterday that it had placed its account in review after 20 years at Ross Advertising in St.
Louis.
Though billings were not disclosed, the trade publication Adweek estimated them at $8 million, with the potential to grow to $12 million to $14 million.


Gillette Will Cut 2,000 Jobs During Next 2 Years
The Gillette Company said today that it would shed 2,000 jobs, or 6 percent of the company's total, in the next two years, as part of a worldwide realignment that will result in a one-time fourth-quarter charge of $164 million.
Most of the job losses will come in Europe.
Alfred M. Zeien, Gillette's chairman and chief executive, insisted that the company was "acting from strength, not from weakness" in undertaking the realignment.


New Capital-Risk Ratings Guide Insurers
When the Prudential Insurance Company sold half of its Macy's mortgages to Federated Department Stores for $449.3 million at year-end, it did more than make a slight profit and give Federated a stronger voice in any effort to acquire Macy.
Prudential, like other life insurance companies, was managing its business with an eye to putting its best foot forward for a new year-end rating of financial strength required by state regulators.


4 Countries In Audition For NATO
When President Clinton arrives here Tuesday to explain the partial membership in NATO that Washington is offering Eastern European nations, he will find four leaders who are essentially eager for the regional security.
But each leader -- from Poland, Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic -- has different concerns.


Q&amp;A
Ionized Air
Q.
I have severe allergies to things like smoke.
Should I buy an ionizer to emit negatively charged particles into the air?


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.96
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.00
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.14
3.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.17
5.17
6.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.24
6.22
7.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.20
7.20
8.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.51
5.52
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Another Giuliani Hams It Up on TV
It didn't have the verve of Vice President Al Gore smashing glass ashtrays and calling David Letterman a "pinhead." But little more than a week into office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani got his own moment on the "Late Show" last night -- and he wasn't even upstaged by his 7-year-old son, Andrew, who was absent but had been the guest of choice.
For a few minutes, the Mayor who faces a $2.2 billion budget deficit and enough problems to keep him up well past Mr.
Letterman's late-night time slot waited in the wings while one of America's highest-paid television personalities listed the Top 10 signs that you have a dumb cat.


CHRONICLE
To the casual observer backstage at the Washington Opera Saturday night, it might have appeared that two United States Supreme Court Justices, RUTH BADER GINSBURG and ANTONIN SCALIA, were preparing to join the English bar.
But the white-powdered wigs donned by the Associate Justices were instead part of their costumes for the opening of "Ariadne auf Naxos," the opera by Richard Strauss about a wealthy Viennese man who commissions an opera to entertain his friends.


Classical Music in Review
Elias Ladino Ensemble  Washington Square Church
Not long ago, the most likely place to hear Sephardic music was at a recital by the Spanish soprano Victoria de los Angeles.
Miss de los Angeles was captivated by the passion and imagery in songs composed by Spanish Jews before the expulsion of 1492, and she sang them as polished art songs without ripping them from their folk roots.


Childhood Depression May Herald Adult Ills
CONTRARY to popular belief, even mild episodes of depression in childhood are often harbingers of repeated, more serious bouts of depression later in life, according to results of the first major study to track depressed children into their early adult years.
The finding challenges the assumption that a period of depression in a child is an isolated event that will have no lasting effect -- that children "grow out of it" -- and suggests a compelling need to treat depressed children.


Human Guinea Pigs Are American as Apple Pie
To the Editor:
My plaudits for your reports on the harrowing nuclear experiments on Americans carried out in Government laboratories and medical research centers.
Subjecting people to experiments, in most instances without knowledge of the risks involved and without their consent, has been a continuing practice by Government agencies.
A Jan. 5 news article discusses the difficulty the Central Intelligence Agency is having finding records of the experiments.
However, at a Senate hearing on Aug. 3, 1977, Adm.
Stansfield Turner, former C.I.A. director, disclosed that the agency had been conducting brainwashing experiments on countless Americans -- prisoners, mentally ill patients, cancer patients and even unwitting patrons at bars in New York, San Francisco and other cities.
Some were drugged with LSD and other psychotropic agents.


Carjack Suspect Confessed, Rockland Prosecutor Says
The 22-year-old dental student accused of killing a college freshman and stealing his 1993 Jeep Wrangler here a week ago confessed four hours after he was arrested, the Rockland County District Attorney, Kenneth Gribetz, said in court today.
The suspect, Edward L. Summers of the Bronx, gave the authorities what Mr.
Gribetz called a 49-page "statement of confession and admission" in a state police barracks in Hawthorne, N.Y., on Jan. 3.


On My Mind; On Black Anti-Semitism
On Nov. 29, 1993, at state-run Kean College in New Jersey, a spokesman for the Nation of Islam, the country's largest black anti-Semitic organization, made a speech.
It was the one about how the Jews had it coming to them in Nazi Germany.
For three hours he talked, adding the advice that blacks slaughter all white South Africans, dig them up and slaughter them again.
He was paid about $2,650 in student funds and in enthusiasm of the audience of black teachers and students.


Chinese Start a Vitamin Program to Eliminate a Birth Defect
THE first new moon after the sun enters Aquarius, sometime between Jan. 21 and Feb. 19, is the Chinese New Year, and that is the traditional time to marry in China.
The next new year begins on Jan. 23.
It was not until the early 1980's, after a 5,000-year tradition of winter marriages, that Chinese medical scientists noted that the rush to conceive a first child came at a time of year when maternal nutrition, especially in rural areas, was low in fresh fruits and vegetables.
The result was birth defects.


Philadelphia Inquirer Plans a TV Newscast
The Philadelphia Inquirer, one of the country's leading newspapers, will move directly into television news production with the broadcast of a local nightly newscast, officials of the newspaper and its corporate parent, Knight-Ridder Inc., announced today.
The move to present "tomorrow's newspaper tonight" is the latest and one of the most extensive by a major newspaper, reversing a decades-long stance by publishers who once saw television as the enemy.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Associates Corp. of North America, Dallas, a unit of Ford Motor Co., is offering $300 million of 4.625 percent notes due in 1996 at 99.954 to yield 4.644 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is offering $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1996 at 100 to yield 4.095 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The issue is callable in one year.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Jan. 3 in the special Outlook '94 issue of Business Day, about new technologies, misidentified a company in Westborough, Mass., that produces superconducting materials.
It is the American Superconductor Corporation, not American Superconducting.


NATO AGAIN PLANS POSSIBLE AIR RAIDS ON SERBS IN BOSNIA
Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization voted today in Brussels -- unanimously but with varying degrees of conviction -- for a broader but still highly conditional plan to use air strikes in the war in Bosnia.
Combining a British and French initiative with an American one, the alliance once again threatened to call in air strikes to save Sarajevo.
In a departure, it also decided to study what steps it could take, including air strikes, to relieve Canadian peacekeeping troops trapped at Srebrenica, in northern Bosnia, and to reopen the airstrip at Tuzla, in central Bosnia.


Prices of Treasury Issues Edge Up
Prices of Treasury securities were slightly higher yesterday, but within a narrow range ahead of scheduled reports of key inflation indicators, beginning with today's Producer Price Index.
Traders attributed the steady pricing in part to an article yesterday in The New York Times that suggested a key United States inflation indicator was overstated.
The article reported that researchers at the Bureau of Labor Statistics considered the Consumer Price index overstated by as much as six-tenths of 1 percent.


Florio, in Farewell Address, Takes a Jab at 'Home Rule'
Even as the leaders of the Republican legislative majority pledged to slash New Jersey's income tax rates, Gov.
Jim Florio warned in his farewell address today that the Legislature should instead deliver property tax relief and government reorganization, calling the state's fractured system of local government unsuited for "the waning days of the 20th century."
Mr.
Florio, who leaves office next week, chose to focus on a taboo subject in New Jersey politics, the "home rule" style of government that is rooted in Colonial days of land grants from the British crown, and on the dependence on local property taxes to finance it. 'Bottom Line Cries Out'
"It's time to stop living a fantasy where we think small is automatically better," he said in his State of the State address, "when in fact, the price we pay is the duplication and inefficiency of maintaining 611 school districts and 567 totally independent municipalities, awash in administrative redundancy.


4 Design Specialists Form Global Alliance
Gerstman &amp; Meyers Inc., a brand identity consulting company in New York, said it had teamed with three other brand identity and design specialists to form a global marketing network.
The new unit, called the Global Design Network, will be based in New York.
It is made up of Gerstman &amp; Meyers, Design Partners of Toronto, DIL of Sao Paulo, Brazil, and Schmidlin &amp; Partner A.G. of Reinach, Switzerland.
Each will continue as a separate company, handling individual local and regional accounts, while joining to handle global accounts for clients like H. J. Heinz, Johnson &amp; Johnson and RJR Nabisco.


Sports of The Times; Examining Reeves's Reasoning
LET us pause in the deification of Dan Reeves and Phil Simms, get off our knees if only to stretch, and at least consider the question of whether Reeves chose the right quarterback to remain with the Giants.
Reeves sure made the smart call, his first as Giants coach, when he decided that the intramural competition between Simms and Jeff Hostetler was going to end.
We have experienced enough idiotic and ultimately destructive quarterback and point guard controversies in New York in the last decade to compile a Top 10, a couple of which, upon reflection, might've been more like a choice between body odor and bad breath.


INSIDE
Top Choice for Drug Chief
White House aides said the head of the New York State Police was the top candidate to run the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Page A16.
Oil Barge Had Worn Cable
The barge that fouled a Puerto Rico beach with oil was being towed by a tugboat using a worn cable, a tugboat crew member said.
Page A10.
Link Is Sought in Abductions
The suspect in the disappearance of an upstate New York girl is the focus of an inquiry into other child abductions, the police said.
Page B1.
Threat of Basketball Boycott
The head of the Black Coaches Association threatened a boycott of college basketball games in a dispute with educational leaders.
Page B9.


Msgr. John P. Brehney, School Principal, 74
Msgr.
John P. Brehney, the founding principal of Cardinal Spellman High School in the Bronx, died on Monday at St.
John's Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 74.
The cause was a stroke, said Msgr.  John M. Harrington, a friend.


Theater in Review
Objects Lie on a Table  La MaMa E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street Greenwich VIllage Through Jan. 23
By Gertrude Stein; directed by David Herskovits; set by Sarah Edkins; lighting by Lenore Doxsee; costumes by David Zinn; sound by David Hull; production stage manager, Meredith Palin.
Presented by La MaMa E.T.C and Target Margin Theater.
WITH: Michael Booth, Neil Bradley, Linda Donald, Rohana Kenin, Steven Rattazzi, Greig Sargeant, Noel Simmons, Yuri Skujins, Penelope Smith and Barbara Wiechmann.


Adrian Lambert, 84, A Thoracic Surgeon
Dr.
Adrian Lambert, a chest surgeon and fourth-generation Manhattan physician, died on Friday at Roosevelt Hospital, where he was on the staff for more than 50 years.
He was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
He had been ill for a long time, his family reported.


Cut Bowe Cancels Bout
RIDDICK BOWE, the former heavyweight champion, was cut while sparring yesterday, forcing the cancellation of his scheduled Feb. 5 bout in Las Vegas, Nev., against FRANCOIS BOTHA of South Africa.
Bowe required 10 stitches to close the cut, which occurred during a sparring session in Washington, said a Caesars Palace spokeswoman, DEBBIE MUNCH.
Munch said she was not sure where Bowe was cut in sparring. (AP)


Movie Shows How Nazis Dehumanized Jews; A Danish 'Schindler'?
To the Editor:
The movie "Schindler's List" deserves its success.
The story of righteous people who risked their lives to counter the monstrous evil of the Nazis needs to be told again and again.
It is a shame, however, that no major motion picture has been made about the rescue of nearly 7,000 Danish Jews by their countrymen in 1943.
The people of this tiny nation could not offer serious military resistance to Hitler, but their moral courage was a bright candle in the dark night of genocide.
What a fine thing it would be to document those events on the screen!
PAUL ROSENDAHL  Great Neck, L.I., Jan. 3, 1993


Protesting Changes, Leader Steps Down At Cold-War Radios
The president of Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty, William W. Marsh, has resigned, criticizing a plan to move the stations that were created in the cold war from Munich to Prague.
The idea of transferring the stations to Prague was initiated by the Czech President, Vaclav Havel, and strongly advocated by influential conservatives in Washington.


Movie Shows How Nazis Dehumanized Jews; Spielberg's Mastery
To the Editor:
Writing on Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List," Frank Rich questions whether "Holocaust ignoramuses will even see it, let alone be swayed by it" (column, Jan. 2).
As the organization that sponsored a poll he cites (conducted by the Roper Organization), which found, to our dismay, that nearly one-third of all Americans find it "possible" that the Holocaust never took place, as well as a second national survey that showed that about 40 percent of American high school students do not even know what the Holocaust was, we are equally concerned, but perhaps slightly more optimistic.


Gay Rights Advocates Brace for Ballot Fights
Gay rights advocates are facing a record number of state ballot initiatives this year that would forbid laws specifically protecting homosexuals from discrimination.
And to fight the measures the advocates are intending to focus on the discrimination they say they suffer rather than devote their energies to countering the notion that they are seeking special protections.


OFF THE MENU
The Party's Over, for Now
The party has ended on West 44th Street, at least for the time being, as the owners have shut the doors of Mamma Leone's, the huge, rollicking restaurant that has been a New York institution for decades.
"The cost of operating the restaurant in that location had become prohibitive," said Nick Valenti, the chief executive of Restaurant Associates, which owns Mamma Leone's.
The restaurant, which first opened in 1906 in the 14th Street area, has been on 44th Street in the Milford Plaza Hotel since 1988.
Mr.
Valenti said the company negotiated unsuccessfully with Milstein Properties, the owner of the Milford Plaza Hotel, to try to get a better deal.
"We are looking at new locations in New York, Orlando and Las Vegas," Mr.
Valenti said.


First Empire State Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Swarthmore Would Pay Student if He Transfers
To resolve a sexual harassment complaint that deadlocked its disciplinary committee, Swarthmore College has offered to pay for the accused student to attend another college for the spring semester.
Educators said the resolution appeared to be unprecedented.


Louise Soelberg, 90, Former Ballet Dancer
Louise Soelberg, a leading dancer with the Ballets Jooss, died on Jan. 5 at Greene Memorial Hospital in Xenia, Ohio.
She was 90 and lived in Yellow Springs, Ohio.
Miss Soelberg trained in dance in her hometown, Seattle, at the Cornish School of Music and Art, a noted experimentalist center whose alumni include Merce Cunningham.
She returned to head the dance department there after further studies with Doris Humphrey and Charles Weidman and at the Jaques-Dalcroze Institute of Eurythmics in Geneva.


Review/Jazz; Veteran Drummer Returns, With a Multitude of Friends
In the late 1960's, the drummer Pete (LaRoca) Sims quit jazz to become a lawyer.
He made one classic album on Blue Note records in 1965, "Basra," and worked with Sonny Rollins, Jackie McLean and others, but then he fell off the face of the jazz world.
Over the last decade or so he has been making appearances, and recently has led a fine group recruited from a revolving band of musicians.
He had been working at Yardbird Suite; the club went under, and now he will be leading his band every Monday night for the next several months at Down Beat, a new club at 70 Grove Street, at Seventh Avenue South.
Mr.
Sims (he used LaRoca as a stage name while working in Latin bands) is an exceptional drummer who combines the lightness of Billy Higgins's style and the rolling rhythms of Elvin Jones without sounding like either of them.
He has a nicely cluttered sound when he solos; he'll hit the rims and the skin of a drum almost at the same time, giving his playing a chattery sound.
And when he supports the band, he leans on his ride cymbal, making it swing with a light sizzle.


SunTrust Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Few subjects are closer to Vice President Al Gore's heart than developing an advanced communications network for the country, but on this matter the Administration has decided it is wiser to coax than to dictate.
News Analysis  [ Page A1. ]  Outlining the Clinton Administration's telecommunications policy, Vice President Gore said it would propose legislation to create a new regulatory structure insuring open access to information services.  [ D5. ]
The lawyers, accountants and investment bankers who have made good livings working out the bad-debt cases of the 1980's are about to face their worst fears: the bankruptcy business is going bust.
Last year, for the first time since 1989, fewer companies entered bankruptcy than left.  [ Page A1. ]  An editor specializing in bankruptcy newsletters may soon be out of that business.  [ D2. ]
The case of the Invesco mutual fund manager who was dismissed for his handling of personal investments is bringing to light others in which money managers have dealt privately with a stock promoter with whom their funds have done business.  [ D1. ] Companies
Rejecting objections from state securities regulators, a Federal judge in New Orleans ordered that hearings proceed on Prudential Securities' biggest class-action settlement stemming from the fraud scandal at the firm.  [ D1. ]
In his first major action as Westinghouse Electric's chairman, Michael H. Jordan cut the dividend in half and announced a pretax charge of $750 million to cover the costs of laying off 3,400 employees, selling operations and settling legal disputes.  [ D1. ]
Advisers to Paramount Communications were leaning toward recommending that the board accept a bid from QVC Network, a person close to the board said.  [ D1. ]
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises, the embattled specialty retail stores, filed for bankruptcy protection after a long but ultimately futile struggle to placate lenders and creditors.  [ D3. ]
Toys "R" Us, the world's largest toy retailer, plans to grow even bigger this year by opening another 115 stores and signing agreements with foreign franchisees.  [ D4. ]
The United Automobile Workers union struck a General Motors assembly plant in Shreveport, La., halting production.  [ D4. ]
Anthony F. Earley Jr. has resigned as president of the Long Island Lighting Company to join Detroit Edison.  [ D4. ]
Phillips Petroleum named its president and chief operating officer as chairman and chief executive, effective May 1.  [ D5. ]
Darla D. Moore, the banker who pioneered lending to bankrupt companies, has resigned from Chemical Bank.  [ D4. ]
Kurt Andersen, an editor at Time, has been offered the editor's job at New York magazine, people at K-III Magazines said.  [ D17. ]
The New York Times said it would seek cost savings, including a reduction in its white-collar work force.  [ D17. ] International
The ousted chairman of Banco Espanol de Credito, Mario Conde, defended his management of Spain's third-largest bank and said central-bank intervention had been unnecessary.  [ D4. ] Markets
Blue-chip stocks suffered their first setback of the new year.
The Dow was down 15.20 points, to 3,850.31.  [ D6. ]
Prices of Government securities traded slightly higher, but within a narrow range.  [ D14. ]
Heating oil prices surged, leading crude oil prices higher.  [ D16. ]  The dollar firmed against most currencies.  [ D16. ] Today's Columns
Can leopards change their spots?
In the case of Reliance Group Holdings, some on Wall Street seem to think so.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Michel Roux, who was instrumental in building Absolut into America's best-selling imported vodka, will soon be selling his former rival's brand.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D1. ]


Exactly Which Team Is In Trouble?
Any resolutions the Nets might have made about beating the teams they ought to beat went by the boards again tonight.
In losing to the Bullets, 115-100, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, New Jersey allowed Washington to have the last laugh in a game that should have been a laugher for the Nets.
Derrick Coleman registered his second straight double-double, and 20th of the season, with a game-high 26 points and a team-high 13 rebounds.
But he was the only Nets starter in double figures in any major category, aside from Kenny Anderson, who had a game-high 16 assists, but shot only 1 for 11 from the floor and finished with 9 points.


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


All of Prague's Their Stage, and They Play It Like Troupers
Tonight's cast included Vaclav Havel, the playwright, and Bill Clinton, the born political ham, and their stroll across the 14th-century Charles Bridge was more than just another moment of diplomatic theater.
Playing cameo roles were a couple of out-of-town broadcasters named Dan Rather and Tom Brokaw.


Ornda Healthcorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Abduction Suspect's Moves Receiving Multistate Scrutiny
As the parents of 12-year-old Sara Anne Wood joined the grim search for her body today in a snowswept area of the Adirondacks, investigators here said the suspect in her disappearance in August had become the object of a multistate investigation into child abductions as far back as 1990.
"We'd be remiss, if knowing what we know right now and having the information we have, if we didn't look at this individual as a serial killer," said Captain Frank A. Pace of the New York State Police, the spokesman for a joint Federal and state task force being assembled today.


National Medical Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Music; Shakuhachi, From School In New York
The arcane, thousand-year-old art of the Japanese shakuhachi flute, steeped in the rituals of Zen Buddhism, might seem likely to flourish only in Japan, but over the last two decades Ronnie Nyogetsu Seldin has succeeded in establishing a New York-based shakuhachi school called Ki-Sui-An ("Place of Blowing Nothingness").
On Saturday night, he gave a mesmerizing recital with three of his pupils and colleagues: James Schlefer, Jeffrey Lependorf and Bob Avstreih.


Blaze Destroys Massachusetts Synagogue


Editorial Notebook; Rascals to the Rescue
The law of supply and demand is constantly flouted at my local video library.
I've got the machine at home; I've got the money to rent the videos; what's lacking is anything worth taking home for the kids.
Every weekend the shelves offer the same choice: Ninja turtles, ancient musicals, Barney, some saccharine cartoon version of a once-great fairy tale and "The Parent Trap," which my kids have now seen at least 15 times.
About a month ago, in desperation, I turned to the adult "Classics" shelf and saw, amid the Joan Crawfords and Humphrey Bogarts, a title that woke me up.
Could it be?
I pulled out the cassette to see if the spine was lying, but no, there they were, just as the title announced: "The Little Rascals on Parade."


Getting Down: The Take-a-Deduction-to-Lunch-Bunch Blues
THE business lunch once seemed so blithely simple.
Shepherd some clients to a nice restaurant, order a steak and a few highballs, make a couple of deals, gossip over the cheesecake.
Hand a charge card to the waiter after barely glancing at the check.
But first came warnings about cholesterol and alcohol and sagging productivity, and now -- as if the conspiracy to destroy this venerable perk were not complete -- the Government has taken another step in its long-running campaign to reduce the tax deduction for business meals and entertainment.


Study Says Clinton Plan To Burden Hospitals
While applauding the goals of President Clinton's health plan, a task force appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has concluded that the plan could cost New York hospitals $6.5 billion in its first four years and would place a modest financial burden on state government for two years before eventually benefiting the state budget.
The report, which was provided by a member of the task force, also expresses "considerable skepticism" about the President's contention that health care costs can be controlled through a combination of government-imposed limits on insurance premiums and market competition among cooperatives of doctors, hospitals and other health care providers.


In America; The Truth Sculptor
You'd like to believe that the President is someone you can trust, someone you can believe when he looks the nation squarely in the eye and says that this or that is so.
But the verdict has not yet been rendered on whether Bill Clinton is someone to be trusted.
He has not made a strong case for himself.
It doesn't matter whether the issues are large or small, public or intensely private, Mr.
Clinton often chooses to skate along the slippery edges of the truth.


First-Time Givers Help the Neediest Cases Fund Grow
Each day, they witnessed the growing poverty on New York's streets, portrayed in newspaper articles and on television.
In small, piecemeal ways, they tried to ease the suffering by giving to panhandlers or pitching in at soup kitchens.
But with so many in need, deciding who to help overwhelmed them.
So for the first time, they turned to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
By giving to the Neediest Cases, they said, they knew their money would be used to lift thousands of people out of poverty and help make sure they do not fall back.


Encouraging Schoolgirls to Enter a Mostly Male World
A gasp rose from the audience of 300 Long Island schoolgirls when Cynthia Burrows, a chemistry professor, projected the slide onto the screen.
What startled the students wasn't a chart of the periodic table or a model of the architecture of a carbon molecule or the text of a complex theory.
It was a photograph of her 18-month-old triplets.


Witnesses Say Mutilated Man Often Hit Wife
A series of witnesses for Lorena L. Bobbitt, the 24-year-old manicurist charged in the cutting off of her husband's penis, testified today that John W. Bobbitt, 26, boasted of enjoying brutal forced sex with women and repeatedly hit her, pulled her hair and threw her against the wall before she maimed him.
The witnesses, called by the defense in the second day of Mrs.
Bobbitt's felony trial, contradicted her husband's testimony that while the two of them had frequently fought, he never hit her or threatened to do so.
Completing his testimony today, Mr.
Bobbitt maintained that he never forced his wife to have sex.
Though he laid his hands on her during their arguments, he said, it was always to fend her off when she tried to hit him.


METRO DIGEST
LEADING CANDIDATE FOR D.E.A. POST
Thomas A. Constantine, the superintendent of the New York State Police, has emerged as the leading candidate to run the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration, Clinton Administration officials said.
A16.
NEW YORK CITY URGING A COVENANT OF REVERENCE FOR LAW
William J. Bratton, sworn in as the 38th police commissioner of New York City, appealed for "a new covenant in which the people and the police share the same reverence for the law." His speech in City Hall appeared to be rooted in Mayor Giuliani's campaign pledges to crack down on crimes that erode the quality of life and to make people feel safer.
B3.
POLICE OFFICER IS SHOT IN BROOKLYN
A police officer was shot in the leg and an 18-year-old suspect was killed in East New York, Brooklyn.
B3.
AN OWNER WITH ONLY PART OF HER HOUSE
All Catalina Lopez wants is to gain possession of the second floor of the tiny house she owns in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, so she and her 33-year-old paraplegic son can each have a bedroom.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman.
B3.
The prosecution in the World Trade Center trial continued to present evidence seized during the Federal Bureau of Investigation's searches of apartments used by some of the defendants.
B3.
The Coalition for the Homeless operates a van on a nightly circuit of Manhattan, delivering hot foot to encampments where hundreds of people make their winter homes.
B2.
REGION FLORIO URGES REORGANIZATION
Even as the leaders of New Jersey's Republican legislative majority pledged to slash New Jersey's income tax rates, Gov.
Jim Florio warned in his farewell address that the Legislature should instead deliver property tax relief and government reorganization.
A1.
Republicans once again control both legislative houses in New Jersey.
But now there is no Democratic chief executive who can be blamed for problems.
B5.
HEALTH PLAN SEENS AS BURDEN
A task force appointed by Governor Cuomo concluded that President Clinton's health plan could cost New York hospitals $6.5 billion in its first four years.
B4.
The head of the Teamsters' union ousted the leader of a New York City local whom a Mafia defector had identified as a major mob associate in the union's airline employees division.
B4.
Teamsters' Local 813 agreed to have a court-appointed officer monitor its members to insure that they do not associate with mobsters.
B4.
Girls from 31 Long Island schools visited the State University of New York at Stony Brook for a day of encouragement and exploration of academic disciplines that remain largely male bastions: the worlds of math and science.
B4.
In the last three years, the Roman Catholic diocese of Camden, N.J., has paid at least $3.2 million to settle lawsuits charging sexual abuse by priests, The Philadelphia Inquirer reported.
B5.
Neediest Cases B3
Chronicle B4


Review/Opera; A 'Lucia' Motivated By Large-Scale Ideas
Francesca Zambello's production of "Lucia di Lammermoor" took something of a drubbing when it first appeared last season at the Metropolitan Opera.
It is back for another try.
The revival began with a performance on Monday night and there will be eight more this month and next.
Its pretensions and wrongheadedness, I am afraid, survive intact.
This is a conception that tries too hard and thinks too much.
It also makes the grievous error of beginning with the general and leaving the particular to fend for itself.
Ms.
Zambello loads "Lucia" with so many broad emblems of doom and social injustice that poor Lucia, Enrico and Edgardo have not much of a chance to be themselves.


Katherine Kuh, Art Connoisseur And Writer, 89
Katherine Kuh, a writer on art and a former curator at the Art Institute of Chicago who devoted her career to the acceptance of modern art, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 89.
She died of natural causes, said her lawyer, William H. Roth.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Fired Dwain Painter, receivers coach.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Placed Chester McGlockton, defensive lineman, on injured reserve.
Signed Warren Powers, defensive lineman.
NEW YORK JETS -- Promoted Greg Robinson, defensive line coach, to defensive coordinator.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Fired John Guy, special teams coach, and Steve Furness, defensive line coach.
General  General FOX INC. -- Named George J. Krieger sports executive vice president.


Irving Goodman, 68, an Executive For Two Book Publishers, Is Dead
Irving Goodman, a former president of Viking Penguin and former head of the trade-books division of Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston, died on Monday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 68 and lived on the Upper East Side.
The cause was colon cancer, said his wife, Roslyn.


Gore Outlines Data Highway Policy
Outlining the Clinton Administration's formal policy for the telecommunications industry, Vice President Al Gore said today that the Adminstration would propose legislation that would create a new regulatory structure to insure open access to a new world of information services.
He said the proposed legislation would also encourage competition in the information marketplace, including the recommendation that telephone companies and cable television companies be allowed to enter each other's businesses.


House Inquiry Is Urged On Clintons' Land Deals
The leading Republican critic of President Clinton's involvement in a failed Arkansas real estate venture said today that even if the Administration installed a special counsel to investigate, he would press for a separate Congressional inquiry.
Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the House Banking Committee, said it was "indefensible that a Congress charged with oversight lacks the backbone to investigate the executive branch, even if it may be embarrassing to their party's President."


Review/Music; It's a Bird! It's a Plane! It's a Symphony!
The obvious question to be asked of Michael Daugherty's "Metropolis Symphony," played by the Baltimore Symphony on Sunday at Carnegie Hall, is whether it deserves to be called a symphony at all.
Its five movements, each inspired by a character or situation in the Superman comics, have more the character of a suite of scherzos or lively overtures, or what are now called concert openers.
Yet an American composer trying to make his living at orchestral music is hard pressed to write anything but concert openers, so the symphony's somewhat ad hoc character might be overlooked.
The more pressing issue is whether Mr.
Daugherty has come up with a style befitting the sexiness of his subject.
Although he produces a distinctive texture -- thudding ostinatos, quick-cut jumps and shifts, swirling glissandos, sirens and rimshots and the like -- his harmonies are curiously static, his rhythms more often insistent than incisive.
Echoes of Sibelius's Fourth Symphony, Britten's "Sinfonia da Requiem," Ravel's Concerto for the Left Hand (heard later on the program, as it happened) and even Franz Waxman's score for "Sunset Boulevard" collide in strangely joyless fashion, and with the exception of the darkly glowering "Krypton" movement the music never seems to take flight.


Star Banc Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bratton Urges a Shared Covenant of Reverence for Law
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton appealed yesterday for "a new covenant" between the police and the community in which both "share the same reverence for the law."
Addressing the need for citizens' support but acknowledging the mistrust born from reports of police corruption and misuse of power, Mr.
Bratton said the pact should be one "in which neighborhood residents stand shoulder to shoulder with the police" but "in which the police treat every law-abiding citizen with the respect they deserve."


Premier Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New President For Atlantic
Danny Goldberg, who joined Atlantic Records in 1992 as senior vice president, was named president yesterday of the label, which is a division of the Atlantic Group.
Mr.
Goldberg, 43, succeeds Doug Morris, who was promoted in 1990 to co-chairman and co-chief executive of the Atlantic Group.
The group, which also includes the EastWest and Interscope record labels, is part of the Warner Music Group of Time Warner Inc.
Atlantic's roster includes Phil Collins, Michael Crawford, Juliana Hatfield, the Lemonheads and Stone Temple Pilots.


The Pop Life
The twin-pronged assaults of grunge and hip-hop may have made significant commercial inroads in the pop marketplace in 1993, but in the final tally of the year's best-selling records, adult contemporary music more than held its own.
In Billboard's annual listing of the year's best-selling albums, the soundtrack for "The Bodyguard" ranked first, followed by the soprano saxophonist Kenny G's soothing pop-jazz record, "Breathless." "The Bodyguard," which featured Whitney Houston's megahit "I Will Always Love You," sold more than 10 million copies in the United States, twice as many as "Breathless." Both albums were released by Arista, which sold more records in 1993 than any other label, according to the magazine.


Movie Shows How Nazis Dehumanized Jews; One Stands for Many
To the Editor:
"Extras in the Shadows" (column, Jan. 2) by Frank Rich quite rightly points out the great failing of "Schindler's List," the "anonymity of the film's Jews." While I agree that this is a painful inadequacy, it is an inevitable, necessary failure, with notable precedents.


Phoumi Vongvichit, 84, Is Dead; Laotian Was Lifelong Communist
Phoumi Vongvichit, a Communist leader who helped guide Laos on its route from colonial rule to independence as a Communist state, died on Friday.
He was 84.
Simangkhala Souvannakhily, an official of the Laotian embassy in Bangkok, said Mr.
Phoumi Vongvichit died of heart disease.
It was not reported where he died.


Books of The Times; Reflections on Endings And Family Secrets
Diary of a Lost Boy
By Harry Kondoleon
183 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.  Decorations in a Ruined Cemetery
By John Gregory Brown
244 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95


CHRONICLE
Seeking to honor those who have worked for ethnic unity, the Greater Harlem Chamber of Commerce will give its Living the Dream awards to six people on Thursday night as part of its celebration of Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday.
Awards will go to State Senator DAVID A. PATERSON; ROBIN BELL-STEVENS, the president of the New York Coalition of 100 Black Women; the Rev.
Dr.
WYATT TEE WALKER, who is the senior pastor at the Canaan Baptist Church in Harlem and was Dr.
King's chief of staff, and RABBI MARC SCHNEIER, president of the Foundation for Ethnic Understanding.


Prudential Hearings To Proceed
Rejecting objections from state securities regulators, a Federal judge in New Orleans yesterday ordered that hearings proceed on Prudential Securities' biggest class-action settlement stemming from the fraud scandal at the firm.
In making his decision, Federal District Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr. ordered what is, in essence, a trial in miniature to begin on Jan. 19 dealing with some of the most contentious issues surrounding the sales and operations of the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships, the biggest series of limited partnerships sold by the brokerage firm in the 1980's.


Katharine Greeff, Child Psychologist, 93
Katharine Reynolds Cooke Greeff, a child psychologist, died on Dec. 26 in her home on Manhattan's Upper East Side.
She was 93.
Her family said the cause was a heart attack.


Merced Gets a Big Raise
ORLANDO MERCED, whose .313 batting average led Pittsburgh last season, received more than a $1 million raise yesterday when he signed with the Pirates for one year at $1,485,000.
The outfielder-first baseman, who had been eligible for arbitration, earned $305,000 in 1993.


Self-Esteem and Friendship In a Factory on Death Row
The death row garment factory is humming at midday.
Condemned murderers wield scissors and razor-sharp knives as they snip and finish piles of work pants at their sewing machines.
A few chat at the coffee urn within relaxed sight of their caged-off guard.
Life goes on and new work pants move as fast as time through the skilled hands of the legally doomed 58-man work shift.
In the setting of rifle towers and razor-wire fences, the simple Quonset hut factory here at the Ellis One unit of the Huntsville prison has a strangely upbeat air, as of some Brechtian production of "The Pajama Game."


Change Seen at Conde Nast
Steven T. Florio, president and chief executive of The New Yorker, is expected to be named president of Conde Nast Publications later this month, succeeding Bernard Leser, who is expected to retire after 35 years with the company, according to published reports.
Neither Mr.
Florio nor Mr.
Leser, who was in Tokyo yesterday, could be reached for comment.
People at Conde Nast would not confirm the reports but said they were preparing a major announcement for later this week.
Other people within the company said that the announcement was being delayed until Mr.
Leser was back in New York.


Theater in Review
How Far to Jaisalmeer?
Theater for the New City 155 First Avenue, at 10th Street East Village Through Jan. 23 By Martin Worth; directed by Bina Sharif; lighting by Paul Smithyman; set by Kevin Martin; stage manager, Dawn Spring.
Presented by Theater for the New City, George Bartenieff, executive director; Crystal Field, executive artistic director.
WITH: Mohamed Djellouli, Marilyn Gholson, Hesh Malkar, Emmett McConnell, Christopher Nissley, John Edwin Payne, Bina Sharif, Wonderly White and Jemima Yorke.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  BROADER BOSNIA DEFENSE PLAN  NATO voted to broaden the plan for the use of air strikes in Bosnia, but it is still highly conditional and some officials say they fear it is another case of words without weight.
A1  BALKANS OVERSHADOWED SUMMIT  News analysis: Despite the United States' intention to focus discussion on its plans for Eastern Europe, in the end the NATO summit meeting could not escape the past failures to deal with the Balkan crisis.
A8


Humbled Spanish Banker Responds
The ousted chairman of Spain's third-largest bank, Mario Conde, defended his management today and argued that intervention by the nation's central bank late last month had been unnecessary.
On Dec. 28, the central bank took over Banco Espanol de Credito, or Banesto, as it is commonly known here, and replaced Mr.
Conde and the board of directors.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Penalties
Coaches and officials work at reducing the friction and increasing the speed in college hockey.
Nevertheless, the skaters on occasion will continue to tangle.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 7
Dec. 31
Jan. 8
1994
1993
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.7
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.5
3.1
Gasoline stocks
227.2
224.4
220.6
Distillate stocks
141.9
145.0
142.4
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.6
6.8
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.4
1.8
Crude stocks
334.6
341.6
320.3
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
89.6
92.0
85.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Corrections
An article on Sunday in The Week in Review about the late Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. and changes in the ethnic politics of Boston misspelled the name of city's new Mayor.
He is Thomas M. Menino.


A Draft State Dept. Report Finds China's Rights Record Is Still Poor
A draft of a State Department report on human rights has concluded that China did not make significant progress in curbing widespread abuses last year, senior Administration officials said today.
President Clinton has said such progress is necessary for China to win extension of preferential trade status next summer.
The officials said the report's findings underscore the repeated warnings by Mr.
Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher that unless the Chinese move forward urgently on human rights, Beijing will lose the right to export goods to the United States under the same low tariffs enjoyed by most other countries.


New Chief Is Named at Phillips Petroleum
The Phillips Petroleum Company announced today that Wayne Allen, its president and chief operating officer for the last two years, will become chairman and chief executive on May 1.
Mr.
Allen, 57, will succeed C. J. (Pete) Silas, who will retire in April when he reaches the mandatory retirement age of 62.
The move was expected.


In This Tournament, 2 Is Better Than 1+1
Some members of the Senior PGA Tour say they want to leave the Mercedes Championships at the La Costa Resort and Spa and start their own version of the annual season-opening tournament of champions.
They complain that under the current format they do not get enough money, enough time on television or enough print coverage.
They say they are treated as the inferior product.
They posit that they are a strong enough draw to go it alone.


Receiver Jackson Fears Slight by Simms
He is, without question, a solid and talented receiver.
But by all accounts, the confidence level of Mark Jackson right now is low.
Coaches say that a few dropped passes, one big one in particular last weekend against the Minnesota Vikings, have him trying too hard.
Players have given him encouragement all week, a pat on the back, a kind word, but they say he looks like a puppy dog who has been scolded with a newspaper.


Emily Jordan Boxer, Television Producer, 65
Emily Jordan Boxer, a television producer who arranged book interviews for NBC television's "Today" show in the 1980's, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
A resident of Manhattan and Amagansett, L.I., she was 65.
The cause was massive pneumonia, said her husband, John Boxer.


No Headline
"It's weird, but when you hit Friday's shift, and arrive at the end of the week, why everybody's looking forward to the weekend! As if they were back in the free world." JAMES BEATHARD, a death row inmate in Texas.  [ A1:6. ]


Karachi Journal; With Blood Tie Sundered, Blood Divides Bhuttos
"She tells a lot of lies, this daughter of mine," Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's mother said.
Nusrat Bhutto is also the widow of former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and dowager of Pakistan's leading political family.
She spoke angrily of her daughter's Government on Monday after learning that a session of the trial of her son, Mir Murtaza Bhutto, had been called off without explanation.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
We were strolling along in the East 50's when my husband shouted, "Wow, look at this!" He was pointing to a Dumpster.
There, on top, was a double bass fiddle.
We climbed up and pulled it out, along with two bows, and carried our booty away.
He held the bottom, I clutched the neck and we boarded a Second Avenue bus headed for SoHo.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING Aamodt Beats Course  Kjetil-Andre Aamodt of Norway produced his two best runs of the season yesterday on the longest and toughest giant slalom course on the World Cup circuit, at Hinterstoder, Austria, and scored his first victory of the season.
Aamodt's performance widened his overall World Cup lead.
He had a winning aggregate time of 2 minutes 49.63 seconds on the Baerenalm Hoess slope, which had a vertical drop of 440 yards with 62 gates in the first run and 65 in the second.
Aamodt held an edge of 0.71 seconds over Christian Mayer heading into the second heat.  (AP) TENNIS Sampras Wins Easily  The defending champion, Pete Sampras, beat Jonas Svensson of Sweden, 6-4, 6-2, in an opening-round match in the New South Wales Open yesterday in Sydney, Australia.
Andrei Medvedev, seeded second, was forced out by a knee injury, which could keep him from this year's first Grand Slam tournament, the Australian Open, which begins Monday.
His place in the main draw was taken by Jamie Morgan of Australia, who defeated Marc Goellner of Germany by 6-1, 7-6 (7-4).
Richey Reneberg turned in a surprise by eliminating eighth-seeded Karel Novacek of the Czech Republic by 6-1, 6-3. (AP)
Austin's Comeback Hits a Snag: Third-seeded Ann Grossman outplayed Tracy Austin, a former United States Open champion, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in a first-round match at the $100,000 Tasmanian International Open in Hobart, Australia.
Austin, making a comeback at 31, served five double faults and now has a 6-7 won-lost record in singles since her comeback began last February.  (AP) HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL Floyd Beats Melville  Led by the Robert Hodgson, undefeated William Floyd High School of Mastic Beach, L.I., won its fifth game of the season and second in two days, defeating Ward Melville (5-4) by 67-46.
Hodgson scored 30 points, grabbed 14 rebounds, blocked 8 shots and stole the ball 4 times.
Off-guard Terence Jackson chipped in 16 points, 4 assists and 4 steals.
N.H.L.
Maple Leafs Triumph  Doug Gilmour scored his 14th goal of the season with 50 seconds remaining, lifting the Toronto Maple Leafs over the Washington Capitals, 2-1, in Landover, Md., last night.
Dave Andreychuk scored his league-leading 35th goal for Toronto, which has lost only once in its last six games. (AP)
Flyers 4, Senators 1: Andre Faust scored the go-ahead goal with 5:06 left, sending the Philadelphia Flyers past the Ottawa Senators in Philadelphia.
Faust was called up earlier in the day from Hershey of the American Hockey League. (AP)
Sabres 5, Blackhawks 2: The rookie Derek Plante scored one goal and set up two others as Buffalo handed host Chicago its fourth straight loss. (AP)
Penguins 5, Bruins 4: Kevin Stevens scored his third goal of the game with 51 seconds left in overtime and Pittsburgh beat visiting Boston.
The Penguins are 4-0-9 in overtime this year and lead the N.H.L. in overtime games and points. (AP)
Stars 5, Oilers 2: Ulf Dahlen scored twice and led a second-period flurry that sent host Dallas Stars past Edmonton.
Dean Evason had a goal and an assist for the Stars. (AP)
Sabres Gain a Partner: The Buffalo Sabres are getting a new part-owner, whose investment will help the team cover its losses until the team's new arena opens next year.
Sabres Chairman Seymour Knox III said the team signed an agreement with cable television executive John Rigas, whose family is investing up to $20 million in the franchise.
Rigas would gain a one-third interest in the Sabres.


R. Brinkley Smithers, 86, Founder Of Fund That Fights Alcoholism
R.
Brinkley Smithers, a recovered alcoholic who marshaled his personal and family fortune into the nation's largest foundation in support of alcoholism research and treatment, died yesterday at North Shore Community Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 86 and lived in Mill Neck, L.I.
His family said he had a brief illness.


Officer Wounded and Man Is Killed in East New York
A police officer was shot in the leg last night and an 18-year-old suspect was killed when the officer and six others responded to a "man with a gun" radio call and confronted the suspect in a darkened basement in East New York, Brooklyn.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said the police did not find a weapon near the suspect and that it was a "possibility" that the wounded officer, Kevin Sherman, was hit by a bullet fired by one of the other officers.


Loan Expert Leaves Post At Chemical
Darla D. Moore, the banker who pioneered the profitable business of lending to bankrupt companies, said yesterday that she had resigned from the Chemical Bank.
"I had a tremendous year," she said yesterday, "But I feel I have accomplished all I can here."


Yield A-Test Data, U.S. Is Told
In a public meeting with Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary, environmentalists, doctors, scientists and critics of the United States' nuclear testing programs called today for the release of thousands of classified documents that describe the Government's nuclear activities since the 1940's.
The meeting, which was attended by more than 100 people, including two dozen invited to share their ideas about how declassification should occur, was arranged by the Clinton Administration partly to counter the new wave of protest over over Government-sanctioned medical radiation tests of decades ago.


Disarming Diplomacy in Ukraine
In a victory for its nuclear diplomacy, the Clinton Administration has persuaded Ukraine's leader to get rid of the nuclear arsenal he inherited from the Soviet Union.
In agreeing to the deal, President Leonid Kravchuk recognized that Ukraine's nuclear legacy may be worth more converted into fuel than as arms.
The chief concern now is that nationalists in the Ukrainian Parliament will find a way to block the pact.
If instituted, the agreement would remove a threat from Ukrainian missiles still programmed to hit American targets, reduce the risk that the warheads will fall into reckless hands and keep tensions in the former Soviet Union from escalating to nuclear war.


Ignorance of the Law Can Be an Excuse, Justices Rule
People who keep their cash transactions with banks to under $10,000 to evade Federal reporting requirements cannot be convicted without proof that they knew such action is illegal, the Supreme Court ruled today.
The 5-to-4 decision, written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, overturned the convictions of two gamblers who paid a $160,000 casino debt by obtaining cashier's checks for just under $10,000 from several banks near Reno.
The Court said that the trial judge had erroneously instructed the jury that the Government did not have to prove that the gamblers knew their conduct was illegal under a Federal money-laundering law.


Begging and Giving
Begging.
Most people, especially in New York, are conflicted about begging.
Panhandlers can be annoying, menacing or pitiable.
They remind the rest of us of matters we'd rather ignore, from poverty and deprivation to mental illness and drug addiction.
What to do when approached by beggars -- give them some loose change to help them, or withhold money to discourage them?
And what of the desire of the rest of us to go about our lives free of hassle and guilt?
Transit Authority officials have asked that question and they have offered up an answer: a crackdown.
Don't give to beggars, they're telling straphangers; arrest panhandlers caught begging repeatedly, they're telling transit police.


Theater in Review
The Courtesan and the Eunuch  28th Street Theater 120 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 30 By Terry Bradberry; directed by Dan McKereghan; sets and costumes by Keven Lock; lighting by Christopher Caines; stage manager, Sonia Belochi.
Presented by New Globe Productions.
WITH: Blythe Baten, Jennifer Fleming, Eleonora Kihlberg, John Marino and Paolo Seganti.


Guatemala and Rebels in Accord
After being deadlocked for more than a year, the Guatemalan Government and leftist rebels have agreed to a new framework for negotiations to end fighting that has plagued the Central American nation for more than 30 years.
The accord, reached on Monday after five days of negotiations here, calls for the creation of a broad-based assembly in Guatemala, headed by a Roman Catholic Bishop, Rodolfo Quezada Toruno, who was the mediator of past negotiations.
The assembly is to make recommendations to solve the country's social and human rights problems.


International Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carnegie Announces 1994-95 Season
The conclusion of a two-year Mahler cycle, performances by the Vienna Philharmonic under Sir Georg Solti and the London Symphony Orchestra led by Pierre Boulez, and a series in which Emanuel Ax and friends will explore orchestral, chamber and solo works by Brahms and Schoenberg are among the highlights of Carnegie Hall's 1994-95 season.
Sir Neville Marriner is to open the season on Sept. 29, conducting the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields in works by Vivaldi, Haydn, Mozart, Berlioz and Dvorak, with the mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli as soloist.
The season ends with a chamber-music workshop for musicians between the ages of 18 and 26, led by Isaac Stern from May 27 to June 11, 1995.


Jackson Won't Quite Say, 'I Told You So'
Mark Jackson believes the Knicks would be better if they had never traded him.
So Jackson was not surprised last week when New York traded for Derek Harper.
The Knicks wanted a point guard with experience, savvy and leadership ability.
Jackson, the Los Angeles Clippers' flamboyant point guard, once brought those same qualities to the Knicks.
Since being traded to the Clippers before last season, Jackson believes his intangibles have been missed in New York.


Cogeco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Chief of Teamsters Union Ousts A Leader of a Powerful Local
Ron Carey, the head of the international teamsters' union, yesterday ousted the leader of a powerful New York City local whom a Mafia defector had identified as a major mob associate in the union's airline employees division.
In removing William F. Genoese as secretary-treasurer of Local 732, based in Queens, Mr.
Carey censured an official whom two years earlier he had appointed to clean up another New York local that Federal authorities said was controlled by the Lucchese crime family.


Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Army Officers' Trials to Test Democracy in Peru
Hurrying before the light of dawn exposed their work at a Peruvian Army firing range, a group of hooded gunmen lined up nine students and a professor kidnapped hours earlier from dormitories at a teachers college here.
In the final minutes of that night 18 months ago, all 10 were shot in the head.
Returning two days later to study the site in daylight, the gunmen found a foot protruding from the desert sand and hastened to cover up traces of the killing, according to participants quoted in press accounts here.


Edward Duke, Actor, 40
Edward Duke, a British actor who appeared on Broadway, died on Saturday in London.
He was 40.
The cause was AIDS, said Pete Sanders, a publicity agent.


CHRONICLE
Talk radio, hardly the most mellow of media, is about to become a bit more edgy.
EDMUND G. BROWN JR., the former California Governor, sometime Presidential candidate and longtime gadfly, will soon jangle the airwaves with his own nationally syndicated radio show.
Mr.
Brown, who made a surprising showing in the 1992 Democratic Presidential primaries by attacking the political system as corrupt, will begin a two-hour show on the Talk America Radio Network on Jan. 31.
Five nights a week from a studio in Oakland, Calif., he will discuss a wide variety of his favorite topics, including universal health care, nonpolluting energy sources and religious faith.


For CBS, Longer Pregame Show But No N.F.L. Game to Telecast
CBS has escalated the network football wars by planning to continue televising its studio show, "The N.F.L. Today," despite having lost to the Fox Network the rights to National Football Conference games over the next four years.
"We want to maintain a competitive program that focuses on what we do best, stories and features about the N.F.L.," said Neal Pilson, the president of CBS Sports.


Carroll Puts Defense in Assistant's Hands
Coach Pete Carroll of the Jets, who was hired last Friday to replace Bruce Coslet, acted swiftly to fill his old job as defensive coordinator, giving one of his soldiers, the defensive-line coach, Greg Robinson, a field generalship yesterday.
With Robinson's promotion, Carroll has filled one of the two coordinator positions and created an opening for a defensive-line coach.
There has been speculation that Carroll might promote another assistant, either Walt Harris, who is the quarterbacks coach, or Larry Beightol, who is the offensive-line coach, to offensive coordinator.


Ireland to Lift Radio-TV Ban on Speakers From I.R.A. Wing
The Irish Government said today that it would rescind the 20-year-old regulation that has prevented representatives of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, from speaking on television and radio.
The removal of the ban as of Jan. 19 was widely interpreted here and in the British province of Northern Ireland as a concession intended to persuade Sinn Fein to renounce the I.R.A. campaign of violence and to accept the offer of the British and Irish Governments to join talks to end the guerrilla war that has killed 3,112 people since 1969.


49er Tension Is High Where Seifert Roams
George Seifert was a zoology major in college, and this is some zoo he has got himself into.
The San Francisco 49ers are either in the Super Bowl, or in ruins, and they are now almost four years between Lombardi Trophies.
Defeats can be traced to Joe Montana's rickety elbow or to Steve Young's eccentricity or to Eddie DeBartolo's decision to shut the bank vault, but, recently, blame has been put at the doormat of Seifert, the head coach.
He would rather be fishing, but as long as he is ashore Seifert is marooned in his office.
The least of his worries is Montana, the majority of his worries are the Giants, but 49er fans have it slightly the other way around.
Seifert has had to deal with enough legends for three lifetimes -- Montana and Bill Walsh, to name two -- and has managed to flick them off his lucky sweater like lint.


Black Coaches Threaten a Boycott of Basketball
A rapidly escalating dispute between black coaches and leaders of higher education approached the confrontation stage today, with the coaches threatening to boycott college basketball games as a result of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's decision not to add a 14th scholarship to its Division I men's teams.
The threat of a walkout, which could also include players, was made one day after the scholarship proposal was defeated in a vote by athletic administrators and school presidents at the N.C.A.A.'s 88th convention.


Red Tape Leaves Owner Only Part of Her House
ALL Catalina Lopez wants is to gain possession of the second floor of the tiny house she owns so she and her 33-year-old paraplegic son can each have a bedroom.
But after struggling with bureaucrats for the last 12 years, Mrs.
Lopez and her son are still forced to sleep in a damp renovated basement in Brooklyn while unwanted tenants occupy the upstairs, paying her a bureaucratically fixed rent of $45 a month.
They mail her the check and she cashes it with the taste of gall.


With One-Party Control, No Top Democrat to Fault
The 206th New Jersey Legislature settled into the 120 seats in the Senate and Assembly today, with Republicans once again in control of both legislative houses.
But those seats lack one cushion the Republicans have had the last two years: a Democratic chief executive who can be blamed for problems.
"The time for excuses is over," said Senator Henry P. McNamara, Republican of Wyckoff, after the ceremonies today.
"There is no room for failure because the voters will know where the responsibility lies."


Colleges Fear Law on Student Loans Means Meddling
When Congress moved to stanch a hemorrhage of bad student loans in 1992 with the passage of the Higher Education Act, a subclause set in motion a fundamental change in the way the nation's 3,600 colleges and universities are supervised.
No one seemed to notice.
But the provision opened the door for the first time to direct Federal intervention in private education.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DONNELLEY MARKETING INC., Stamford, Conn., purchased FDC Inc., a data base and computer mailing service provider, from Fingerhut Inc., Minnetonka, Minn., a mail order and direct marketing company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Executive Changes
BRANDON SYSTEMS CORP., Secaucus, N.J., appointed Patricia Kennedy senior vice president for branch operations and Peter Lordi senior vice president for finance and administration.
DAYTON HUDSON CORP., Minneapolis, the general merchandise retailer, named Douglas A. Scovanner senior vice president of finance.


Mozambique Working Hard to Build Its Future
To the Editors:
I just came back from six months as a development aid volunteer in Mozambique, rebuilding two abandoned schools with local residents.
Mozambique is said to be the poorest country in the world, a former Portuguese colony that gained independence just 18 years ago.
It has suffered a decade of civil war, financed by South Africa, China and others.


JURORS ARE PICKED IN TEXAS SECT CASE
A jury of eight women and four men was selected today to hear the Federal Government's case against 11 members of the Branch Davidian sect charged with murder in the slaying of four Federal agents last February near Waco.
Judge Walter S. Smith Jr., moving briskly through two days of pretrial motions and the questioning of more than 40 potential jurors in Federal District Court here, ordered opening arguments to begin on Wednesday morning.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Low-Fat Diets: How Low to Go?
THE mantra for the 90's is "Eat more, weigh less," but diet experts are starting to ask questions about this latest in a long line of magic bullets intended to take off weight painlessly.
The new dieting wisdom comes with just one caveat: no more than 10 percent of the calories can come from fat.
That's a far cry from the normal American diet, which hovers near 40 percent of calories from fat, and a good deal less than the maximum of 30 percent recommended by many health professionals.
Not many experts think the latest dieting regimen has any better chance of success than the very low-calorie liquid diets that preceded it or earlier fads like the Scarsdale Diet, the Fit for Life Diet, the grapefruit diet or the rice diet.


People
*
Steve Troy, president at Ketchum Directory Advertising, New York, was promoted to the new position of chairman.
John Joseph, executive vice president of strategic planning, was promoted to president, succeeding Mr.
Troy. *
Allan Winneker, president and chief executive at Wunderman Cato Johnson, Chicago, was named to the additional new position of president of Wunderman's North America division, overseeing units in Chicago; Detroit; Newport Beach, Calif.; Rochester, and Toronto.


Serbs Pound Sarajevo Again And Bosnians Counterattack
Artillery exchanges drew new blood in the Bosnian capital today and an exploding rocket prompted United Nations officials to close the city's airport only hours after it had reopened.
Six civilians died in the Serbian shelling and at least 40 were wounded, hospital and morgue officials said.
Serbian officials reached by Reuters said three civilians were killed in Bosnian Government attacks.


Seagate Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Erica Wallach, 71, A Prisoner of Soviets In Cold War Intrigue
Erica Glaser Wallach, who spent five years in Communist prisons at the height of the cold war on espionage charges that the Soviet authorities later said were false, died on Dec. 22 in Fauquier Hospital in Warrenton, Va.
She was 71.
She died of cancer, said Renee Glaser, a cousin.


Military Court Assails Navy in Ruling on Tailhook
The nation's highest military court today rejected the appeal of a Navy aviator who is trying to avoid trial on charges that he was involved in the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal.
But in strikingly strong language, the court accused the Navy of displaying a "careless and amateurish approach" to the case.
The United States Court of Military Appeals ruled that the officer, Lieut.
David Samples, did not receive immunity from prosecution in exchange for cooperating with the Navy authorities.
The panel's 5-to-0 decision allows the Navy to prosecute Lieutenant Samples on charges of indecent assault at the 1991 convention of the Tailhook Association, a private group of naval aviators, in Las Vegas, Nev.
No date has been set for the trial.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Knicks Look Half-Hearted In Victory
One half of solid basketball was all the Knicks needed last night.
Playing a Los Angeles Clippers team that appeared uninterested, New York pulled away in the second half for an easy 98-77 victory at Madison Square Garden.
After a dreary first half that ended with the score 44-44, the Knicks (22-9) did some soul-searching and raised their level of play.


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Man Questioned as Crown Hts. Witness
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office and Brooklyn detectives have interviewed a Brooklyn man they say they believe was a witness to the 1991 killing of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Investigators working on the case, energized by the recent emergence of a new suspect and four witnesses whom they say can help them construct a case, interviewed Henry K. Rice on consecutive days in December after being informed that Mr.
Rice had been present at the scene of the fatal attack on Mr.
Rosenbaum, a Hasidic scholar.


Merry-Go-Round Files for Bankruptcy Protection
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises, the embattled specialty retail stores, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday after a long, tortuous, but ultimately futile effort to placate its creditors.
The company, whose ability to buy merchandise for the spring had been constrained by speculation that it would seek bankruptcy protection, said it had obtained a $125 million financing package from the CIT Group to use while in bankruptcy.
The company, which is based in Joppa, Md., also has $90 million in cash.


Memorial for Shirer
A memorial service for the author William L. Shirer is to be held on Saturday at 2 P.M. at the Church on the Hill, Main Street, Lenox, Mass.
Mr.
Shirer, author of "The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich," died on Dec. 28 at the age of 89.
The historian James MacGregor Burns, a friend of the author, will speak at the service, which is open to the public.


Review/Theater; A Divided Family in an Alien Land
Set in the mid-1930's, "The Ash Fire," Gavin Kostick's portrait of Polish immigrants in Ireland, at the American Jewish Theater, has a tidy, schematic quality that evokes the conventional dramas of the era in which it takes place.
With diagrammatic clarity, it traces the fitful assimilation of the three Katzmeir brothers, each of whom conveniently embodies a different, sociologically relevant trait: Nat (Joseph Siravo), the eldest, is a fiercely religious cabinetmaker, with visions of "a new Jerusalem"; the awkward Rube (Michael Countryman) turns out to be a natural, worldly businessman, and the restive, intellectual Abe (Andrew Polk) is drawn to socialism.
As the brothers' increasingly divergent world views run against one another, Mr.
Kostick takes the opportunity to deliver a series of small history lessons about Jewish traditions and Irish politics, helpfully amplified by the women in the brothers' lives: Nat's devoutly Kosher wife, Cissy (Rosemary Fine); Cait (Jenny Conroy), the pretty domestic with whom Rube begins an affair, and Doris (Terry Donnelly), an outspoken feminist who educates Abe, via Socratic questioning, in revolutionary thought.


Washington Fedl S &amp; L Assn of Seattle (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York State Police Chief May Get Top U.S. Drug Post
Thomas A. Constantine, the superintendent of the New York State Police, has emerged as the leading candidate to run the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Federal agency responsible for fighting the war on drugs, Clinton Administration officials said today.
If nominated by President Clinton and confirmed by the Senate, Mr.
Constantine, who supervises nearly 4,000 police officers and has a budget of $238 million in New York State, would take charge of an agency with 7,200 employees, a budget of $722 million and global responsibilities.


Public &amp; Private; Hillary Rodham Candor
It is the end of Hillary Rodham Clinton's first year in office.
That description alone illustrates how successful she has been at transforming the notion of how the spouse of the President can serve the nation.
Amid endless speculation about how much she could do and how openly she could do it, Mrs.
Clinton simply went to work on health care reform.
When the President introduced his plan to the Congress, she was applauded enthusiastically.
Polls suggest the American people applauded, too.


Funds Find Managers In Deals
The case of a mutual fund manager who was dismissed last week for his handling of personal investments is bringing to light other instances of powerful money managers having participated in private deals with a stock promoter with whom their funds have done business.
Rafi Khan, a stock promoter who is under investigation by Federal prosecutors on accusations of perjury and who was fined for securities fraud in Canada in 1976, did favors for several of his money manager customers by allowing them personally to buy special private shares in stocks he was promoting, according to documents filed last summer with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The practice is not illegal, but it raises questions of the independence of money managers who accept such favors.


Paramount's Advisers Said To Be Favoring Bid by QVC
Advisers to the board of Paramount Communications Inc. are strongly leaning toward urging acceptance of QVC Network Inc.'s takeover bid over the latest offer from Viacom Inc., a person close to the Paramount board said last night.
Paramount's board meets this afternoon to evaluate the new Viacom offer, which has a total value of about $77 a share -- still lower than the QVC bid, which is worth about $82 a share.


CHRONICLE
After what was described as a long spiritual journey, the DUCHESS OF KENT is leaving the Church of England to become a Roman Catholic.
Historians said her conversion was unprecedented for a member of Britain's royal family, according to news reports from London.
The Duchess, whose husband, EDWARD, is 18th in line to the throne, is to be received into the Roman Catholic Church at a private ceremony in London on Friday conducted by the Archbishop of Westminster, BASIL CARDINAL HUME, her office said.


New Mayor Tests Magic of the Airwaves
Some staff salaries still have not been set.
And governing initiatives seem weeks away.
But less than two weeks into office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has quickly adapted to one aspect of the job: the image-age possibilities of talk radio and late-night television for selling himself directly to the public.
In a media barrage that began Monday night with an appearance on the "Late Show With David Letterman," he traded quips with television's king of cool, and then turned up yesterday morning in rapid-fire succession on Channel 5's "Good Day New York" and two drive-time radio talk shows, WABC's "Curtis and Lisa Show" and WOR's "Rambling With Gambling."


Movie Shows How Nazis Dehumanized Jews
To the Editor:
In "Extras in the Shadows" (column, Jan. 2), Frank Rich bemoans the fact that Steven Spielberg's movie "Schindler's List" depicts the Jews of Hitler's Europe as nameless and soulless characters.
According to Mr.
Rich, the Jews are not dramatized as individuals, like Anne Frank in her diary and Meryl Streep in the film "Sophie's Choice."


Survival at Ground Zero: For the Hard-Core Homeless, Life at 15 Degrees
The vast sheet of ice under the Brooklyn Bridge was smooth and still Monday night on the streets of lower Manhattan.
A rat had been trapped and frozen in the amber of the glacier, and the only sign of life was the distant rumble of traffic far above.
Suddenly, men began to materialize from the shadows, walking and sliding across the ice toward a van that had just pulled up.
They came from the dark chambers and crannies built into the bridge's great foundation, and they came from the benches and hollows along the street the city has named the Avenue of the Finest.
They lined up in an orderly file, and as the back door of the van was flung open, they breathed deep the scent of the hot chili that would be their evening's warmest moment.


Bridge
Dictionaries rarely have photographs, and one with cartoons may be unique.
The Bridge-Player's Dictionary has both, and also 1,400 terms, both technical and colloquial.
It is a 280-page hard-cover book, obtainable for $22.95, including shipping, from Baron-Barclay Bridge Supplies, (800) 274-2221.
The dictionary gives the diagramed example of a dummy reversal.
North-South have overbid to seven spades, and the diagram gives a possible route.
North's two no-trump is Jacoby, asking for a singleton, and four no-trump is the modern variety of Blackwood, Roman Key Card.
A five-club response shows zero or three key cards, counting the trump king together with the four aces.
Five diamonds is an inquiry about the trump queen, and six clubs shows that card plus the club king.
When North discovers that South has a singleton diamond, all the top spades and the club king he gambles on a grand slam.


Steeler Dismissals
The Pittsburgh Steelers dropped two coaches yesterday: JOHN GUY of special teams and STEVE FURNESS of the defensive line.
The changes were made only a day after the head coach, BILL COWHER, hinted that staff changes were likely following a 9-7 season and a playoff loss to Kansas City.


After 30 Years, a Smoking Scorecard
Commemorating the 30th anniversary of the first Federal report on the health effects of smoking, numerous health groups and seven former Surgeons General today called on Congress and the Clinton Administration to enact tough new measures to restrict the advertising and sale of tobacco.
Thirty years to the day after the first Surgeon General's report on smoking was issued on Jan. 11, 1964, the health leaders charged that tobacco is still killing more than an estimated 420,000 Americans each year while serious regulation is being blocked by the powerful tobacco industry.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Monday, about Viacom Inc.'s new offer for Paramount Communications Inc., referred incorrectly to the stock part of the offer.
It includes Viacom's nonvoting class B shares, not the voting class A shares.


Shreveport G.M. Plant Out on Strike
Unable to reach agreement on a local labor contract, the United Automobile Workers union struck a General Motors assembly plant today in Shreveport, La., halting production.
The plant manufactures two versions of a popular light pickup truck.
Auto industry analysts said the strike would have to continue for at least two weeks before it cut into sales, a prospect that appears unlikely.


Mellon Wins an Eclipse
PAUL MELLON, owner of the Kentucky Derby winner Sea Hero, won the Eclipse Award of Merit yesterday for his contributions to thoroughbred racing.
When Sea Hero won a $1 million bonus for collecting the most points from the Triple Crown races, Mellon donated the money to the Grayson Jockey Club Research Foundation. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.02
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
3.02
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.18
3.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.14
5.17
6.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.24
6.24
7.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.20
7.20
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.51
5.51
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about new allegations of fraud in the limited partnership scandal at Prudential Securities, misstated the given name of the lead lawyer in a class action against the firm.
He is Edward Grossmann, not Stanley.


UKRAINE HESITATES ON NUCLEAR DEAL
The Ukrainian Government, taking a markedly more reserved approach to the agreement President Clinton announced on eliminating Ukraine's nuclear weapons, said today that the accord was still under discussion and might not be signed in Moscow on Friday.
Adding to the doubts surrounding the accord, the Ukrainian President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, has yet to mention the agreement publicly, and several members of Ukraine's Parliament said he would have a tough time winning ratification of the deal.
There has been strong opposition in Parliament to giving up the weapons because of a perceived threat from Russia.
Quick Stop in Kiev
President Clinton is scheduled to stop for two hours at the airport here Wednesday afternoon for a largely symbolic meeting with President Kravchuk before flying on to Moscow.
Mr.
Kravchuk has been snubbed by the White House until now because of his country's refusal to destroy its nuclear arsenal, the third-largest in the world.
Mr.
Kravchuk is then supposed to fly to Moscow to sign the accord with Mr.
Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia on Friday.


New Tack on Technology
Few subjects are closer to Vice President Al Gore's heart than developing an advanced communications network for the country, but on this matter the Administration has decided it is wiser to coax than to dictate.
In a speech today in Los Angeles, Mr.
Gore outlined a series of legislative initiatives aimed at promoting the construction of an advanced nationwide network that can link classrooms, electronic libraries, rural doctors and ordinary people in their own homes.  [ Page D5. ]


Market Place; Changes at Reliance Group seem to be overcoming bad memories.
CAN leopards change their spots?
Securities dealers on Wall Street seem to think so, at least in the case of the Reliance Group Holdings, an insurance company controlled by Saul P. Steinberg.
Through the 1980's, Reliance was known for the sour taste it left in the mouths of investors who bought shares at $10 in a public offering in 1986, only to see the stock hover around $5 for years as the company reported lackluster profits, culminating in losses in 1991 and 1992.
Particularly galling was the $593 million reduction in profits from 1988 through 1992 because the company had underestimated its insurance losses -- and overstated its profits -- in earlier years when the company was privately owned by the Steinbergs.


Scoring Is Down but Fights Are Flourishing
As the National Hockey League regular-season schedule reaches the midway point, some trends are becoming clear.
Scoring is down, fighting is up, suspensions are numerous, expansion is a success, labor-management relations are touchy, key injuries are plentiful.
And whatever happened to Gil Stein?
Pleasant Surprises
Expansion.
This season's new teams may be hockey's best pair of first-year franchises ever.
Partly because of a generous expansion draft, partly because of smart management and partly because of ownership with deep pockets, the Florida Panthers and the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim are more than respectable.
The Panthers are contending for a playoff berth and the Ducks are a success at the gate and the souvenir stand.


Anthony Borden, 79, Greek Church Leader
Dr.
Anthony G. Borden, a radiologist and former national commander of the Order of St.
Andrew the Apostle, an organization affiliated with the Greek Orthodox Church, died last Thursday at the Fox Chase Hospital in Fox Chase, Pa.
He was 79 and lived in Rydal, Pa.
He had been ill for a long time, his family said.


Succession Questions For Lilco
Anthony F. Earley Jr., who helped guide the Long Island Lighting Company through a rocky period after it shut down its Shoreham Nuclear Power Station, has resigned as president to take the same position with the Detroit Edison Company.
Some Wall Street analysts said his departure left open the question of who would eventually succeed the chairman of the utility, William J. Catacosinos, who is 63.
The analysts said Mr.
Earley, 44, had been considered next in line to run Lilco.


Group Videotron reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Illinois Jacquet: Still a Master, Still Learning
Illinois Jacquet is a short man with big hair, and when he hits the stage he's liable to do just about anything.
He may dance a bit, or play puffy, billowing notes on his tenor saxophone.
He may sing, or tell a joke.
Or he'll bend backward, howling on the saxophone, waving his band on to bigger and bigger riffs.
His performances -- part vaudeville, part music -- span a good portion of the century, and have a story to them.
Mr.
Jacquet, 71, has settled in for a rare engagement at Tavern on the Green, Tuesdays through Sundays until Jan. 30.
Shows are at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M. on Sundays and on Tuesdays through Thursdays (music charge, $17), and 9 and 11 P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays (music charge, $23.50).
Mr.
Jacquet and his orchestra are offering a course in one of the great American cultural developments, the big band.
In Mr.
Jacquet's hands the orchestra glides through luxuriant material, draping a sonic richness over a room.
Basing its style loosely on the innovations of the Count Basie Orchestra, Mr.
Jacquet's band has a Southwestern blues sensibility, never sentimental and always swinging.


Book Notes; Gone but Not Forgotten, Or, Death's Effect on Sales
The death last week of Virginia Kelley, President Clinton's free-spirited mother, saddened the First Family, touched the nation and made it onto front pages and evening news programs across the country.
And it spurred Victoria Meyer, the publicity director at Simon &amp; Schuster, to pick up the telephone and make an announcement to reporters: the company, she said, was accelerating publication of Mrs.
Kelley's memoirs, "Leading With My Heart," to May from October.
"We wanted it to be out in time for Mother's Day," Ms.
Meyer said.
"I can't think of a better tribute to this woman."


Consumer, Beware of Banking 'Reform'
To the Editor:
Re "Unfinished Bank Reform" (editorial, Dec. 29): Banking "reform" to date has not saved taxpayers any money, it has only placed a straitjacket of unnecessary regulation around banks, making it difficult for them to lend, serve their communities and fuel the economy.


Foley's Lawyers Argue Against Limits on Terms
Waving pocket-sized copies of the Constitution, lawyers argued in Federal court here today over whether voters can set term limits for members of Congress.
The case, brought by Representative Thomas S. Foley against term limits in Washington State, is the first major legal challenge to state initiatives passed last year.
Fifteen states have passed laws limiting the tenure of their United States senators and representatives, but the measures are clouded by legal uncertainty.
The Constitution has no provision on term limits.
This case, which legal experts say is on a fast track to the Supreme Court, could set the standard that will determine if term limits are legal.


Seaway Food Town (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Times to Seek Cost Savings Including Some Cuts in Jobs
After six years of sharp declines in advertising, The New York Times reported yesterday that it had a "tiny -- but nonetheless real"-- advertising gain of 1 percent for 1993, compared with 1992.
But in a memorandum to the staff, the newspaper's publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., said that while The Times's financial picture "has stabilized, we still find ourselves facing serious difficulties" that will force the newspaper to seek cost savings, including a reduction in its white-collar work force.


Sitting Down With Syria
The meeting this Sunday in Geneva between President Clinton and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria once again reminds Americans that Mr.
Assad is a major player in Middle East peace making.
One hopes the meeting will encourage Mr.
Assad to take further steps toward peace, in the spirit of his 1992 statement that Syria was ready for a "peace of the brave." But Mr.
Clinton will encounter a man whose doubts about Israeli policy toward Syria and the Arab states in general have not significantly changed since he discussed them with President Jimmy Carter in 1977.


Leader to Quit Post-Riot Panel In Los Angeles
In the latest upheaval for the riot-recovery effort here, Rebuild L. A., the group's chief operating officer said today that he would announce his resignation on Wednesday as part of a revamping of the organization.
The official, Bernard W. Kinsey, a former Xerox Corporation executive who also served as Rebuild L. A.'s co-chairman, was appointed in June 1992 to strengthen the group's management.
He was also picked in response to calls for more diverse racial representation in the organization's leadership.
Mr.
Kinsey, who is 49, is black.
The organization is seeking to create jobs and economic opportunities in riot-torn neighborhoods here.


BanPonce Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Blast Trial Witnesses Give Inventory of Search Items
There was a heavy brown shirt and a pair of faded jeans, some six-volt lantern bulbs and an automobile tire; there were bottles of acid, New York City subway maps, plastic tubing, surgical masks, a telephone directory and a booklet from the Spy Emporium titled "Surveillance Transmitters and Receivers."
The prosecution in the World Trade Center case yesterday continued the long and tedious task of presenting the various pieces of evidence seized during the Federal Bureau of Investigation's searches of apartments used by some of the defendants in the bombing trial, and of a storage locker where, the Government maintains, the chemicals used to make the explosive were kept.


USAIR LOSES RULING IN CRASH CASE
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that USAir was negligent in a crash in which 27 people died at La Guardia Airport in 1992.
The compensatory damages to be awarded to survivors and to families of the dead have not yet been determined.


Bankruptcy Update Service Sees Slowdown in Big Cases
Peter A. Chapman went from chasing deadbeats to writing about them.
Now he may soon be out of that business.
Mr.
Chapman publishes weekly newsletters devoted to specific billion-dollar bankruptcies.
His current best sellers: R. H. Macy &amp; Company Bankruptcy News, Olympia &amp; York Bankruptcy News, and Eagle-Picher Bankruptcy News.


Raiders Call Cold All a State Of Mind
It was 76 degrees here this afternoon.
The sun was shining brightly.
The Raiders went to work for their playoff game at Buffalo on Saturday with big smiles.
And warm limbs.
Meanwhile, in Buffalo, 8 to 10 inches of snow covered the ground.
More is likely.
Game-time temperatures on Saturday are expected to dip below zero.
How do you re-create that here?


From One Island, a Savory Blend of Three Cultures
PUERTO RICAN food is not just cuchifritos, those fried bits of pork that are sold at luncheonettes.
Although the pig is king in Puerto Rican cooking, there are hundreds of dishes in this hybrid cuisine, which is partly Spanish (pork and rice), African (plantains) and Taino Indian (beans and guava).
It is spicy and savory, sometimes sweet and seldom bland.
It is also intact and in flux throughout New York City, where chefs like Michael Rodriguez, 38, a caterer in Queens who graduated from the Culinary Institute of America, are reducing the amount of salt in traditional dishes and using olive oil instead of lard.


A Time Editor Is Said to Get New York Magazine Offer
Kurt Andersen, an editor at large at Time magazine and a founding editor of Spy magazine, has been offered the job of editor of New York magazine, people at its parent company, K-III Magazines, said yesterday.
An announcement is expected by the end of the week.


Young Gives Fox a Moving Target
It was not a pretty picture as Mike Fox hurled his 285-pound frame at Jim McMahon last Sunday and bear-hugged the quarterback into helplessness.
Along came Keith Hamilton to deliver the blow that led to a concussion.
That play, only moments into the second half, set the tempo for the Giants' defense, which shut out the Vikings the rest of the way last Sunday to position a 17-10 Giants victory.
Later in the game, Fox also sacked McMahon's replacement, Sean Salisbury.


Wine Talk
In matters of food and drink, the southwestern part of France, commonly known as Gascony, is enjoying a wave of popularity here in the capital.
There is still no lack of Lyonnaise bistros or Alsatian choucroute palaces, but the cooking of the southwest, championed by such culinary stars as Alain Dutournier, has been quietly on the ascendancy for at least a decade.


Camden Diocese Settles Sexual-Abuse Cases
Over the last three years, the Roman Catholic diocese of Camden, N.J., has paid at least $3.2 million to settle lawsuits charging sexual abuse by nine priests, it was reported yesterday.
Responding to an article about the settlements that appeared yesterday in The Philadelphia Inquirer, Bishop James T. McHugh of Camden confirmed that settlements had been reached, but did not comment on the sums involved.
Bishop McHugh also said the settlements included an agreement among all the parties not to discuss the cases.


Mixed White House Signals on Prosecutor
The Clinton Administraton issued a stream of confusing signals today in the face of intensifying pressure from Senate Democrats to appoint an special prosecutor to examine President Clinton's past business dealings with the owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan.
Senior Administation officials who have been weighing whether to ask Attorney General Janet Reno to name an independent prosecutor said today that no decision had been made.


Review/Film: Sure Fire; Living by Old West Code on a Modern Frontier
"Sure Fire," Jon Jost's scathing character study of an ambitious land developer in the rural part of Utah that has been called the Mormon Dixie, might as well have been called "The Last American Patriarch." The film's central character, Wes, who is portrayed by Tom Blair with the intensity of a coiled cobra about to strike, isn't just any old modern-day frontiersman.
He is presented as the grimly self-righteous and puritanical embodiment of primitive code of values in which the meaning of life is defined by the ritual of the deer hunt.
As the film makes almost too clear in its climactic hunting sequence, preparing to kill an animal is much more than a sport for people like Wes.
It is a rite of purification and a sexual substitute.
The hunters talk of their first kills in the same mystical tones that others might adopt in describing their loss of virginity.


DIETING WITH: Kathleen Sullivan; With a Will and a Weigh
THE arc of Kathleen Sullivan's story cries out for a collaboration between Edith Wharton and Paddy Chayefsky, a double helix of irony and satire, glamour and ruin.
Two parts "Network," one part "House of Mirth."
Over coffee at the Plaza on Friday morning, Ms.
Sullivan was philosophical about a dramatic fall from grace that has landed her on a Weight Watchers scale.
"Hey, I put myself out there," she said.
"As they say, if you make the big bucks, kiddo, you've got to take the hits."


The Bankruptcy Business Hits Hard Times
The legions of lawyers, accountants and investment bankers who have made good livings in the last few years working out the bad-debt cases of the 80's are about to face their worst fears: the bankruptcy business is going bust.
Last year, for the first time since 1989, fewer companies entered bankruptcy than left, helping slow the volume of billion-dollar cases to a trickle.


Advertising; Absolut Switch: Image Maker to Sell Rival Vodka
It's vodka with a twist. And vodka marketing with a vengeance.
Michel Roux, who was instrumental in building the Swedish brand Absolut into the nation's best-selling imported vodka, overtaking the Russian brand Stolichnaya, will soon be responsible for selling his former rival.


F.B.I. Begins Own Search For Kerrigan's Assailant
The F.B.I. has joined the search for the attacker of Nancy Kerrigan, the figure skating star.
The F.B.I. has examined three videotapes made near the time of the attack, according to the Detroit police.
The tapes were made by a Chicago production company, by a local Detroit television station and by a spectator at Cobo Hall, where Kerrigan had just finished practice last Thursday when she was clubbed in the right knee by an unknown assailant.


Some Seizures Tied To Flashing Lights
A YOUNG woman is transfixed by the pulsating strobe lights at a discotheque and suffers a seizure.
A teen-age boy has unexplained and increasingly severe seizures after repeatedly playing a video game.


Corrections
An article on the Company News page of Business Day yesterday, about the Gillette Company's plan to eliminate 2,000 jobs, referred incorrectly to the distribution of the cutbacks.
The company said most would occur outside the United States, not just in Europe.


In Russia's New Congress, Decorum and Chaos
The two chambers of Russia's new Parliament held their maiden sessions today in separate buildings and widely contrasting styles, the upper house sedately applauding an appeal for cooperation from President Boris N. Yeltsin and the lower house sinking into a rowdy test of strength.
At the end of the day, it was clear that neither chamber would be the unmanageable old Congress of People's Deputies that Mr.
Yeltsin disbanded by force last October, but neither would they be the tame supporters that the President had hoped for.
An Angry Zhirinovsky
It was also clear that Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the unruly and often outrageous nationalist who rode a huge protest vote to take 64 of the 450 seats in the lower house, will live up to his billing.


Personal Health
IN the seven years prior to May 1992, Dr.
Loren M. Fishman, a New York specialist in rehabilitation medicine, had treated 34 patients with a form of sciatica called piriformis syndrome, his special research interest.
When his work in diagnosing and treating this painful and sometimes crippling ailment was discussed in this column, it prompted more reader mail than any other single column in 17 years.
Many of the letters were from people who were sure they had the syndrome and wanted to know what exercises they could do to relieve it.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about a steep drop in prices at the Mexican stock exchange, referred incorrectly to a record set on Monday by a larger percentage decline.
That drop -- 166 points in the exchange's index, amounting to 6.32 percent -- was the biggest percentage loss in more than four years, not six.


George B. Balamut, Lawyer, 81
George B. Balamut, a retired senior partner of the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, died on Saturday at his home in New York City.
He was 81.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.


Lukas Is Out of a Coma
The trainer JEFF LUKAS is out of a coma and has been moved to a private room in a hospital, a family spokeswoman said yesterday.
The 36-year-old Lukas, who has helped his father, D. WAYNE LUKAS, train horses since 1978, is in Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, Calif.
"They moved him out of the surgical intensive care unit into a private room last night," said PEGGY YOST,business manager for D. Wayne Lukas Stables.
"He's listed in serious but stable condition."
Lukas suffered multiple skull fractures when hit by a runaway horse at Santa Anita on Dec. 15. (AP)


Reiner G. Stoll, 80, Scientist Who Led Research in Textiles
Dr.
Reiner G. Stoll, a retired business executive, scientist and inventor, died on Thursday while vacationing in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 80 and lived in Sherman, Conn.
The cause was a heart condition, his family said.


Polian to Panthers?
BILL POLIAN, a two-time National Football League executive of the year who built the Buffalo Bills from losers into a three-time Super Bowl team, will become general manager of the the Carolina Panthers, according to newspaper and television reports.
The Charlotte Observer and WBTV-TV said the Panthers owner, JERRY RICHARDSON, has called a news conference for today to announce Polian's hiring and the elevation of the current general manager, MIKE McCORMACK, to the new position of team president. (AP)


Accounts
*
Bakers Square Restaurants, Matteson, Ill., to Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, to handle the chain's account, previously at CME KHBB Advertising, Chicago.
Tatham was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $8 million, without a review. *
United Parcel Service, Atlanta, to Brierley &amp; Partners, Dallas, as the first agency to handle direct marketing aimed at the delivery company's special customer segments.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $5 million to $10 million.


Westinghouse to Lay Off 3,400, Cut Dividend
In his first major action as chairman of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Michael H. Jordan cut the dividend in half yesterday and announced a pretax charge of $750 million to cover the costs of laying off 3,400 employees, selling operations and settling legal disputes.
Mr.
Jordan, who was named chief executive in July, has disclosed little since then except to announce in September that earnings would fall considerably short of the investment community's expectations.
Paul Lego, the previous chairman, was forced out a year ago as a result of disastrous losses in the now-disbanded financial services subsidiary.


Funds Find Managers In Deals
The case of a mutual fund manager who was dismissed last week for his handling of personal investments is bringing to light other instances of powerful money managers having participated in private deals with a stock promoter with whom their funds have done business.
Rafi Khan, a stock promoter who is under investigation by Federal prosecutors on accusations of perjury and who was fined for securities fraud in Canada in 1976, did favors for several of his money manager customers by allowing them personally to buy special private shares in stocks he was promoting, according to documents filed last summer with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The practice is not illegal, but it raises questions of the independence of money managers who accept such favors.


School Board Gives Parents Power to Veto Condoms to Children
In a decision that appeared to signal the end of a bitter three-year struggle, the New York City Board of Education voted yesterday to modify its program of distributing condoms on demand to students in high schools by allowing parents to prohibit their children from participating in the program.
The board's 5-to-2 vote came after a tumultuous meeting that Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines called "an embarrassment" -- a session whose emotional tone epitomized the rancor that the condom program had engendered from its inception.


Bronx Proves What a Publicly Run Open-Air Market Can Do
To the Editor:
In "The Outdoors Indoors," one of your invited suggestions for improving New York City (Op-Ed, Jan. 2), David Garrard Lowe lauds the city's burgeoning greenmarkets and flea markets, and recommends the city expand its markets program by creating indoor markets.
However, creating new greenmarkets and flea markets should not be separated from the larger issue of dealing with the thousands of street vendors who often seem so linked to the sidewalks of our busiest shopping areas.


Bosnia's Legacy
In the end, the summit meeting President Clinton called to assure the future of NATO could not escape the alliance's past failures, and those of the United States as its leading power, in Bosnia.
The dominant topic in the last 24 hours was not the President's "partnership for peace" to build a new relationship between NATO and formerly Communist countries to its east, but growing frustration throughout the alliance over NATO's inability to deter or stop Serbian aggression in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


A Quick, Hearty Soup
THE quintessential cold-winter supper is soup, salad and bread.
But a hearty soup brings to mind a daylong project, which does not fit in with the 1990's penchant for quick and easy solutions.
But red lentil soup can be prepared in less than half an hour, because red lentils cook in about 10 minutes.
It doesn't take a day to coax the full flavor out of the vegetables that play such an important role in this soup, which, to tell the truth, is so thick it is more like a lentil stew.


Synovus Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Long Road to Harvard for a South Bronx Youth
Rey Ramos stood in front of the two dozen seniors in the dimly lighted classroom of his old high school, James Monroe, in the South Bronx.
He had not returned just to see friends; he had an important message about expectations and goals for students whose odds of graduating on time are only one in four, students who are searched daily for weapons.
"I used to walk around this school telling people, 'I'm going to Harvard,' " Mr.
Ramos told the seniors in an English class.
"Most people just smiled and said, 'That's nice.' "


Herzog Resigns As General Manager
WHITEY HERZOG resigned as general manager of the California Angels yesterday and was replaced by BILL BAVASI.
Herzog, 62, submitted his resignation, effective Saturday.
He will remain as a consultant.
"I'm only resigning in title as the general manager," Herzog said.
"It isn't like I'm going with somebody else. I really feel that it's time for me to do some of the things I want to do. I don't really want to be traveling all over."


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boat in Oil Spill Had Faulty Cable, Crewman Says
The barge that fouled a beach in San Juan with 750,000 gallons of heavy oil on Friday was being towed then by a tugboat with a worn cable in need of replacement, a member of the tugboat crew said today.
The crew member, Brian F. Forry, said the inch-and-a-half cable connecting the tug to the barge had broken once and had been improperly repaired at sea, only to break again hours later.
At that point, the barge was carried by the ocean onto a coral reef.


Union Local Agrees to Court Monitor to Bar Any Association With Mobsters
Roughly 35 years after Federal investigators first accused Local 813 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters of being controlled by organized crime, the union has agreed to have a court-appointed officer monitor its employees and members to insure that they do not associate with mobsters.
The move is part of a larger drive to end organized crime's influence over the private garbage-hauling industry in the New York metropolitan area, particularly Long Island, an effort that has gained momentum over the last decade with the criminal indictments, convictions and civil actions against a host of key players.


FOOD NOTES
A New Tabasco
What is that bright green stuff in the classic Tabasco bottle?
Tabasco Jalapeno Sauce, that's what, the latest addition to the hot-sauce collection, and the first new hot sauce made in 125 years by the McIlhenny Company of Avery Island, La.
Tabasco Jalapeno Sauce has a fairly straightfoward green jalapeno flavor and, while forceful enough, is considerably less ferocious than the classic red pepper sauce.


O'Brien Hurt in Fall
DAN O'BRIEN, the world champion and world-record holder in the decathlon, cut three fingers on his right hand and needed 10 stitches to close the wounds when he slipped on ice and fell outside his home in Moscow, Idaho.


Art Pottery: Who Made What
FOR those who scour flea markets, secondhand shops and auction houses for art pottery like flower-bedecked Roseville or paper-thin works by George E. Ohr (right), there's a new book to peruse.
"Kovels' American Art Pottery: The Collector's Guide to Makers, Marks and Factory Histories" by Ralph and Terry Kovel (Crown, 1993; $60) traces the history of 200 American potteries, from 1876 to 1920.


Police Defend Actions of Officers In Fatal Shooting of Son of Cleric
Responding to a call about a man with a gun, officers shot and killed the 17-year-old son of a prominent Muslim cleric Tuesday night after a scuffle in a dimly lighted basement in Brooklyn, police officials said yesterday.
Commissioner William J. Bratton, who took command of the force on Monday, said the teen-ager was apparently unarmed, but he defended the shooting as the response of officers who believed their lives were in danger.
Members of the teen-ager's family questioned the police handling of the shooting, and two women who live in the apartment building where the young man was killed disputed the official account, saying they saw the teen-ager raise his hands at the moment he was shot.


Astronomers Say Hubble Repairs Were Successful
Repairs to the Hubble Space Telescope have virtually restored its full vision, astronomers say, and the earth-orbiting spacecraft will soon be ready to undertake one of its most ambitious objectives: the search for black holes.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has called a news conference for Thursday morning to release the first pictures taken after corrective optics were installed last month by astronauts of the space shuttle Endeavour.
In space walks, they inserted a new camera and other instruments intended to compensate for the telescope's flawed primary mirror.


Liberty National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Balloon Fails in Its 4th Try To Circle the Globe Nonstop
Earthwinds, the most expensive balloon in history, took off here this morning for what its crew had hoped would be the first manned balloon flight around the world.
But seven hours later it was on the ground again, forced down by an unexplained mechanical problem.
The three crewmen were not injured, and an Earthwinds spokesman said the balloon was not damaged.


Irving Berchuck, Education Official, 68
Dr.
Irving Berchuck, a former official with the New York City Board of Education, died Monday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Ivy Berchuck.


CHRONICLE
Eight students from the Thomas C. Giordano Middle School in the Bronx had quite a night on the town Tuesday.
It began with caviar and Scotch salmon at Caviarteria on East 60th Street.
Then they went to Le Cirque, on East 65th Street, for pasta primavera, broiled salmon on lentils and a dessert deluge of cakes, souffles and creme brulee.
This Cinderella evening was the highlight of an after-school cooking class taught by RICHARD A. SCHACHTER, a guidance counselor.
Mr.
Schachter said the experience was "mind-blowing for the children: many are used to eating with plastic forks and spoons."


A Gleam In His Eye
A FIREPLACE, a beacon of light and warmth, almost always enchants.
But some fireplaces are more enchanting than others.
When Joe Eisner, a 31-year-old Manhattan architect, renovated his parents' country house last year in Weston, Conn., he revamped a two-and-a-half-foot-wide brick fireplace, set in a brick wall.
"It was an ordinary, boring fireplace," Mr. Eisner said.


Charles B. Duff, 85, General Who Served In Air Defense, Dies
Lieut.
Gen.
Charles B. Duff, an anti-aircraft specialist who was once responsible for the Army air defenses of New York City, died on Monday at Penrose Hospital in Colorado Springs.
He was 85.
The cause was a respiratory infection, said Ruth Rouss, his attorney.


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Hibernia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wilder Leaving Race in Virginia For Senate Seat
In a stunning close to his State of the Commonwealth address, and perhaps to his political career, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia said today that he would not run for the United States Senate.
The decision by the outgoing Governor not to challenge the incumbent, Senator Charles S. Robb, for the Democratic nomination greatly changes the political calculus in what had been expected to be one of the most bruising Senate contests in the country this year.


Inquiries Clear Whitman Campaign, Finding No Vote Suppression
In an announcement that removed a cloud from Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman's inauguration next week, Federal and state investigators said today that they had found no evidence to support allegations that Republicans paid bribes to hold down the Democratic vote in November.
Mrs.
Whitman's victory had been tainted almost immediately after the Nov. 2 election when Edward J. Rollins Jr., who served as Mrs.
Whitman's campaign manager over the closing weeks of the campaign, told reporters in Washington that the campaign had spent about $500,000 in "walking around money" to suppress the vote in urban areas.
He said that some of the money had gone to black ministers with the understanding that they would not speak from the pulpit in favor of Gov.
Jim Florio's re-election, and that other money had been paid to Democratic Party workers to stay home on Election Day.


Town Prepares to Mourn In Search for Girl's Body
In this small rural community, where a 12-year-old girl named Sara Anne Wood lived and one day vanished, hope still hangs by a thread for some who refuse to believe she lies in an unmarked grave.
But today, as the search for the girl's body in the Adirondacks entered its third day, most here were preparing to mourn.
The mood was somber at the state police command post at the Norwich Corners Presbyterian Church, where Sara's father is the pastor.
The fellowship hall, normally crowded with state troopers scanning maps, interviewing possible tipsters and eating meals provided by volunteers, was virtually empty, with most of the troopers gone on the 80-mile trek to the site where a Massachusetts man, Lewis S. Lent Jr., has said Sara is buried beneath the earth and snow.


Trial for Yanks' Taylor Is Put Off Until April
Brien Taylor's trial on two misdemeanor charges stemming from a fight that injured the Yankee pitching prospect last month near his home in Beaufort, N.C., was postponed yesterday for at least three months.
After Roger Crowe, Taylor's lawyer, filed a motion for continuance with the Carteret County district attorney to have the proceedings delayed from today because Crowe had previously planned a vacation, a new court date was set for April 13.
But Crowe noted that the new date is also subject to change.


Essay; 'What's the Charge?'
Vincent Foster must have been worried sick last June about his letter of Feb. 28, 1989, to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
In this nine-page letter from the Rose Law Firm of Little Rock, Ark. -- probably among the many papers concealed by the Clinton subpoena collusion with Justice -- Foster made a pitch for the lucrative legal business growing out of the collapse of the Madison S.&amp;L.


Inflation Report Buoys Long Bonds
With another sign that inflation remains under control, investors rushed to buy the Treasury's 30-year bond yesterday.
Prices of the long end of the market outperformed the shorter maturities.
The release of wholesale price data for December, the first of this month's inflation reports, were particularly well received by the long end of the market, where the price of the 30-year bond increased much more than short-term and intermediate-term securities.
The Labor Department's Producer Price Index fell one-tenth of a percent over all and rose two-tenths of a percent in the core inflation rate, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components.
Analysts said the numbers were what many market participants had expected.
Pressure Off Fed
The numbers helped to further reduce investor fears that the Federal Reserve would raise short-term interest rates anytime soon since the economy is growing but at a pace that is slower than the market had expected.


Unitel Plans To Lay Off 650
Unitel Communications Inc., Canada's second long-distance carrier, said this week that it would take a charge of $325 million (Canadian), or $246 million (United States), and eliminate 650 jobs as competition with the former monopoly phone companies takes its toll.
The company will cut 310 jobs this year and 340 more by 1996.


U.S. Says Bigger Security Council Will Make U.N. More Effective
Opening consultations here on its decision to support Germany and Japan as permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, the Clinton Administration said today that it believed a larger Council would have greater moral authority in the world and make the United Nations more effective.
The American Representative to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, broke off her tour of Eastern Europe and the Balkans to explain to Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and other officials that while the United States wanted permanent seats for Germany and Japan it thought that this would be difficult to achieve without giving some form of permanent membership to populous developing countries as well.


Books of The Times; Reporting on a Life of Reporting From the Front
Live From the Battlefield
From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War Zones.
By Peter Arnett
Illustrated. 463 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
This is fame: While Peter Arnett was broadcasting from Baghdad, Iraq, for the Cable News Network during the Persian Gulf war, delivering the news from the enemy capital that was heard and seen around the world, he learned from a Vatican reporter that the Pope wanted to meet him.
And an Ankara reporter told him that women in Turkey were naming their children after him, "even the females."


No Million-Dollar Send-Off for Taylor
Lawrence Taylor won't be getting a $1 million "golden parachute" from the Giants.
The team has officially said no to Taylor's request for a financial package in which he would be given a million-dollar bonus for 13 years of service.
Taylor's agent, Steve Rosner, said the Giants told him no and that any hopes of receiving such a deal are dead.
Taylor apparently did not ask for part ownership of the team or next year's salary in full.
While Rosner said that he did ask for a "financial package that would be reasonable for the Giants and good for Lawrence," he would not give details.


Review/Theater: The Women; Unorthodox View of Luce Classic
When "The Women," Clare Boothe Luce's dissection of the indolent ladies of Park Avenue, opened on Broadway in 1936, it was widely thought to be a brittle, sophisticated comedy.
By the time it was revived on Broadway in 1973 with an all-star cast of hissers and scratchers, it had acquired the unmistakable gloss of high camp.
Now, the director Anne Bogart has taken the work to a third, perhaps unavoidable level in its life as a pop-culture artifact: She has deconstructed it.
The unorthodox production, which is playing at Hartford Stage through Feb. 5, is frequently surprising, occasionally illuminating and almost never funny.
Ms.
Bogart claims that "The Women" is part of her "personal search for our American roots" and reflects her enthusiasm for such popular American entertainments as vaudeville and musical theater.
The operative word here is "personal." The director has such an idiosyncratic vision of the script that Luce's contribution seems altogether secondary.


The White House Bows to Reality
President Clinton's belated decision to ask Attorney General Janet Reno to name a special prosecutor to investigate his involvement in an Arkansas land deal is a capitulation to bipartisan political pressures.
It also represents a concession by his advisers that months of defensive stonewalling had created an impression of Presidential wrongdoing where none may turn out to exist.
Assuming that Ms.
Reno acts quickly, Republicans who have been calling for Congressional inquiries -- chiefly Senator Bob Dole and Representative Jim Leach -- would be wise to set aside their requests.
Parallel inquiries would only clutter up the investigative landscape; they can begin down the line should the special prosecutor falter.


NEWS SUMMARY
Companies
Another sacred cow at I.B.M. is endangered: the corporate headquarters.
In a sign of its new cost-cutting ways, the company is considering vacating its head office in Armonk, N.Y.  [ Page A1. ]  A move by I.B.M. from Armonk would be another blow to the Westchester County economy.  [ D3. ]


No Iran Nuclear Role For German Company
To the Editor:
William Safire is correct in "Helping Iran Arm" (column, Dec. 27) that he has "only fragments of the Skoda story, and may be putting them together mistakenly." But he goes on anyway to guess that our company is somehow involved in Iran's attempts to acquire nuclear technology.
In that guess he is flat wrong.


Sony Does Sushi, Most Carefully
JUST below its signature Chippendale-style pediment, the top floor of the 35-story Sony building at Madison Avenue and 56th Street houses a tiny hideaway that is both the pride and a possible concern of Sony.
When Sony moved into the former A.T.&amp; T. headquarters building in 1992 and remodeled it for 1,400 employees of Sony Music Entertainment, it made only cosmetic changes in the executive dining spaces and meeting rooms on the top floor that are now collectively known as the Sony Club.
The area, with elaborate mahogany and marble, is a rarefied haven where executives and their guests eat, schmooze and conduct business while looking out on stunning vistas of Manhattan.


Pope Seeks a Disarming Of 'Aggressor' in Bosnia
Pope John Paul II today urged "all forms of action aimed at disarming the aggressor" in Bosnia but stopped short of specifically condoning air strikes.
The Pope's remarks were taken by some Vatican officials as reflecting a widening gap between the Holy See and international groups over what a church document on Tuesday called the "utterly shameful cowardliness" of international efforts to end the Bosnian war.


Tugboat Captain Testifies on Spill, to Incredulity
Testifying for the first time about a barge accident that left some San Juan beaches fouled with oil, a tugboat captain said he was in too much of a hurry to follow standard repair procedures for a broken towline.
That statement and others drew expressions of incredulity from a Coast Guard investigator, who suggested that the captain had taken a cavalier attitude toward events leading to the grounding.
The captain of The Emily S., Roy McMichaels, 50, of Jersey City, was questioned for more than three hours at a United States Coast Guard inquiry into the Friday oil spill 300 yards off Escambron Point.
He said he rarely read or entered notations in the tugboat's deck log and therefore did not see one made by the vessel's alternate captain on Dec. 8, 1993, which said that its towing cable needed to be replaced.


Shantytown Fire Underlines Deficiencies in Homeless Policies
To the Editor:
The fire that destroyed a homeless shantytown and killed two people on Columbia Street in South Brooklyn (news article, Jan. 4) is a tragic commentary on New York City's homeless policies and the counterproductive tactics of homeless advocates.


Would a Subscription Be a Commitment? Read, and Find Out
MONDAY seemed as good a day as any to immerse oneself in the Pollyanna-like existence of the just married.
It was the day before Kelly Good McGee's big day, when 650,000 copies of her new magazine, Married Woman, were going on sale in supermarkets and convenience stores and on newsstands across the country.
The first issue chronicles the momentous change "From Me to 'We' " and tells wives what to do about money -- "For Richer: Keep Clinton's Mitts off Your Money" -- and mothers-in-law -- "That Old Bat (His Mother)." With a start like that, one was curious about how far the magazine's founder and editor in chief could stretch newly married life when casting around for new material.
One needn't have worried.


AT HOME WITH: Carol Fennelly; Sheltering Storm
It's hard to share a roof with 1,400 homeless people, and the habit is taking its toll on Carol Fennelly, the madcap housemother of the nation's largest homeless shelter.
Eyes at half-mast, she began a recent interview by turning off her office lights in deference to a blinding, nauseating headache.
"This really isn't as much fun as it used to be," she said.
Ms.
Fennelly has been springing awake with nightmares about Mitch Snyder, the late hero of the movement to help the homeless, who hanged himself three years ago after their 13-year romance soured.


Keeping Up With Japan
To the Editor:
"Life in a Box: Japanese Question Fruits of Success" (front page, Jan. 2) states of Japan's rat race, "decades of Government policy focused on creating industrial might rather than consumer benefits have left the country with a standard of living that many people, including top politicians, are ashamed of."


Review/Music; Webern Quartet Colors 2 Nights of New Works
Webern's Five Movements for String Quartet (Op. 5), which closed the concert at Merkin Concert Hall on Tuesday night, cast a long shadow back over the other works on the program, presented by the Chamber Players of the League/ISCM, the country's oldest new-music organization.
The Webern piece, brief as it is, even seemed to affect memories of the preceding night, when Parnassus, another of the city's neo-modernist groups, presented recent compositions at Columbia University's Miller Theater.
Webern must now be considered an old master, and this early piece, written in 1909, is not so ethereal and stringent as his later works.
But the issues Webern faced throughout his life remained the same: how to create new compositional systems and sounds out of the wreckage of a long tradition.
These issues persist in many of the programs presented by these performing groups, which have taken their stand in the modernist esthetic that Webern helped codify.
In fact, the quartet's idiosyncratic phrasing, its skittish energy, its internal coherence and replicating and transforming gestures seemed to anticipate the ambitions of most of the other works on these programs.


David B. Kimmelman, Ophthalmologist, 80
Dr.
David B. Kimmelman, an ophthalmologist who practiced in New York City for over four decades, died on Tuesday at his home in Lake North, Fla.
He was 80 and also had a home in Norwalk, Conn.
The cause was a major stroke, his family said.


Vons Opens Store in City Torn by Riots
Making good on a promise to invest in riot-torn neighborhoods in the Los Angeles area, the Vons Companies, the largest supermarket operator in Southern California, opened the first of 12 new low-income area stores today in this city known for violent crime and "gangsta" rappers.
The Compton Vons -- which has a First Interstate Bank branch, pharmacy, dry cleaners, delicatessen and bakery -- is the first full-service supermarket to open in an area 20 miles south of Los Angeles that was ravaged by riots in 1992.
During the riots, the Compton Renaissance Plaza shopping center, where the new Vons is situated, had to be protected by dozens of police officers as angry mobs attempted to loot and burn it.


Company Formed to Rebuild Beirut Raises $926 Million
A Lebanese company set up to rebuild the center of Beirut said today it had raised $926 million from Lebanese and other Arab investors despite opposition by Muslim fundamentalists.
Nasser Chamaa, head of the company, said Lebanese investors had subscribed for $600 million and other Arabs had bought in for $326 million.
Only Arabs were allowed to take part in the offer, which began in November.


Attorney General Makes An Abrupt Turnaround
In agreeing to appoint an independent counsel, Attorney General Janet Reno adopted an approach she had rejected for weeks as the wrong tool to examine President Clinton's land dealings in Arkansas.
But tonight she said that she would immediately begin to consider a wide array of candidates for the counsel's post, including those suggested by Republicans like Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate minority leader.


Conde Nast Switching President and Publishers
Conde Nast Publications will announce several changes today, including a new president for the company and new publishers at The New Yorker and Bon Appetit.
Bernard H. Leser, president of Conde Nast Publications Inc. since 1987 and an executive there since 1959, has been named chairman of Pacific operations for Conde Nast Publications, effective June 1.


G.O.P. Is Tacking Death Penalty to Gun Bill
Seeking to outmanuever the Democrats on gun control, Republicans in the State Senate appear poised this week, for the first time, to propose a ban on various assault weapons.
But party leaders said today that they would also include in the bill a renewed call for the death penalty, virtually guaranteeing that the bill would not become law.
The Republican proposal, though not firm, appears to add another bit of stage drama to the fight over crime: Following the lead of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Democrats in the Assembly are convening on Monday, Martin Luther King Jr.
Day, for a special session on crime and had been expected to pass an assault weapons bill.


Economic Collapse Leaves Ukraine With Little to Trade but Its Weapons
As the second largest of the former Soviet republics, a country endowed with natural resources and a well-educated work force, Ukraine was once viewed by Western economists as having an excellent shot at becoming a prosperous market economy.
But two years after gaining independence, the earlier hopeful assessments have turned sour as Ukraine sinks deeper into economic crisis.


Clinton Looks Homeward
Behind all foreign policy there lurks, or ought to lurk, careful political calculation.
What the folks at home will not support, the traveling potentate cannot afford to promise.
So it has been with President Clinton this week, on his maiden voyage to Europe as the leader of the Atlantic alliance.
Having seen how quickly American opinion turned sour when the body of an American serviceman was dragged through the streets of Mogadishu, to be duly photographed, he is reluctant to make small commitments -- witness the turning back of an American troopship bound for Haiti -- let alone big dangerous ones.
No Bold Moves
Mr.
Clinton therefore made no bold move on Bosnia.
He issued no ultimatum to the combatants -- do this or we will do that.
Instead he and the allies temporized.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Hungary's acceptance of President Clinton's offer of a new defense relationship between Eastern Europe and NATO misstated the year of the Munich conference before World War II.
It was 1938, not 1939.
Because of a transmission error, the article also misspelled the first name of a Hungarian television commentator who spoke about the Clinton offer.
He is Janos Horvat.


It Takes More Than A Punch to Rile Oilers
The Houston Oilers' defense is based on one premise and one premise only -- attack.
That philosophy is as simple and straightforward as the defense's architect, Buddy Ryan, noted sideline pugilist and generally hard-nosed football man.
Ryan has been the center of a maelstrom of controversy since he took a swing nine days ago at the Oilers' offensive coordinator, Kevin Gilbride, during Houston's shutout victory over the Jets and then called Gilbride a "wimp" who should be "selling insurance."


METRO DIGEST
I.B.M. MAY VACATE HEAD OFFICE
Another sacred cow at I.B.M. is endangered: the corporate headquarters.
In a sign of its new cost-cutting ways, I.B.M. may vacate its Armonk, N.Y., head office.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY OFFICERS' ACTIONS DEFENDED IN SHOOTING
Responding to a call of a man with a gun, officers shot and killed the 17-year-old son of a Muslim cleric after a scuffle in a basement in East New York, Brooklyn, police officials said.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said the teen-ager was apparently unarmed, but he defended the shooting as the response of officers who believed their lives were in danger.
A1.
Shu'aib Abdul-Latif, the 17-year-old shot to death by the police, was described by friends and family as a painfully shy young man who shunned drugs and violence.
B3.
BRATTON AND MUSLIM MINISTERS TO MEET
Police Commissioner Bratton said he would meet with Muslim ministers to try to defuse tensions growing out of a clash that injured eight police officers at a Harlem mosque.
B3.
A RELATIONSHIP IS TESTED QUICKLY
Neither has been in office more than a few days, but already Mayor Giuliani and Police Commissioner Bratton are grappling with the delicate relationship between the Police Department and black New Yorkers.
News Analysis.
B3.
MAN DENIES BEING CROWN HEIGHTS WITNESS
One of two men whom law-enforcement officials had described as new witnesses to the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights said that he was not at the scene and that he had no information on the deadly assault.
B5.
A witness in the World Trade Center bombing trial described to the jury how, in a Jersey City park, he detonated chemicals found in a storage locker that had been rented by Mohammad A. Salameh, a defendant in the case.
B4.
The Giuliani administration plans to dismantle the eight offices that serve as liaisons to various constituencies in the city, senior administration officials said.
B3.
REGION WHITMAN REJECTS 76ERS MOVE
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey offered early proof of her promise to be frugal with the taxpayers' money by rejecting a plan to move the Philadelphia 76ers professional basketball franchise to Camden.
B6.
KOPPELL WANTS LILCO TO CUT RATES
The State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, said that the Long Island Lighting Company should cut its rates rather than freeze them.
B5.
As the search in the Adirondacks for the body of 12-year-old Sara Anne Wood entered its third day, many residents of her hometown, Litchfield, N.Y., were preparing to mourn.
B6.
Republicans in the New York State Senate appear poised for the first time to propose a ban on various assault weapons.
B7.
Neediest Cases B2
Chronicle B7
Parking Notice B7


INSIDE
Whitman Campaign Cleared
Investigators said they found no evidence to support allegations that Republicans paid to suppress the Democratic vote in New Jersey.
Page B1.
Justices Question Cable Law
Supreme Court Justices questioned part of a Federal law requiring cable systems to carry local broadcast television stations.
Page A12.
Mexico Halts Hunt for Rebels
Facing pressure to negotiate with southern rebels, Mexico's President declared a truce and offered amnesty to those who stop fighting.
Page A3.
Gift to New York Library
Bill Blass, the fashion designer, has made a donation of $10 million to the New York Public Library.
Page C13.


The Legacy of the Earthman: Wise Words to Plant By
GINNY MITCHELL stood in the Earthman's frozen garden one recent day and said, "Henry really loved this mess."
It's a wild and woolly tangle of plants and tilting homemade structures, crammed into a small backyard (exactly 40 feet by 185 feet) in northwest Washington.
Walking down Davenport Street, you can't mistake the Earthman's house.
It's the one you can hardly see, thanks to the yews, the hollies, the big rumpled boxwoods, the roses as old as Pliny, the clematis rearing up over the porch, the epimedium, the ivy (how many bulbs are hidden there?), the -- oh, you get the idea.


The Chunnel, at Last
Tickets went on sale this week for the tunnel under the English Channel.
Yes, the "chunnel" is finished, finally.
You thought you would never see the day.
Neither did science historian Willy Ley, who 40 years ago listed it among trail-blazing projects that were possible from an engineering standpoint, but probably doomed by politics or cost.
The first notion of a tunnel was broached to Napoleon Bonaparte in 1802 by a French engineer named Mathieu-Favier.
Napoleon was intrigued, but it was not to be.
Nor would later schemes succeed, for a bridge or for a dam with openings for ships.
Not until the 1960's did the dream start moving toward reality.


Caspian Sea Oil Search To Honor Bird and Beast
It is where 90 percent of the world's sturgeon breed.
More than 300 species of birds migrate and nest there.
A flourishing population of seals lives there.
It is the part of the North Caspian Sea controlled by Kazakhstan, a former Soviet republic, and it is where there are an estimated 36 billion barrels of oil, more than was discovered in Prudhoe Bay off Alaska.


Health Agency Head Denied Big Severance
In the face their agency's $79 million budget deficit and New York City's projected shortfall of $2.3 billion, the directors of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation denied a request yesterday by the corporation's departing president, Dr.
Billy E. Jones, for a severance package that could have approached $300,000.
Instead, the directors gave Dr.
Jones $37,500, the minimum they were obliged to provide under his $150,000 a year contract that was due to expire in May.


Calendar: Porcelain With a Grand View
Porcelain Landscapes  Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts, 18 West 86th Street; (212) 721-5857.
Vedute, or view paintings, are architectural and landscape scenes painted on canvas or depicted on porcelain vases, plaques and dinner services.
These porcelains, made in Prussia in the early 19th century, were a status symbol to the citizens of Berlin and Potsdam, Prussia's twin centers of culture and cosmopolitan life.
Thirty vedute (pronounced veh-DUE-ta) porcelains and 70 paintings, some displayed next to photographs of the buildings and gardens as they appear today, are on view at the center through Feb. 20.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Thursday until 8:30 P.M.
Admission is $2; those 65 and older, $1; children under 12, no charge.


Aqueduct Pushes Ahead With Seasonal Changes
It was snowing, sleeting and, at times, raining, but Aqueduct pushed on with its tortured winter schedule yesterday and even instituted the "quick official," the first in a series of refinements aimed at giving customers more time between races to place their bets in the new era of simulcasting.
The next change will begin Saturday, when post time for the first race will be restored to 12:30 P.M., and five or six races at Aqueduct will be run before any races are simulcast from Gulfstream Park in Florida.


Editor Hired At New York
Kurt Andersen, an editor at large at Time magazine and a founding editor of Spy magazine, accepted the job of editor of New York magazine yesterday.
Mr.
Andersen, 39, succeeds Edward Kosner, 56, who left to become editor in chief of Esquire.
Since Mr.
Kosner's departure, New York magazine has been run by an acting editor, Peter Herbst, who had been second in command to Mr.
Kosner.
Harry McQuillen, the president and chief executive of K-III Magazines, said Mr.
Herbst, who had been a leading candidate for the job, had agreed to stay at the magazine.


Boycott Threat Reflects Power Struggle in Colleges
Ten years after the Presidents Commission was created to place the control of athletic departments in the hands of chief executive officers of universities, the hardened positions of presidents and basketball coaches have reached the breaking point.
As presidents have remained determined to reduce costs, improve graduation rates and create a sense of integrity within athletic departments, coaches who recruit in the inner cities, including some who took advantage of a college education to escape from similar places, have voiced the need for a commitment to the current generation.


NATO's Bosnia Sideshow
Bosnia's warring armies are not taking NATO's latest warning of air strikes very seriously, and neither should anybody else.
What really went on at the Brussels summit meeting this week was 99 parts maneuver to one part substance, having much more to do with inter-alliance politics than with the ongoing Bosnian tragedy.
But give the Clinton Administration the credit it deserves.
Not only did it successfully press its proposals on NATO's possible expansion into Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
In addition, having learned something from last year's Bosnia stumbles, it neatly sidestepped the diplomatic traps set for it by mischievous French Gaullists and cynical British promoters of unenforceable peace agreements.
Instead, it held fast to Washington's more prudent and more principled approach.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Carolina Power and Light Co., Raleigh, N.C., is offering $150 million of 5.875 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2004 at 99.069 to yield 6 percent through Prudential Securities.
The nonredeemable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
"We still don't think that the evidence is there to require a special counsel. At the same time, we want to make sure that nothing interferes with the President's agenda. We don't want to let that happen, so we'll go to the special counsel." GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS.  [ A18:3. ] "In my view, appointment of a special counsel doesn't take care of our responsibility in the Congress." SENATOR BOB DOLE.  [ A18:4. ]


Digital and USA Video in Market Test of New Technology
The Digital Equipment Corporation, seeking a foothold in the potentially explosive video-on-demand market, signed on yesterday as a partner of the USA Video Corporation for a coming market trial of the nascent technology.
USA Video is taking on such giants of the telephone and computer industries as Bell Atlantic, I.B.M. and A.T.&amp; T. in the race to provide technology that will give viewers access to movies, shopping and video games on demand through telephone lines.


Meanwhile, Back at the Mansion . . .


Denison Ray, Lawyer, 62
Denison Ray of Malden Bridge, N.Y., a lawyer for the Legal Aid Society who practiced civil rights law for almost 30 years, died on Jan. 6 in Ellis Hospital in Schenectady.
He was 62.
The cause was a heart attack, said Michael Hampden, a friend.


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schnitzer Steel Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Whitman Rejects Plan to Land Sixers
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman today offered early proof of her promise to be frugal with the taxpayers' money by rejecting a plan to move the faltering Philadelphia 76ers professional basketball franchise to the Camden waterfront.
The costs of building a new 530,000-square-foot arena, as calculated by the project's sponsor, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, were too imprecise and unsettled, Mrs.
Whitman said.
The project's backers also shifted their ground on important questions of land ownership and the share of development costs to be paid by Camden County, she said.
Ultimately, Mrs.
Whitman said, taxpayers could end up responsible for $100 million in underperforming construction bonds and state income guarantees to the Sixers.


Joseph F. Carlucci, Surgeon, 80
Dr.
Joseph F. Carlucci, a retired surgeon and general practitioner, died yesterday at Flushing Medical Center in Queens.
He was 80.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE BURNS will celebrate his 100th birthday at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, and the event is already sold out -- well before its time.
On Jan. 20, the comedian will be only 98.


Each Design Bears the Artist's Fingerprints
FROM June to November, Rhode Islanders and tourists go to Olga's Cup and Saucer in Little Compton for homemade muffins, brownies, pizza, vegetable tarts and pies.
But some customers are also tantalized by the shop's cooling racks, baskets and pie stands.
So when the Cup and Saucer shuts down for the winter, Rebecca Wagner (right), a sculptor and a partner in the bakery with Olga Bravo, sells them through her studio in Providence, R.I.


Voyage Ends Early
A voyage from New York to San Francisco ended prematurely yesterday for ISABELLE AUTISSIER, the French sailor who wanted to break the 14,000-mile record to San Francisco as practice for a coming round-the-world race.
Autissier and her three-man crew arrived early yesterday in Martinique, an island south of Puerto Rico in the Lesser Antilles.


Not Guilty of Architectural Sin of Sameness
PETER NOEVER, an architect and the director of the Austrian Museum of Applied Arts in Vienna, says that designing hotels and office buildings -- and, yes, even toilets -- that all look the same is an architectural sin.
But not one Mr. Noever is guilty of.


A.M.A. to Seek Major Changes In Clinton Plan
The battle lines over health care became sharper today as the American Medical Association outlined a plan to lobby for significant changes in President Clinton's proposal, while labor leaders, with whom Mr.
Clinton feuded just two months ago, vowed to support him.
In a confidential letter to lobbyists for medical specialty societies, Richard A. Deem, director of Federal affairs at the A.M.A., catalogued 37 changes that the association wants to make in the Clinton plan.
Objectives include an antitrust exemption for doctors, so that they could collectively negotiate fees and other matters, as well as the elimination of proposed restrictions on doctors' fees.


Producer Prices Fell Last Month
Reflecting a dive in the oil market, prices at the producer level edged down one-tenth of a percent in December while inflation for all of 1993 came close to the vanishing point, Government figures showed today.
The bond market rallied strongly on the report, pushing long-term interest rates down to 6.18 percent, the lowest in five weeks, as many credit market analysts concluded that the economy was growing at a slower-than-expected pace.  [ Page D16. ]


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Ukrainian hesitation on a nuclear disarmament agreement referred incorrectly in some editions to the place of President Clinton's scheduled meetings with President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine.
The two men met at the Kiev airport yesterday and are to meet in Moscow tomorrow.


Everett S. Crosby, 82; Wrote About Winery
Everett Sumner Crosby, who operated the High Tor vineyards and winery in Rockland County for more than 20 years, died on Monday at Memorial Hospital in Ormond Beach, Calif.
A former resident of West Nyack, N.Y., and Ocho Rios, Jamaica, he was 82 and had lived in Ormond Beach since 1989.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Warning on Clinton Health Proposal From Idea's Originator
A Stanford University economist who invented the concept of managed competition in the health care industry said today that President Clinton's health plan would not work and should be completely rewritten.
"I conclude that the Clinton plan puts the Federal budget at enormous risk and will result in huge tax increases," said the economist, Alain C. Enthoven.
He addressed a conference of the American Insurance Association at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan and later elaborated on his comments in a telephone interview.


Giuliani Planning to Close Community Affairs Offices
The Giuliani administration, as part of its effort to trim the budget of the Mayor's office by 10 percent, plans to dismantle the eight offices that serve as liaisons to various constituencies in the city, senior administration officials said yesterday.
The move, which has been widely rumored since Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's election, drew criticism yesterday from representatives of several community groups, who contended that the offices help enhance relationships between the administration and citizens.
Most of the offices were established by former Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Chief Quits Film Venture Financed by Japanese
When Lawrence Gordon was given $100 million four years ago by a Japanese consumer electronics company and told to make movies, the former film studio executive and producer called it "a dream come true."
Today the dream died.
Mr.
Gordon, whose producing track record included films ranging from "Field of Dreams" to "Die Hard," resigned as chairman and chief executive officer of his company, Largo Entertainment, which was financed by the Victor Company of Japan Ltd., known as JVC.
And producers and executives said the end of Mr.
Gordon's highly publicized venture served as a lesson in the fragile nature of Hollywood deal making and Japanese involvement in it.


In Death, Sarajevo Woman Becomes a Symbol
The world came to know her only in death, in television images and newspaper pictures, face down in a pool of blood on a sidewalk, wearing a knee-length gray coat and black rubber boots.
She was Tuesday's representative image of the thousands of people who have fallen victim to the shelling of Sarajevo by Serbian nationalist forces dug in on the mountains around this city, unthreatened by any weapons the Bosnian Army has at its disposal.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about fighting in Bosnia referred imprecisely to the sequence of events in the fighting in Sarajevo on Tuesday.
As the article noted, United Nations officials said it was unclear which side started the day's fighting; there was no independent conclusion that Serbian forces had fired first and that the Bosnian Government counter attacked.
Yesterday, the United Nations said the Bosnian Government was responsible for starting the fighting.


Market Place; Investing in Soviet debt: The thrills just keep on coming.
FOR ups and downs and uncertainties about what lies around the next turn, few investments can compare with the roller-coaster ride of trading in the debt owed to foreign commercial banks by the former Soviet Union.
Since April, the debt, which is traded on secondary markets largely by institutional investors, has surged from 15 cents on the dollar to a high of 55 cents early last month, according to traders here.
After nationalist parties made a strong showing in Russian parliamentary elections on Dec. 12, the debt dropped to the low 40-cents range, rose briefly to around 50 cents, and has now settled at about 45 cents on the dollar.


A Prudential Investigation By New York
The Prudential Insurance Company of America is under investigation for illegally selling financial products that New York insurance regulators ruled could not be sold in the state, company executives and regulators said yesterday.
The investigation for the first time expands the widespread regulatory problems that have been unfolding for months at the company and its brokerage subsidiary, Prudential Securities, to one of the parent company's central, bread-and-butter business lines: group pension and retirement plans.


Key Israeli General and Aides Die in Copter Crash
The chief Israeli Army commander in the occupied West Bank was killed with three other officers early today when his helicopter crashed in heavy fog near his headquarters on the northern outskirts of Jerusalem.
The death of the commander, Maj.
Gen.
Nechemia Tamari, 47, the highest ranking army officer killed in more than a decade, stunned military and Government officials and prompted the air force commander to appoint a commission of inquiry.


2 Rat Studies Yield Clues On Spinal Cord Repairs
Scientists in Japan and Europe have separately taken steps toward solving one of the most difficult and frustrating problems in medicine: repairing a severed spinal cord.
The advances have come in two studies, both with rats, involving extraordinarily delicate microsurgery and clever biochemical manipulations.


Alfred J. Bingham, 85, An Expert on Voltaire
Dr.
Alfred Jepson Bingham, professor emeritus in the humanities at the University of Maryland, died on Tuesday at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 85 and a resident of Silver Spring.
The cause was complications from a stroke, his family said.


Bill Blass Gives $10 Million to Library
Bill Blass, the fashion designer, has given $10 million to the New York Public Library.
The gift, one of the largest ever received by the library, was announced yesterday afternoon by Marshall Rose, the library's chairman of the board, and by Paul LeClerc, the library's president, at a meeting of the board.
In recognition of Mr.
Blass's gift, the Public Catalogue Room of the Central Research Library at Fifth Avenue an 42d Street has been named the Bill Blass Public Catalogue Room.
Of the $10 million donated by Mr.
Blass, $5 million is designated for the library's unrestricted endowment.
Annual income from the endowment supports such activities as acquisitions and the processing and conserving of books.
The remaining $5 million will go toward new technology and services in the catalogue room that will allow patrons to use the Internet computer network, as well as the library's collections, more easily.
The money will also pay for two new senior staff positions.


Caver Fills Pirates' Offensive Vacuum
No one has questioned Seton Hall's ability to play its trademark tenacious defense this season.
The question has been whether someone can seize the moment on offensive in a tight game, especially when Arturas Karnishovas is struggling.
Tonight, at least, Seton Hall found an answer in Bryan Caver, a senior point guard who scored 13 second-half points, including 8 straight in a crucial stretch late in the game, to almost singlehandedly take over in the final 20 minutes.
He led the Pirates to their first Big East victory of the season, a 61-53 triumph over 20th-ranked Boston College at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Reporter's Notebook; Top Hollywood Agency Reaches for the Stars Of Television News
Hollywood's most powerful talent representative, Creative Artists Agency, announced a joint venture today with N.S.
Bienstock, the leading agency representing television news performers, which has a client list that includes Dan Rather, Diane Sawyer and Mike Wallace.
The purpose of the alliance, both sides said, was to seek opportunities in nonfiction programs across the changing landscape of television, including such areas as network, cable, syndication and even home video.


Advertising; Coke Adds Life to Its Diet Coke Ads
Naughty, sly, sexy, titillating and playfully self-referential advertising from Coca-Cola rather than Pepsi-Cola?
How refreshing.
It is no coincidence that a major campaign introduced yesterday for Diet Coke, carrying the theme "This is refreshment," is uncharacteristically infused with those Pepsi-esque attributes.
The ads for America's leading diet soft drink are the first since the Coca-Cola Company rocked Madison Avenue in October by replacing Lintas New York, the agency that had handled Diet Coke since its introduction in 1982, with Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS on the estimated $70 million account.


Doctors of Death
Reports of Government radiation experiments on unwitting Americans during the cold war, though shocking, have overlooked an important and sinister element.
Some of the plutonium injections and X-rays were performed not only for medical research but also to study potential military applications of radiological poisons.
The doctors who carried out some of the experiments were interested not only in saving lives but in taking them.
The work of two physicians mentioned in news accounts, Joseph G. Hamilton and Robert S. Stone, deserve further scrutiny.
Dr.
Hamilton, a neurologist at the University of California Hospital in San Francisco, was one of the first doctors to use radioactive tracers in medical research in the 1930's.
Dr.
Stone, a radiologist at the same hospital, was chosen by the Army in 1942 to monitor the health of people working on the atomic bomb.


Reaux and Rorem In a Concert at Hunter
The soprano Angelina Reaux and Robert Osborne, a bass-baritone, are to share a program of songs set to poetry, Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, 68th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues.
Ms.
Reaux is to sing the Ned Rorem cycle "Women's Voices," 11 songs to texts by Anne Boleyn, Emily Dickinson, Christina Rossetti and others.
Mr.
Rorem will be her accompanist for the cycle, as well as for the New York premiere of his "Anna la Bonne," set to a text by Cocteau.
Ms.
Reaux will also sing several pieces by Ricky Ian Gordon featuring the words of Dorothy Parker, Edna St.
Vincent Millay and others.
Mr.
Gordon will accompany his works.
Mr.
Osborne is to offer Charles Ives's "Throne of Grace," with texts by John Greenleaf Whittier, Vachel Lindsay and others; Victoria Bond's "Prepare!" and three songs by Marc Blitzstein, one of which has a text by E. E. Cummings.


Older Parents Forget Children's Needs
To the Editor:
Linda Wolfe makes a glaring omission in "And Baby Makes 3, Even if You're Gray" (Op-Ed, Jan. 4), on late-life motherhood.
And that is the needs of the children involved.
These needs are for growth -- physical, psychological, intellectual.


Review/Film; A Last, Naughty Celebration Before Getting Serious
There is a major cosmetic change in the latest edition of the "House Party" series, starring the hip-hop team of Kid 'N Play.
Kid has traded in his improbably high fade haircut -- the one that made people call him "eraserhead" in the original movie -- for a topknot of dreadlocks.
But it would take more than that to keep this series fresh.
"House Party 3" has lost the loose-limbed, high-spirited spark of the original "House Party" (the director Reginald Hudlin's knock-'em-dead debut) and the fun-loving spirit of "House Party 2" (directed by Doug McHenry and George Jackson).
"House Party 3," which had its low-profile opening yesterday, begins with the smart-sounding premise that Kid 'N Play can't pretend to be partying teen-agers forever.
Kid (Christopher Reid) is engaged to be married, and Play (Christopher Martin) arranges what's meant to be a blowout bachelor party.


Giuliani and Blacks: Relationship Is Quickly Tested by 2 Incidents
Neither has been in office for more than a handful of days, but already Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, are grappling with the delicate relationship between the Police Department and black New Yorkers.
In the last several days the Mayor and Mr.
Bratton have been embroiled in a dispute with members and leaders of a Harlem mosque over a melee that left eight officers injured Sunday night.
And yesterday both were facing questions over the shooting of a black 17-year-old in East New York on Tuesday.


Board of Paramount Snubs A Takeover Bid by Viacom
The board of Paramount Communications Inc. unanimously recommended yesterday that Paramount stockholders reject Viacom Inc.'s revised tender offer.
Paramount's board also reaffirmed that shareholders should accept the tender offer by QVC Network Inc.


Journal; San Francisco Paradise Lost
So much sex on television, so little time.
Should I watch a perky animated condom leap into a couple's bed?
If I did, I could take sides in the new and rancorous debate about whether the Government should produce commercials promoting safe sex.


Sports of The Times; The Black Boycott Is a Bad Idea
IF there is a worse message about education in America than the one the Black Coaches Association is sending with its proposed boycott, it is difficult to imagine.
The association hates the idea that the National Collegiate Athletic Association voted Monday to retain the reduction in Division I basketball scholarships -- voted on last year -- from 15 to 13.
The black coaches group wants 14.
Otherwise, it says, there will be damage to the black community.
The coaches figure that the reduction means about 330 scholarships "lost" a year.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Greg Zaun, catcher, on a one-year contract.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Promoted Tim Mead, vice president of media relations, to assistant general manager.
Named Joseph Schrier vice president of marketing; Preston Gomez special assistant to the general manager; John Sevano assistant vice president of media relations and broadcasting; Larry Babcock director of baseball information; and Kraig Kojian, assistant director of baseball information.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Joel Skinner, catcher, on a minor-league contract and invited him to spring training as a non-roster player.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Announced the retirement of Frankie Albohn, head groundskeeper.
Named Bob Wilkinson stadium superintendent and head groundskeeper.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Dave Gallagher, outfielder, and Milt Hill and Michael Potts, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Tommy Greene, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Casinos Putting Tribes at Odds
In a tiny museum on the Ak-Chin Indian reservation here, near displays of prehistoric pottery and stone tools, is a vision of the future -- a drawing of a glittering $28 million casino that will soon be built and managed for the tribe by the Harrah's division of Promus Companies Inc.
"When I saw the drawings it was like going to downtown Vegas or Reno and walking down the strip," said Martin Antone Sr., the tribe's chairman.
"I could smell the money."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  AVOIDING NEW COMMITMENTS  News analysis: President Clinton's maiden voyage to Europe illustrates his reluctance to make promises that Americans will not support.
The lessons of Somalia have been extended to Bosnia and to NATO.
A1  UKRAINE ASSURES CLINTON ON ARMS  Visiting Kiev, President Clinton extended his hand to President Leonid Kravchuk, a leader he had previously shunned.
The Ukrainian returned the gesture by endorsing a three-way accord requiring his country to surrender all its nuclear arms.
A6


Tandy Will Hire 3,600, Adding 30 Superstores
The Tandy Corporation, moving to expand its electronics retailing rapidly after shedding its manufacturing operations last year, said today that it plans to open 30 computer and consumer electronics superstores and hire about 3,600 employees this year.
The company, which is based here, said it would add 24 new stores to its 40-store Computer City retail chain beginning in March.
It also plans to triple the number of its Incredible Universe consumer electronics and computer stores, adding six new outlets to its three existing stores in Dallas, Arlington, Tex., and a suburb of Portland, Ore.


Magazine Ads' Growth Rate Slows
The growth rate in magazine advertising pages slowed significantly in 1993 compared with 1992, according to annual totals released yesterday by the Publishers Information Bureau in New York.
For 1993, the bureau said, magazine ad pages increased 1.2 percent, to 167,917.6 from 165,895.3 in 1992.
The 1992 total represented an increase of 2.4 percent from 1991.


Corrections
An obituary on Jan. 4 about William Morris, a lexicographer and publishing executive, gave an incomplete history of his syndicated column "Words, Wit and Wisdom." From 1968 to 1986, Mr.
Morris wrote the column with his second wife, the former Mary Elizabeth Davis.
After her death, Mr.
Morris did carry on the column, most recently with his son Evan, who will continue it.


Review/Jazz; Distinctive Saxophonist With Muscle
The best thing about Sonny Fortune's second set at Down Beat on Tuesday night was Mr.
Fortune himself.
A saxophonist and flutist, he came of age under the dark shadows of both rock-and-roll and the avant-garde, and he's a member of a middle-aged, lost generation in jazz.
He's had time to think about his playing, and he's become one of the more powerful alto saxophonists working.
Blue Note Records has recently signed him to a recording contract, which augers well for other musicians who are neither child prodigies nor octogenarians.
His power comes from his sound, which projects and carries the heft of a thick lead pipe.
And he's an athletic improviser; he plays long breathless phrases, where the notes all join together like a drawn and smudged line.
There is no space between notes, and Mr.
Fortune, with his onslaught, can create a claustrophobic atmosphere, jammed and busy.


New Law Regulating Cable TV Gets Skeptical Response From High Court
The Clinton Administration's defense of a new Federal law regulating cable television got a skeptical reception at the Supreme Court today from Justices who questioned both the rationale for and the constitutionality of a provision that requires cable systems to retransmit the signals of local broadcast television stations.
The Court heard arguments before a capacity audience of lawyers representing the communications industry's numerous and often competing factions, all of which have a stake in the outcome of a case that could provide some of the constitutional markers for the new information age.


Remembering Loesser
Susan Loesser, daughter of the songwriter Frank Loesser, will reminisce about her father's life and work next Thursday evening at 6 at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
Ms.
Loesser's program, "Frank Loesser: The Man and His Music," will include recordings of the composer's work and will be held in the library's Bruno Walter Auditorium, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza.
Admission is free.
Information: (212) 870-1630.


U.S. Can Help Stop the Land-Mine Slaughter; Deadly Legacy
To the Editor:
The banning of antipersonnel mines throughout the world is a worthy long-run goal.


New Ways or Old, Pest Control's Tough
TRYING to get rid of household pests, whether they are just nuisances like ants, cockroaches and mice or potential house-destroyers like termites, exacts a toll in time, frustration and cost.
And often, it means turning to professionals.
Even under ideal circumstances, human intervention does not always have much impact on pest mortality: more than 500 of the most dominant insect pests are resistant to one or more chemical classes of pesticides.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Lightning Strikes Twice on the Road  John Tucker had a goal and an assist as the Tampa Bay Lightning beat the hot Detroit Red Wings, 4-2, last night.
The loss was only the Red Wings' second in 15 games, and ended their nine-game unbeaten streak at home.
Detroit's last loss at Joe Louis Arena came on Nov. 9 to Edmonton. (AP) Jets 3, Sabres 2: Teemu Selanne tied the game and set up Nelson Emerson's game-winning goal in the third period to give Winnipeg the victory over visiting Buffalo.
Tie Domi also scored for Winnipeg.
Dale Hawerchuk and Donald Audette scored for Buffalo. (AP) CROSS-COUNTRY SKIING Kemppel Earns Her 2d Olympic Berth  Nina Kemppel, competing on a course where she grew up training and racing, took charge on the back half of a 5-kilometer (3.1 mile) ski race in Anchorage, yesterday to assure herself a spot on her second Olympic team.
Bill Koch, the only American ever to win an Olympic cross-country medal, fell short in trying to earn his fifth Olympic trip in the men's 10-kilometer (6.2-mile) race.
Kemppel, a Dartmouth College graduate from Anchorage, covered the rolling terrain at Kincaid Park in 16 minutes 31.6 seconds.
Kerrin Petty of Townshend, Vt., was second in 16:38.3.
Earlier, Todd Boonstra of Eagan, Minn., guaranteed himself a third Olympic berth by winning the men's 10-kilometer classical technique race in 28:14.7.
Ben Husaby of Mount Hood, Ore., was second in 28:27.7 and Luke Bodensteiner of West Bend, Wis., winner of the first two races of the United States championships and Olympic trials, was third in 28:36.0. (AP) TENNIS Sampras Advances in Australia  Pete Sampras moved into the quarterfinals of the New South Wales Open yesterday in Sydney, Australia.
He recovered from a midmatch slump to defeat a local hero, Jason Stoltenberg.
Leading by a set and within two games of wrapping up the match in less than an hour, Sampras lost 10 of 12 games and had to rally for a 6-1, 4-6, 7-5 victory.
His victory set up a quarterfinal match with a fellow American, Aaron Krickstein.
In women's play, top-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain, reached the quarterfinals with a 2-6, 7-5, 6-2 defeat of Wilrud Probst of Germany.
Second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina was a 6-2, 6-1 winner over Kimberly Po of the United States.
Joining them in the quarterfinals were two Americans, Zina Garrison Jackson and Patty Fendick. (AP) YACHT RACING Conner's Strategy Works in Whitbread  Dennis Conner's strategy of separating from the rest of the fleet continued to pay off yesterday as the American yacht Winston extended its lead in the third leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.
Winston, a Whitbread 60 entry, led the nearest rival in its class, the Japanese-New Zealand yacht Tokio, by 83 nautical miles.
The leading boat in the Maxi class, New Zealand Endeavor, was 77 miles off the lead as the fleet sailed off the southern coast of Australia.
Uniondale won the girls team crown with 37 points and the boys finished on top with 44 points.
The Loughlin girls won the 3,200 relay in 9 minutes 45.30 seconds and the boys were first in 8:14.90.


Questions That Are Lingering
Nothing that is known publicly about the failed real estate venture of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, amounts to direct evidence that they or anyone else in the Administration have done anything improper.
But the Clintons' reluctance to make all their records public has allowed critics to assert that they must have something to hide.
Following are some of the questions that cannot be laid to rest until the facts become public:


Mexico Orders Cease-Fire and Offers Rebels Amnesty
Responding to growing political pressure to end the violence in southern Mexico and negotiate peace with a new rebel group, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari today declared a cease-fire, ordered the Mexican Army not to pursue fleeing guerrillas and offered amnesty to rebels who stop fighting.
Under the new orders, the army will return fire only if fired upon, or if civilians are threatened by the rebels, Mr.
Salinas said.


U.S. Can Help Stop the Land-Mine Slaughter
To the Editor:
In "Moving Toward a Land-Mine Ban" (editorial, Dec. 27) you give the Clinton Administration credit for a resolution, unanimously adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on Dec. 16, calling for a global export ban on mines.
You fail to mention, however, that on that same day the United States was one of only three countries to abstain on a key vote calling for a United Nations conference to strengthen international limits on land mines.
This was in sharp contrast to the 162 countries that voted for the resolution.


Devils Take the Power Out of Their Power Play
Jacques Lemaire could no longer stand it.
The Devils' coach called a timeout because of what his team was doing on the Forum ice with a man advantage with four minutes left in the first period tonight.
Or more accurately, what his team was not doing.
During his team's fourth power play of the game, the coach instructed his players on the bench and kept pointing out how things should be done.
But nothing worked.
The Devils failed on all five manpower advantages in the opening period and on eight for the game.
Those deficiencies proved critical as New Jersey suffered a 3-2 loss to the Montreal Canadiens.


Ukrainian Agrees to Dismantle A-Arms
President Clinton extended his hand here tonight to a Ukrainian President he had shunned, and Leonid Kravchuk returned the gesture with his first public endorsement of a three-way accord requiring Ukraine to surrender its nuclear weapons.
A joint appearance by the Presidents after an airport meeting tonight appeared to put to rest the last doubts about whether the agreement would indeed be signed on Friday in Moscow, as Russia and the United States announced with considerable hullabaloo at the beginning of the week.


Baryshnikov To Perform In New York
Mikhail Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project is to make its New York debut in a one-week season at the New York State Theater, from March 1 to 6.
The eight-member company, founded by Mr.
Baryshnikov and Mark Morris in 1990, will present two programs of modern dance and ballet repertory by seven choreographers.
Mr.
Baryshnikov will dance at all performances.
Featured premieres will be Twyla Tharp's "Pergolesi," an untitled dance by Jerome Robbins, and works by Kevin O'Day, a company member, and Joachim Schlomer, who danced with Mr.
Morris and Pina Bausch and is currently the director of the Ulm Ballet in Germany.


The Energized Millrose Games Go On and On and On
Forget the Jan. 30 date in the Georgia Dome.
The way they were telling it in New York yesterday, the real sports showdown of the year will occur on Feb. 4 in Madison Square Garden.
It was being hailed as the 87th Chemical Bank Millrose Final Four Super Bowl Games, an event, it was suggested at a lunch at the Chemical Bank headquarters, that should have tens of millions of American sports fans on the edge of their seats.


Review/Dance; Before the Cock Crows
"Sollie's Cradle," which the Randy Warshaw Dance Company presented on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, lasted only an hour.
Yet it managed to be the chronicle of an entire sleepless night.
Mr.
Warshaw's creation, which was presented as part of the Altogether Different series, concerned an insomniac, portrayed by Greta Peterman, who was first seen tossing and turning in an enormous bed.
Then she got up and wandered about an apartment.
This setting, designed by Kyle Chepulis, was soon invaded by Jennifer Allen, Bryan Kepple, Jennifer Lacey, Robert Martocci and Kim Olsen.


The Ballad of John and Lorena
Every era has its legend.
If this were still the age of balladry, Lorena Bobbitt would have a ballad.
Her crime -- wicked and fascinating -- speaks so eloquently of our time, in ways we don't even want to talk about.
It serves, first and most frighteningly, as a man's scariest fantasy of Feminine Revenge, worse than any plot of Lysistrata.
For women it is horror mixed with the awful temptation to admire the crime.


VIEWS IN CONFLICT IN CULT SIEGE TRIAL
Opening arguments concluded and testimony began today in the trial of 11 Branch Davidians charged with murder in the deaths of four Federal agents during a botched raid on the sect's compound near Waco, Tex., last February.
Vastly different views of the case emerged as prosecutors described the sect's beliefs as a "theology of death" backed by an arsenal of weapons, while defense lawyers painted the defendants as peace-loving churchgoers unlawfully attacked by agents bent on attracting publicity for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


CHRONICLE
For TONI MORRISON, winning the 1993 Nobel prize for literature was the easy part.
Picking it up in Stockholm last month was the real challenge.
On Tuesday night, at a dinner at La Grenouille, on East 52d Street in Manhattan, she told friends that her entrance at the awards ceremony was one of the most terrifying moments of her life: she thought she was going to have an accident royal as she descended the long, marble staircase in the Grand Hall in Stockholm's Old City on the arm of the King of Sweden.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.97
2.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.96
2.98
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.13
3.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.10
5.14
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.18
6.24
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.15
7.20
8.46
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.48
5.51
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Slain Youth Is Called Nonviolent
Shu'aib Abdul-Latif, the 17-year-old shot to death by the police on Tuesday night in Brooklyn, was the painfully shy son of a prominent New York City Muslim leader.
Friends and family said he dreamed of being a carpenter as he worked in the family business, studied for his general equivalency diploma, and tried to negotiate the gritty streets of East New York as a practicing Muslim.
His father, Imam Al-Amin Abdul-Latif, the head of a Brooklyn mosque and the president of the Islamic Leadership Council of New York, yesterday painted a picture of a young man who shunned drugs and violence.
But his family said he had dropped out of high school and had one minor skirmish with the law -- he was on probation for jumping a subway turnstile.


Bridge
Two players dominated the two 1993 Player of the Year races in New York City, reports the Greater New York Bridge Association.
In the regular listings, including all major events, Tom Smith of Greenwich, Conn., eked out a victory over August Boehm of Manhattan by a margin of just 2 points.
Boehm turned the tables in the Team Player of the Year race, beating Smith by 25 points.
They were playing together on the diagramed deal from the Regional Knockout Teams during the New Year's championships, which concluded the tournament year.
South's raise to two clubs was inverted, and therefore strong and forcing.
He then pulled his partner's double of two hearts, a wise move since that contract would have succeeded.
But he erred in the play of three no-trump.


John P. Ohl, 84, Dies; A Retired Tax Lawyer
John Phillips Ohl, who practiced law in Manhattan for 42 years, specializing in taxation, died on Dec. 29 at his retirement home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 84 and formerly also kept homes on Park Avenue and in London.
He died of complications after a long convalescence from a stroke that he suffered in 1986, his family said.


Burlington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carlton Will Enter Hall Alone
If Reggie Jackson's election to the Hall of Fame last year proved that baseball's shrine has more than enough room for the enormously effervescent, yesterday's election of Steve Carlton proved something quite the opposite: There is also room in Cooperstown for the game's most quietly perplexing.
Carlton, winner of 329 major league games and a record total of four Cy Young Awards, was the only player elected to the Hall by the Baseball Writers Association of America, and the vote was overwhelming.
In his first year of eligibility, the 49-year-old left-hander was named on 436 of 455 ballots, or 95.8 percent, far surpassing the required 75 percent (342 ballots) needed for election and achieving the fifth-highest percentage ever.


International Dairy Queen Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Matching Grants Inspire Giving to Neediest Cases
The New York Community Trust in Manhattan, the nation's largest community foundation, gives out more than $50 million every year to assist thousands of social-service organizations in the five boroughs.
But for more than a decade, several of the trust's employees and board members have found a more personal way to help poverty-stricken New Yorkers, through The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Polian Is Panthers' G.M.
BILL POLIAN, credited with turning the Buffalo BIlls into annual Super Bowl contenders, was hired yesterday as general manager of the expansion Carolina Panthers.


Helping Youngsters Prepare for a Sibling
"WHAT I want to know is, how did the seed get in there in the first place?" a 5-year-old said to his mother as they were about to attend a class on what it's like to have a new sibling in the home.
The mother never answered him, and the boy didn't ask the question later in class.
Like most of his classmates at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York, he appeared to be dumbstruck by the very subject of the class itself.


CLINTON ASKS RENO TO NAME A COUNSEL ON HIS LAND DEALS
Acting to ward off a potential Congressional inquiry and bowing to outside pressure, President Clinton asked Attorney General Janet Reno today to appoint a special counsel to investigate his involvement in a real estate development and its relationship to a failed Arkansas savings and loan.
The decision, relayed to White House aides by telephone as the President was traveling in the Czech Republic, was an outright reversal by Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, who until today had maintained that there was no need for a special investigation into their investment because they had done nothing wrong.
Hillary Clinton Concurs
But Democrats in Congress began to join the calls for the appointment of an independent counsel and urged Mr.
Clinton to demonstrate that he had nothing to hide regarding the investment, which involved a plan to develop a retirement community in northern Arkansas.
Aides said that Mr.
Clinton spoke with Mrs.
Clinton by telephone from Europe on Tuesday night and that she had "concurred" with the decision.


Winter Pulls Up a Chair and Stays; Yesterday's Snow Adds to the Burden on Municipal Budgets
Months from now, when hearts are light with spring and this awful, icy mess of winter is just a vague memory, the imprint of the weather of 1994 will still be visible on the bottom line.
Governments across the region, charged with making life livable despite the elements, are reporting that the two storms of January are putting a strain on their snow-removal budgets.


Starbucks Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


France Bars Taiwan Sales, Warming China Ties
After a yearlong dispute over French sales of jet fighters to Taiwan, France and China said today that they would restore friendly relations on the basis of a commitment from the conservative Government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur to ban any further arms sales to Taiwan.
With the Chinese economy booming and French companies effectively excluded from bidding for contracts there since the decision in November 1992 to sell 60 Mirage jets to Taiwan, the announcement amounted to a potentially important development for France's recession-hit economy.


Greene and Phillies Agree
Pitcher TOMMY GREENE, who was eligible for arbitration, accepted a large salary increase instead yesterday when he agreed to a $2 million, one-year contract with the Philadelphia Phillies.
The 26-year-old right-hander made $390,000 last season, when he was 16-4 with a 3.42 earned run average.
He pitched 7 complete games and struck out 167 batters in 200 innings in helping the Phillies win their first division title and National League pennant in 10 years.


As Young Prepares for Giants, There Remains a Lot to Prove
Talk about pressure.
Steve Young followed in Joe Montana's footsteps, and filling them is, of course, an impossible mission.
And so there has been criticism -- unfair criticism, many say -- that Young is a great regular-season quarterback but just can't do it when it comes to the playoffs.
Montana won four Super Bowls and Young has won zip.
He can run, he can scramble as if his feet are on fire, he has a good arm.
But he's no Joe.


Iranian Convert in Peril
The State Department called on Iran today to release a Protestant minister reported to be under a death sentence for having converted from Islam to Christianity as a youth.
The case involves Mehdi Debadj, 59, described as a minister in the Assemblies of God Church, who spent 10 years in prison before being brought to trial late last year.
The acting State Department spokeswoman, Christine Shelly, said the United States believed that the death sentence might be carried out imminently.
"We call upon the Iranian Government to honor its commitments under the Universal Declaration of Human rights by releasing Mehdi Debadj," Ms.
Shelly said.


Ad Sales Shift At Harper's
Harper's Magazine in New York said yesterday that it had hired an outside advertising sales representive company to take over its ad sales services, replacing some members of the magazine's in-house team.
The company, Salesconcepts Associates Inc. in New York, headed by Peter Lenahan, president, and Rod Baird, chief executive, will now oversee the magazine's sales operations in New York.
Jack Grant, Harper's associate publisher, and Scott Gober, New York manager, have left the monthly magazine.
Debra Goldberg, Harper's travel and direct marketing manager, has been promoted to a new position, advertising manager.


Progress Made in Kerrigan Case, the Police Say
Law-enforcement authorities in Detroit and Portland, Ore., said yesterday that they were working together to solve the case of the attack on the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan last week.
Police in Detroit said last night that no arrests had been made but that they were satisfied with the pace of investigation.
Authorities in both Detroit and Portland declined to comment on a report in an Oregon newspaper that said that the husband and bodyguard of Tonya Harding, the newly crowned national champion and a rival of Kerrigan, were being investigated by the F.B.I. to determine whether they were involved in the attack.


U.S. Can Help Stop the Land-Mine Slaughter; Humane Warfare
To the Editor:
"Moving Toward a Land-Mine Ban" (editorial, Dec. 27) is naive, misguided and baneful.
Land mines, as a weapon, are the most humane form of warfare, when properly used.


Britain Undone, With Evil Delight
For Anglophilophobes, Americans who lament their country's undue adoration of all things British, the Public Broadcasting Service's newest "Masterpiece Theater" offering may seem, well, just a bit much.
Starting on Sunday at 9 P.M., PBS will present "To Play the King," the four-part sequel to the hugely popular series "House of Cards," first seen in the United States in 1991 and just rebroadcast to whet interest in the follow-up.
It would be hard to imagine a more delicious wallow in British archness, British insider snobbery, British social mores.
What makes both series all the more insidious is that they are so brilliantly achieved.


At the Threshold, A Poem of India
AS she sat on a plump flowered sofa in her Queens living room, Dr.
Madhulika Khandelwal thought back to her childhood in India and recalled a night beneath a full moon.
In her family's courtyard, she had just completed a rangoli design, an ancient Indian floor-painting tradition, using rice paste or wheat flour to transform the barest and simplest of surfaces into art.


Wife Tells Jury Of Love Story, Then 'Torture'
Taking the stand in her own defense today, Lorena L. Bobbitt traced the steady disintegration of her marriage, from the day in 1989 when John W. Bobbitt proposed to her in an ice cream parlor to the days and nights over the next four years in which, she testified, he repeatedly raped and abused her.
Mrs.
Bobbitt described years of escalating violence, in which her husband regularly twisted her wrist, squeezed her face, slapped her, pulled her hair, choked her and used what she called "Marine Corps torture techniques," once twisting her foot so severely that she was hospitalized.
She said the episodes began a few months after their marriage, describing a fight that Christmas over her wish for a plastic tree like those from her childhood rather than the real one he wanted.


Hoyas' Pressure Flusters Redmen
John Thompson, the noted Georgetown coach seldom at a loss for words on any subject, remained silent tonight regarding a threatened basketball boycott by the Black Coaches Association.
Since the possibility of a protest action by black coaches and players arose this week, Thompson has said he would have no comment, and he stuck to that tonight.
"Don't ask," he said.
But his team left a little message.
The Hoyas trounced St.
John's, 60-49, to even their Big East record at 2-2 and build their overall mark to 8-3.


Softly, Armani pushes men ahead: page C10.


Germany Hunts Attackers of Disabled Woman


Mayor Urged To Redefine Shelter Pact
The lawyer who won the right to shelter for the homeless in New York City more than a decade ago has told the Giuliani administration that he wants to redefine that right to emphasize the need for services, not just shelter.
His proposal has sharply divided advocates for the homeless and set off a bitter power struggle over which of them will shape the political strategy toward Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about people who live downwind of the old nuclear weapons test site in Nevada referred incorrectly in some copies to a 1987 ruling by a Federal appeals court.
The court said the Tort Claims Act, which gives the Government broad powers to carry out vital national programs, protected the Government from lawsuits arising from radiation exposure by those downwind residents.
The ruling did not say that the Government had taken adequate steps to protect them.


Economic Scene; Fixing air traffic control with a new corporate management.
IT'S 5 P.M. on Thursday, and you are sardined into a sleek jet capable of whisking you from Miami to New York in time for "Seinfeld." But with air controllers lacking up-to-date equipment already straining to keep track of the hundreds of planes aloft, it will be another hour before take-off.
And you aren't the only frustrated traveler this night or many others.
And your frustration represents big bucks to the airlines: between 1988 and 1992, the number of hours flown daily by the average airliner actually fell by one-fifth.
Is this any way to run an air traffic control system?
Not if the White House has anything to say about it.
Acting surprisingly swiftly on a recommendation from the National Commission to Ensure a Strong Competitive Airline Industry (who names these things?), the Clinton Administration proposed last week to create a Government-owned corporation to manage the system.


Morris May Return to Nets' Starting Lineup
Maybe it was the grumbling about being underused that Coach Chuck Daly heard from Chris Morris's end of the bench earlier in the week.
Or maybe it was the 24 points that Morris scored in 23 minutes Tuesday night in a loss to Washington.
Whatever it was, Daly has been thinking seriously about giving the 6-foot8-inch small forward out of Auburn, a sixth-year pro, another shot at his starting job, which had been taken over by P. J. Brown, the 6-11 rookie out of Louisiana Tech.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.S. Slightly Eases Conditions for Aid to Moscow
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told Russian leaders today that the United States is prepared to help speed up delivery of Western aid, but only after credible signs that Russia is restructuring its budget to phase out money-losing industries, to lower inflation and to better assist the unemployed.
The mantra for President Clinton's visit, Treasury officials say, is: more Russian reform in return for more Western money more quickly.


An Inquiry Finds 125 Cheated On a Naval Academy Exam
An investigation into one of the largest cheating scandals ever at the United States Naval Academy will implicate about 125 midshipmen, or about 15 percent of this year's graduating class, Navy officials said today.
The inquiry, by the Naval inspector general, Vice Adm.
David M. Bennett, compiled individual files on midshipmen who have been identified as having advance knowledge about a final engineering exam given to third-year students in December 1992.
Those students are in the class that will graduate from the Academy in Annapolis, Md., this spring.
Academy Is Criticized
Some students simply received a computer message urging them to study a particular question on a previous year's test.
They may be cleared or receive only reprimands.
But in the most serious cases, involving the theft of a full copy of the test, midshipmen could face expulsion and even criminal charges.


Chronology of a Partnership and Interwoven Events
The events that prompted President Clinton to call today for the appointment of a special counsel have their roots in the political and business relationships Mr.
Clinton forged more than a decade ago as a young Arkansas politician.
What follows is a chronology of how his investments and those relationships were a counterpoint to Mr.
Clinton's rise as a star on the national political scene. 1978-79 The Whitewater Development Corporation is founded and buys 200 acres of land in the Ozarks with $200,000 borrowed from banks.
Partners are Bill Clinton, who is at that time Arkansas Attorney General; Hillary Rodham Clinton; James B. McDougal, a friend of Mr.
Clinton from their days as aides to Senator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas, and Susan McDougal, a real estate broker who is Mr.
McDougal's wife.
The McDougals are corporate officers, and the Clintons are shareholders, entitled to an equal split on any profits though they wound up contributing significantly less to the venture than the McDougals.
The plan is to subdivide the land and sell lots for vacation homes.


I.B.M. May Abandon Its Hilltop Headquarters
In the latest sign that company headquarters are no longer the icons for Corporate America they used to be, I.B.M. is considering vacating its head office in Armonk, N.Y.
Opened in 1963, the building was designed by the prestigious architects Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, and a glass atrium by I. M. Pei was added later.
It is a classic example of the postwar American corporate headquarters -- a modern, sprawling structure on a hill in splendid isolation, overlooking carefully landscaped grounds in suburbia.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 12 about the economy of the Great Plains misstated the population of Kearney, Neb.
The 1990 census put it at 24,396.


TCF Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan's Political Reform Effort Seems to Gain
After struggling for months to fulfill his promise to overhaul Japan's corrupt electoral system, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa now appears on the edge of a major victory, with many politicians now predicting that the Government's broad political reform bill will clear its last hurdles in Parliament this month.
As recently as a week ago Mr.
Hosokawa's reform effort, which would radically change campaign financing and restructure the country's electoral districts, seemed doomed to failure in the upper house of Parliament.
Political experts here warn that the emerging deals to win its passage could still collapse.
But over the past few days the opposition to the bill from the Liberal Democratic Party, which was ousted from power last year after 38 years in office, has begun to crumble.


Talbot Ready to Return One Day After Surgery
The day after donating bone marrow to her sick brother, KRISTEN TALBOT, the Olympic speed skater, said she has started warming up on an exercise bike and should be ready to return to the ice by Monday.
Talbot said at a news conference yesterday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore that her hips were a little sore, but otherwise, she feels great.


Boycott Is Big Question for Coaches
Members of the Black Coaches Association, upset that the National Collegiate Athletic Association overwhelmingly rejected a proposal this week to restore one of the two basketball scholarships that had previously been stripped from the 300 or so Division I teams as a cost-cutting measure, stepped up their talk about a boycott yesterday.
But for all the talk, it was unclear last night whether there would be a boycott, what form it might take, when it might begin, how long it might last and what the consequences might be.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Alvarez Coach of Year
BARRY ALVAREZ, who led Wisconsin to its first Rose Bowl appearance in 31 years, was voted college football's coach of the year yesterday by the American Football Coaches Association at its 71st convention in Anaheim, Calif.


Review/Television; Patient as Ever, Dalgliesh Inspects a Sordid Scene
Comdr.
Adam Dalgliesh returns to "Mystery" tonight, with a reddish tinge to his short-cut hair and more displays of affection than he has been wont to exhibit.
His main squeeze is the publishing executive Deborah Riscoe (Mel Martin), whom you may recall from "Cover Her Face," a previous Dalgliesh sleuther.
The incidental question here is whether Adam (a widower, remember) is ready to make what Deborah calls a commitment or whether she will flee to America, presumably in search of a more committable companion.
Never mind.
"Unnatural Causes," adapted from a 1967 novel by P. D. James, has easily enough murder, mutilation and mayhem to fill a properly preposterous plot and as pleasing a pack of unpleasant suspects as any fan could want.


Thorn Apple Valley Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 10


Blast Witness Tells Why Contents of Locker Were Detonated
A witness in the World Trade Center bombing trial described to the jury yesterday how, late at night in a Jersey City park, he detonated chemicals found in a storage locker that had been rented by Mohammad A. Salameh, the lead defendant in the case.
The witness, Drew F. Lieb, the head of the New Jersey State Police bomb squad, told how on March 5 last year he was asked to go to the Space Station Storage Center in Jersey City to assist in a search of a locker there.
He then described in great detail how he determined that some of the contents of the locker needed to be detonated immediately.


Huntington Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Man Denies Being Crown Heights Witness
One of two men whom law-enforcement officials had described as new witnesses to the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights has told the Brooklyn District Attorney's office that he was not at the scene and had no information on the deadly assault.
The development is the latest twist in the complex, controversial investigation, and it again raises questions about the strength of the case that District Attorney Charles J. Hynes has developed against the latest suspect in the Aug. 19, 1991, killing of the Hasidic scholar.


Parking Rules
Because of the weather, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Centura Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bills' Big-Bang Offense Generating Less Heat
It was only a couple of seasons ago that the Bills' no-huddle offense operated a mile a minute and produced points like popcorn.
That hasn't been the story this year.
Sure, the Bills still run their offense out of the no-huddle.
And sure, they still deploy three wide receivers and one running back.
But this isn't the same Bills offense that flattened the Raiders, 51-3, in the 1990 American Football Conference championship game.


A Potential New Loss for Westchester
If I.B.M. vacates its headquarters complex in nearby Armonk, the move would further wound the Westchester County economy, already hurt by the loss of thousands of jobs and a growing office vacancy rate.
But it also would be another blow to Westchester's 30-year image as a suburban mecca for corporate America, the headquarters not only of the International Business Machines Corporation but of brand-name companies including Pepsico, General Foods, Reader's Digest, and Texaco.


Richard Wood KixMiller, Chemist, 73
Richard Wood KixMiller, a chemist and retired vice chairman of the old Celanese Corporation of America, died on Saturday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
A former resident of Summit, he was 73 and lived in Chatham.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


Review/Fashion; In Not-So-Trendy Milan, Armani Moves Men's Wear
There is no group of designers more self-referential than the Milanese.
A witness briefed for five minutes by a savvy buyer could sort out culprits in a police lineup by their suits: Georgio Armani, Gianni Versace, Romeo Gigli, Dolce &amp; Gabbana.
These designers, with their pointed perspectives, would be loath to leave their men's wear design to others, as so many French houses with licensees do, which is why Milan so often offers men so many fashion options.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Orchid Development
Q.
My orchid-loving friends talk about monopodial and sympodial plants.
Can you explain these terms? -- Cheryl Kent, Cincinnati
A.
They are referring to how orchids grow and develop their bloom, and in general, there are two ways this happens.
The sympodial orchid develops new flowers and leaves from the most recently formed rhizome, a horizontal-growing ground stem.
In most species, once this area has matured and sent up its blooms, it does not do so again.
If you look at an orchid with sympodial growth, it's often possible to trace the development of the rhizome from its oldest to its newest part.
The cattleya and paphiopedilum are sympodial orchids.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHARTER MEDICAL CORP., Macon, Ga., a health care facilities operator, said it would expand its behavioral health care business into 30 new United States and European markets.


Koppell Wants Lilco to Cut, Not Freeze, Rates
The State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, said today that the Long Island Lighting Company should cut its rates, rather than freeze them for two years, as the company has proposed.
Appearing at a news conference here with three State Assemblymen from Long Island, Mr.
Koppell called on the State Public Service Commission to conduct "a full investigative hearing" on Lilco's rate proposals, which include a rate freeze in 1995 and 1996, followed by a 4 percent increase in 1997.


Mark R. Locher, 37; Actors' Guild Official
Mark Ross Locher, national communications director for the Screen Actors Guild, died on Friday at Hollywood Community Hospital in Hollywood.
He was 37 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was AIDS, the performers' union said.


Bratton and Muslim Ministers to Meet on Tensions Over Clash
Taking a direct hand in his first crisis as Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton said he would meet today with Muslim ministers to try to defuse tensions growing out of a clash that injured eight police officers at a Harlem mosque Sunday night.
Police tapes released yesterday show that the officers were drawn to the location, Mohammed's Mosque No. 7, at Fifth Avenue and 125th Street, by an emergency call falsely reporting a robbery in progress and that once there, they were quickly engulfed in a confrontation that Mr.
Bratton described as "sheer terror."


Parent &amp; Child
IN his autobiography, Mark Twain wrote about how he and his younger brother, Henry Clemens, had opposite personalities, even when they were young children.
Henry was a goody-goody who felt honor-bound to report his brother's misdeeds and questionable adventures to their mother.
Twain later used their childhood conflicts as the basis for part of "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer."
Few things demonstrate the natural diversity within families as well as the temperamental differences between siblings.
The first child in a family may be highly gregarious; the second one, shy and demure.
A bookworm may be sandwiched between two athletes.


A Back-Country Boom, But Look Out Above
Jim Collinson, a 36-year-old ski patroller, was busy this week detonating Tentolite, a chemical blasting agent, on the snow-laden slopes at the Snowbird resort in Utah.
It is his job, but Collinson also knows first-hand about the perils of an avalanche.
While on duty on Jan. 8, 1987 at Snowbird, Collinson and another patroller were using 30 pounds of blasting material to create avalanches on unstable slopes.
But before their day was done, a line of snow fractured under Collinson's skis.
An avalanche swept him away with the force of a freight train.


Blacks Moved to Texas Housing Project
As Federal marshals and the police kept watch, Federal housing officials early today moved four black households into an all-white housing project in this East Texas town, which has not had a permanent black resident in more than 60 years.
It was the first time since the mid-1960's that the Federal Government had enforced the integration of a housing project with such an armed escort.


Robert Horen; Actor, 68
Robert Horen, an actor in theater, films and television, died on Wednesday at his home in New York City.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, said Thomas Barbour, a friend.


On Stage, and Off
A Little Whorehouse Carries On
It appears there will be enough new musicals for a full complement of Tony nominees after all.
The long-rumored arrival of "The Best Little Whorehouse Goes Public" was confirmed this week by the producer, Stevie Phillips, and Larry L. King, who, with Peter Masterson, wrote the book.
The show is a follow-up (though not really a sequel, Mr. King said) to "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas," the musical about a small-town brothel called the Chicken Ranch that opened on Broadway in 1978 and ran for nearly four years.
It is scheduled to open on May 10, the day before the Tony deadline, at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, whose owners, the Nederlander Organization and Stanley Stahl, have agreed to spend $1 million to renovate.
The show is to have a cast of 39, including Dee Hoty as the brothel keeper, Miss Mona, and a full pit orchestra (the original made do with a country-western band).
The creative team that put on the first show -- the composer and lyricist Carol Hall; Tommy Tune as co-director (with Mr. Masterson) and choreographer -- is back. (Jeff Calhoun will share the choreography with Mr. Tune.) And once again, Universal Pictures is putting up all the money.
Ms.
Phillips wouldn't say how much, calling it "unladylike" to speak about such things, but another person close to the show -- definitely not a lady -- said, "Seven million would be a good guess, but you didn't get that from me."


Trail Left by Phone Calls May Link Bomb Suspects
A sinuous trail of telephone numbers was the subject of testimony in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday.
It was so sinuous, in fact, that the meaning of some of it was not immediately clear, even though the prosecution's overall purpose was to show that the four men on trial knew each other and called each other at important moments in their alleged plot.
The most significant element in the trail of numbers presented by a trail of prosecution witnesses was that Ahmad M. Ajaj, the defendant against whom the Government seemed to have the least evidence, may have called some of the other defendants in the months before the actual trade center explosion on Feb. 26 last year.


New York State's Top Officer to Lead Drug Agency


Moving to Revise Head Start To Still G.O.P. Complaints
The Clinton Administration has moved to still Republican complaints about one of its top domestic priorities -- an effort to help disadvantaged pre-schoolers get a better start in life -- by promising to improve the quality of the Head Start program.
Backers of the $3.3 billion program from the Administration and Congress have agreed to correct widespread flaws before undertaking efforts to expand the program's reach.
That commitment came first in a report made public on Wednesday by a Department of Health and Human Services advisory committee, whose members included child welfare experts from both sides of the political divide, and then in a Senate hearing.


Turning a Spotlight On a Life in Shadow; An Outsider Is Under Suspicion
For most of his 43 years, Lewis S. Lent Jr. lived on the margins of society, inhabiting a world epitomized by the job he held for the last seven years: cleaning the empty and silent theaters of an 11-screen multiplex in the wee hours of the morning.
He came, with his own key, when the ticket-takers and moviegoers were long gone and the laughter and excitement were stilled.
In turn, he was usually gone when the first employees came in for the new day.
But Mr.
Lent, whose life is now at the center of a sprawling investigation into grisly charges of child abduction and murder, including the slaying of Sara Anne Wood in upstate New York, was not, by most accounts, the sort of morose loner who often turns up on a police blotter.


British Scandals Jeopardizing Party's 'Back to Basics' Effort
To Britain's Conservative Government, racked by internal dissension and searching for a fresh approach after more than 14 years in power, the adoption several months ago of a "back to basics" strategy emphasizing "family values," law and order and a commitment to education seemed just the ticket.
But now even that strategy, initially viewed as as a politically safe anodyne to the squabbling in the party and the Government's dismal standing in public opinion polls, has blown up in Prime Minister John Major's face.


In Belarus, Memorials Define a Nation
President Clinton's decision to lay a wreath in the Kuropaty Forest, just off the highway from the airport, as he arrives in Minsk has ignited a debate that tells much about Belarus's fragile sovereignty and Soviet-style politics.
The fuss threatens to overshadow Mr.
Clinton's six-hour visit here on Saturday, a quick thank-you to the former Soviet republic for agreeing to give up all 81 of its SS-25 nuclear missiles, an accord that was reached without any of the haggling needed to produce a similar pledge by Ukraine.


The Truth in Ed Rollins's Lies
Ed Rollins, the Republican political consultant, has seen better days.
Nevertheless, he said he was "relieved" when Federal and state prosecutors in New Jersey called him a liar this week.
One of them observed further that his "racist, insensitive remarks . . . poured acid" on bonds between white and black communities.
And the Democratic state chairman added that, despite the apparent legality of what Mr.
Rollins did, "the ethics of it stinks."
Mr.
Rollins managed Christine Todd Whitman's bid to be governor of New Jersey last fall, and then soiled her narrow victory by gloating to reporters about dirty tricks to suppress the turnout for Gov.
Jim Florio.
Mr.
Rollins declared that the campaign had paid "street money" to dissuade black clergymen from giving sermons that encouraged parishioners to vote and to persuade Democratic workers to spend Election Day at home.


Play on Old New York, In Appropriate Setting
A restored 1832 Manhattan row house is the setting for "Old New York: False Dawn," a play that is to open on Sunday.
The drama, about a son who is disowned by his father in the 1840's, is adapted from the first part of Edith Wharton's four-part novel "Old New York," which chronicles the city's social history.
It is to be performed in the Old Merchant's House Museum in Greenwich Village, and has been adapted by Donald T. Sanders, the artistic director of the New York Art Theater Institute.
Since 1978, the group has specialized in dramatic works involving literature and the fine arts.


Woody Allen Appeals Judgment in Custody Case
The long and bitter conflict between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow landed yesterday in an appeals court, where Mr.
Allen asked that a judgment awarding Ms.
Farrow custody of their three children be overturned.
With Mr.
Allen looking on, his lawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, argued before a five-judge Appellate Division panel that the custody judgment had deprived the children of any relationship with their father.
Mr.
Allen has not seen two of the children in 17 months, he said, and has only brief, supervised visits with the third.
Mr.
Abramowitz asked that Mr.
Allen be awarded custody, or at least that he gain more liberal visiting rights with the children.


Reputed Drug Chieftain Arrested


Art in Review
Lois Dodd and Warren Brandt
Fischbach Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Through Jan. 29
Anyone interested in enjoying a taste of winter without a hint of discomfort would do well to stop by Lois Dodd's current show.
She has titled it "White Paintings" and the white in question refers to the snow and bleached winter light falling across the rural landscapes that are her recurrent subjects.


Some Hands To Hold
When the crowd starts to roar in San Francisco on Saturday, four of the beefier Giants will start to hold hands.
No, they're not quaking in fear.
The hand-holding helps the offensive linemen know when the ball is snapped because they may be unable to hear Phil Simms shout "hut!" for the ball.


Amway Asia Pacific Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Less-Drastic Alternative to Mastectomy Is Offered
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13
A study of breast cancer treatments has shown that for women who have relatively large tumors and for whom the standard treatment has been a mastectomy, a less drastic therapy may be possible without compromising their chances of survival.
The study showed that a combination of lumpectomy and radiation therapy, known as breast conservation, is an acceptable alternative to the complete removal of the breast and other nearby tissues.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; When a stranger offers to buy a drink at the bar, is it flattery, or a walking commercial for Cognac?
NEXT time you visit a sophisticated nightspot or a chic restaurant, peer closely at the hip, attractive people around you.
Are they spending freely?
Ordering beverages by brand names?
Treating you to their favorite drinks?
If so, those generous bon vivants may actually be paid promoters, part of living infomercials -- sponsored tableaux vivants, if you will.


Two Players Suspended
GARY ROBERTS of the Calgary Flames and RICK ZOMBO of the St.
Louis Blues were suspended by the National Hockey League yesterday.
Roberts, a left wing, was suspended for four games without pay and fined $500 -- the maximum allowed under the collective bargaining agreement -- because of two slashing incidents in a game against the Rangers on Jan. 5.
New York's STEVE LARMER was injured by one of the slashes.
Roberts will be fined an additional $500 for a high stick to the Rangers' BRIAN LEETCH.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about two large mergers of health care organizations misidentified the health maintenance organization purchased recently by the United Healthcare Corporation.
It was HMO America, not Health America.


For Packers' Sharpe, the Hurt Had Better Go Away Soon
Sterling Sharpe is so good that he has just become the first receiver in National Football League history to catch at least 100 passes a season for two straight seasons.
He is so good that he achieved that without practicing during the last half of this season because of an insidious injury known as turf toe.
If the Packers are to have any chance in Sunday's playoff game against the Dallas Cowboys -- the Cowboys are two-touchdown favorites at home -- Sharpe must be at his best.
Instead, at least physically, he is at his worst.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a plan to move the Philadelphia 76ers professional basketball franchise to the Camden waterfront misspelled the name of an economics professor at Lake Forest University who is an expert in sports franchises.
He is Robert Baade.


Review/Art; The Intimate Grandeur Of Old Italian Drawings
You don't have to be Arnold Schwarzenegger to know that a good sequel is hard to make.
When William M. Griswold and Linda Wolk-Simon, curators at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, set out to organize "16th-Century Italian Drawings in New York Collections," they knew they had their work cut out for them.
The predecessor of their effort, a three-part show of 15th- and 16th-century Italian drawings organized at the Metropolitan in 1965 by Jacob Bean and Felice Stampfle, had set a high standard and, they feared, had left no stone unturned.
Thus, Mr.
Griswold, who is associate curator in the department of drawings and prints, and Ms.
Wolk-Simon, assistant curator of the Robert Lehman Collection, set out to locate a relatively new batch of stones.
Their goal was to give as full an account of the period as possible, while reflecting developments in Italian Renaissance scholarship since 1965.


Teledyne Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Home Video
Films on Disk
Now that compact video disks can hold movies, what distributors need are the movies to put on them.
Until last week, however, only Paramount had been willing to give the small disks a try.
In October, Philips Media, a division of the electronics company, began to release 50 Paramount films for play on its CD-I (compact disk interactive) system.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Rick Krivda, pitcher, and Jim Wawruck, outfielder, on one-year contracts.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


The Spoken Word
CHAMBER MUSIC CONFERENCE, Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza, Broadway and 49th Street, Manhattan.
A four-day conference to explore how people in the arts can better serve their communities; with workshops, discussions and performances.
Awards for adventurous programming sponsored by Chamber Music America and Ascap will also be given to various groups.
Today, 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 8 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.; Sunday, 8 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Monday, 8 A.M. to 12:30 P.M.
Sponsored by Chamber Music America.
Registration each day is $80 ($20 for students); there is also a $225 ticket good for admission on all four days.
Information: (800) 243-6969.
"PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ENTERTAINMENT IN NEW YORK: 1893," New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Manhattan.
A symposium on entertainment in New York at the turn of the century, with scholars and artists.
Tomorrow, noon to 4:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 870-1630.


Cooper's Ex-Chairman Convicted in Fraud Case
The Cooper Companies and its former chairman, Gary A. Singer, were convicted yesterday by a Federal jury in Manhattan of taking part in an extensive conspiracy to profit from advance tips about a large mutual fund's junk-bond trades.
Mr.
Singer, who left his job after four years at the company before his indictment on Nov. 10, 1992, was found guilty of 21 counts of racketeering, money laundering and fraud.


Review/Theater; In Search Of Herself, With a Gift Of Hilarity
"Blown Sideways Through Life," first presented by the New York Theater Workshop, has reopened at the Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street, Greenwich Village.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 22.
Claudia Shear is a Brooklyn-born woman of uncertain age (the late 30's, perhaps?) who personifies two middle-class nightmares.
She is fat, and she cannot keep a job.
As she explains in "Blown Sideways Through Life," to be fat is to be branded not merely unerotic but also un-American.
And to have had and lost 64 (count 'em, 64) jobs -- for employers as varied as Bear Stearns and a whorehouse -- is to be seen as without character, class or a place in the world.


Prof. Moynihan and His Presidential Pupil
When President Clinton stepped up to the lectern at a fund-raising reception for Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan at the Waldorf-Astoria last month, he joked: "Before I met Pat Moynihan, I actually thought I knew something about Government. Now I just feel like I'm getting a grade every time I talk in front of him."
Unfortunately for Mr.
Clinton, his latest grades from the professor-turned-Senator have been well below average -- so lackluster that the New York Democrat has made a public example of his student several times in recent days, to the irritation and embarrassment of the White House.


Celebrating Dr. King
Tomorrow is the 64th anniversary of the birth of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
The Federal holiday commemorating his birth is on Monday, and events are planned around the city this weekend.
Here is a sampling:  Today  FILM, 115th Street branch of the New York Public Library, 203 West 115th Street, Morningside Heights.
A screening of the 1968 documentary film "Martin Luther King: The Man and the March," which documents Dr.
King's Poor People's March in Washington in 1968. 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 221-7676.


Market Place; Recovery Bandwagon Passes Figgie
Harry E. Figgie Jr. and Gerald Swanson made the best-seller lists last year with "Bankruptcy 1995: The Coming Collapse of America and How to Stop It," an apocalyptic view of the nation's economic future that focused on rising Government debts.
But Mr.
Figgie's credibility on Wall Street has collapsed even faster.
Losses at Figgie International Inc., the $1 billion conglomerate of which the 70-year-old Mr.
Figgie is chairman and chief executive, have piled up while companies around him have ridden the wave of economic recovery.


If Giuliani Was Elected to Crack Down, So Be It
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's lament about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, "Balance, Mr. Mayor" (column, Jan. 5), is understandable.
Mr.
Herbert obviously misses David N. Dinkins's somewhat softer style.
But is it fair to criticize Mr.
Giuliani for failing to display "balance" when he has been in office for less than a week?


Live, Via Compuserve: It's On-Line With Al Gore
In a hands-on demonstration of the "information superhighway" technology he has been promoting, Vice President Al Gore conducted the first computer-based news conference from the White House tonight.
He made history and only a few typographical errors.
Mr.
Gore, appearing comfortable at the computer keyboard and displaying more than a passing acquaintance with the electronic realm known as cyberspace, spent 45 minutes reading and responding to typed questions that scrolled down his screen from unseen questioners from California to France.
Real-Life Questions
The questioners were not journalists.
And with the exception of a single question on the strife in Bosnia, all the questions concerned the Administration's proposed "national information infrastructure" and its possible effects on people's everyday lives.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. is offering $200 million of notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 6.19 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The issue is callable in three years.


Skater's Assault Puts New Focus on Familiar Sport
CBS, which will televise the Winter Olympics next month, now stands to benefit from the extraordinary burst of attention being paid to figure skating in the wake of the attack on Nancy Kerrigan and the search for her assailant.
The assault on Kerrigan at last week's United States Figure Skating Championships will focus even more attention on how Kerrigan will perform at the Games in Lillehammer, Norway, and will probably help CBS exceed its previous high ratings for figure skating, the highest for any sport in the 1992 Winter Olympics.


Citicorp Passes Off Quotron, Predicts Big Quarterly Profit
Citicorp said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Quotron financial-information computer service, which has lost money ever since the banking company bought it in 1986, to Reuters Holdings P.L.C.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed, but Citicorp had offered to pay another company more than $100 million to take the ailing Quotron off its hands, an executive of the other company, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said.


Kelly Seeking Pension
Former Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly has applied for a tax-free disability pension for police officers and firefighters who develop heart ailments on the job, Inspector Lawrence F. Loesch, a police spokesman, said yesterday.
If granted the pension, Mr.
Kelly would receive at least $82,500, or 75 percent of his $110,000 active-duty salary.
The annuity is free of Federal taxes.


Let's Not Set Up an Orthodoxy for Ethics
To the Editor:
"Fetal Ovary Transplant Is Envisioned" (news article, Jan. 6), like so many other "gee whiz" articles on the ethics of medical technology, turns to professional "ethicists" for their opinions.
But no "ethicist" is more capable than any random person selected from the phone book to render judgments on the morality of a particular activity.


At the Bar; The prosecutor in the country's most visible domestic battle is being pummeled himself.
Paul B. Ebert has been the Commonwealth prosecutor in Prince William County since 1967.
Yesterday, he sent his seventh convict to Virginia's death row, more than any of his colleagues.
But after taking on both John and Lorena Bobbitt in the most celebrated skirmishes here since the first and second battles of Bull Run, he laments he will always be known as the prosecutor in the penis case.
Critics agree the Bobbitt cases have changed Mr.
Ebert's reputation, but not in the frivolous way he suggests.
For he finds himself in the middle of a domestic battle, one that began with two people but has come to engage much of the civilized world.


WABC-AM Cancels Sliwas' Talk Show
Curtis and Lisa Sliwa, whose topical radio talk show often drew leading politicians and other newsmakers, have been dropped by WABC-AM, which has carried their early-morning program for three years.
The Sliwas will broadcast their last program a week from today, Mr.
Sliwa, the leader of the Guardian Angels, said yesterday.


Regent Apologizes for Buttafuoco Comparison
A member of the New York State Board of Regents issued a public apology today for likening a colleague to Joey Buttafuoco, the high-profile Long Island auto mechanic now serving prison time for statutory rape.
The apology by the Regent, Carl T. Hayden, seemed to end for now a testy and well-publicized feud with J. Edward Meyer that many of the Regents considered an embarrassing distraction for the typically genteel board, which oversees the state's education system.


No Headline
"All I can say is, Wow!" DR.
DUCCIO MACCHETTO, an astronomer, hailing the repair of the Hubble Space Telescope.  [ A1:2. ]


Italy's Premier Resigns, Paving Way for National Vote
After more than eight months of overseeing one of the most turbulent eras of postwar Italian history, Prime Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi resigned today, opening the way for early elections that are expected to result in a purge of the country's political elite.
The 73-year-old former Central Bank governor handed his resignation to President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro after a final, rowdy debate in a Parliament disgraced by a corruption scandal that has touched nearly every political party represented in it.


Simulcasts Off Once Again
The new simulcasting alliance between Aqueduct Race Track and Gulfstream Park in Florida, which was disrupted three times in its first week by snow in New York, was disrupted again yesterday -- this time by rain in Florida.
The horses were running at Aqueduct on a relatively balmy afternoon with the temperature making a rare move past 40 degrees.
But after one race at Gulfstream, the jockeys decided that three days of rain had made the track too slippery and advised management that they would not ride.


Art in Review
Jim Isermann and Jason Fox
Feature Gallery  76 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 12
To this uneven two-man show, Jim Isermann contributes large cotton wall hangings, which he has hand-stitched from his own intricate watercolor studies.
The unlikely marriage of what appear to be Shaker quilt patterns, African textile designs and suburban curtain fabric looks like a multiculturalist sendup, but Mr.
Isermann has never been an artist interested primarily in irony.
In fact, what continues to make his work engaging is exactly its wholehearted, even optimistic embrace of popular crafts, in this case one traditionally regarded as "women's work." The results may be too blandly self-effacing to match the work of Robert Kushner and Alan Shields, artists who helped break the craft barrier 20 years ago, but Mr.
Isermann is certainly on the right path.


Review/Film; A Dog-Sled Race Fueled by Fruitcake
"Iron Will," a dandy film for dog-sledding enthusiasts the world over, is a dicier bet for audiences less tempted by the call of the wild.
Based on the real story of a 1917 dog-sled race from Winnipeg, Manitoba, to St.
Paul, it tells of how young Will Stoneman (Mackenzie Astin) enters the competition as, pardon the expression, an underdog.
"Don't let fear stand in the way of your dream, son," counsels Will's father (John Terry) shortly before becoming a casualty of the dog sled himself.
"Why didn't you pull him out, Gus?" Will asks the film's leading canine actor after his father drowns in icy waters.
Fueled by grief, determination, a lot of homespun boosterism and his mother's special fruitcake, Will overcomes mountainous odds as he struggles to the head of the pack.
The movie means to be quaint about Will's adventure, providing flag-waving fans to cheer his progress and actually referring to him as a "plucky lad." "Pembina Welcomes Dog Derby Mushers," reads a banner in one town.
As war looms on the horizon, a newspaper headline declares: "America Finds New Hero in Iron Will."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Everett S. Crosby, who operated the High Tor vineyards and winery in Rockland County, N.Y., for more than 20 years, misidentified the place of his retirement and death.
It was Ormond Beach in Florida, not California.


Strong Retail Sales Hurt Bonds
Conflicting signals in recent economic data and a forecast of strong economic growth from a Federal Reserve governor prompted a selloff in the bond market yesterday.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond fell 13/32 , while its yield -- which moves in the opposite direction -- jumped to 6.26 percent, from 6.18 percent on Wednesday.
Bond prices had soared nearly 3 points in the previous five trading days amid optimism that economic growth was moderate and not likely to fuel inflation.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday, about the connections of some mutual fund managers to Rafi Khan, a stock promoter who is under Federal investigation, misstated the extent of Mr.
Khan's legal problems.
He was never fined in Canada for securities fraud.


Art in Review
Jeanne Miles
Anita Shapolsky Gallery  99 Spring Street  SoHo  Through Jan. 25
Jeanne Miles has had the kind of life few artists live anymore.
She was born in Baltimore in 1908; after art school, she moved to Tahiti, then stowed away on a cargo ship to France, where she married, had a child and took refuge in an abandoned monastery during World War II.
In 1943, she showed in New York with Betty Parsons, one of the few dealers exhibiting work by female artists.
And although Ms.
Miles counted many of the Abstract Expressionists among her friends, her own painting grew increasingly hard-edged and geometric, influenced not only by late Kandinsky, but also by Tantric art and her study with the Russian philosopher P. D. Ouspensky.


His Fame Speaks Volumes: Carlton Talks
Steve Carlton was talking yesterday, finally talking at length after all those years of silence that he intertwined with precise pitching, and he might as well have been a battery-operated toy.
Push a button, hear him speak.
Push another button and hear some more.
Carlton's batteries were charged, for him anyway.
One day after being voted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility, Carlton unveiled the voice that was rarely heard by reporters while he performed as the finest left-hander of his era for the Philadelphia Phillies.
He exercised his vocal cords for 45 minutes and smoothly answered questions from some of the same reporters he once shunned.


Canandaigua Wine Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


New Policy on Declassifying Secrets Is Debated
The Clinton Administration, which is preparing a new post-cold war policy on the release of Government secrets, is engaged in an intense debate over how long information should remain classified.
A draft report of a new policy would require that all Government secrets, with few exceptions, be automatically released after 40 years.


The Coaches' Backdoor Play
There is a struggle going on at the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 88th annual meeting that bears watching by anyone who cares about the integrity of America's universities and about America's poor minorities, for whom a decent education is at least one ticket out of the ghetto.
Understanding this struggle requires an ear for hypocrisy and an appreciation for power plays masquerading as benign and virtuous gestures.
On the surface, the fight involves the number of scholarships a basketball coach can offer.
But underneath, it involves the question of who is going to set standards and manage the distribution of resources at schools that are big-time basketball powers -- the coaches or the college presidents.


Seymour S. Raven Orchestra and College Official, 75
Seymour S. Raven, a former general manager of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, died on Wednesday at his home in Chicago.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said his son Jonathan.


Group Begins New AIDS Ads in Subways
A New York City AIDS organization has begun a new subway advertising campaign aimed at young people that shows homosexual and heterosexual couples kissing and touching while holding condoms and other protective devices.
Officials from Gay Men's Health Crisis say the advertisements, which began appearing in subway cars last week, are more explicit than what they have produced for the wider public in the past.
They say the concept and wording for the advertisements resulted from months of consultations with youth agencies and four focus groups last summer with members of the target audience: gay and bisexual adults between the ages of 15 and 21.


Clintons' Personal Lawyer: A Survival Expert
A few years after graduating from law school, David E. Kendall wrote an article, entitled "How to Keep Your Client Alive," in which he offered advice based on his extensive experience defending inmates on death row.
Now Mr.
Kendall, a lawyer little known outside bar circles, is working for the political survival of Bill and Hillary Clinton.
Since last summer, he has been the Clintons' personal lawyer.
His role became public only last month, after it was disclosed that the Clintons had used him to negotiate the terms of a Justice Department subpoena for the business records of their real estate investments in the Whitewater Development Corporation.
The Clintons had a partnership in the company with James B. McDougal, the proprietor of an Arkansas savings and loan institution that is now closed.


Innovation In Sending Donations To Neediest
During a season when many longtime contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund have been forced to send less because of economic hardship, hundreds of others have instead seen the difficulties as a challenge.
In letters with their contributions, they describe how they have taken up the cudgels of innovation to try to meet the challenge, collecting money from their fellow employees or neighbors, holding auctions, sending along windfalls or even raising money from recycling to help those in need.


Shift Is Seen at Coopers &amp; Lybrand
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the giant accounting firm, is expected to make a major announcement today concerning its chairman, Eugene M. Freedman, after a meeting in New York of the firm's top partners.
A spokesman for the company declined to comment.
But current and former partners of the firm said they expected Mr.
Freedman to announce that he had decided not to run for re-election as head of the American firm after his current term expires in September.
He had been testing the partnership's interest in changing the rules to allow him to run again.


Abroad at Home; The Politics of Nativism
When California political consultants talk with their focus groups these days about such issues as crime, schools or jobs, they find an underlying concern about something else: immigration.
There is a strain of ferocious anti-immigrant feeling in the state.
Fear of immigrants is not new in California.
As long ago as 1848 an outcry against Peruvian miners led to a Foreign Miners Tax, and there has been periodic anti-immigrant fever since.


Review/Theater; Violence Is Abrupt in a Black Haven
Imagine a collaboration between August Wilson and Sam Peckinpah, and you'll have a good idea of "East Texas Hot Links," the one-act play by Eugene Lee that opened last night at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
The Top o' the Hill Cafe, a black hangout nestled under the spindly pine trees of East Texas, is the setting.
Since the time is 1955, segregation is still the law on the far side of the screen door.
But for Charlesetta (Loretta Devine), the congenial proprietor, and the seven men who gather at the bar to deliberate on life and guzzle moonshine out of tin cups, the homely establishment is a haven.


Weicker Offers Tough Curbs Covering Guns of Every Type
Seeking to counter what he called a "crescendo of death and mayhem," Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and a group of lawmakers said today that they would propose legislation making it tougher to own a gun and providing stiffer penalties for owners of guns used in violent crimes.
The law would require all prospective gun owners, including hunters using rifles or shotguns, to obtain a license, which requires completion of a gun safety and use course, rather than simply a permit.


2 Recall 1949 Radiation Tests on Them
Two former students returned here to the Fernald School today and testified to a Senate committee about radiation experiments performed on them in the 1940's and 50's by researchers who had told them that they were joining a science club.
The hearing was the first by the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources in its investigation of human radiation experiments that were conducted after World War II.
The chairman, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said he planned to introduce legislation "for the protection of human subjects."


A Spreading Light on Radiation Tests
Three weeks after Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary directed the Energy Department and its contractors to "identify and gather all of the records that may pertain to human experimentation," long-hidden documents about cold war radiation tests are coming to light around the country.
Yesterday, as Mrs.
O'Leary held a public hearing in Seattle on experimentation, officials at the Hanford nuclear weapons plant in central Washington State made public 54 pages of administrative files associated with an experiment conducted in the late 1960's.


Whitewater Issue Hampers Nightline's Access to Clinton
The special access that President Clinton has granted to the ABC News program "Nightline" during his trip to Europe was temporarily interrupted on Wednesday when Mr.
Clinton refused to give an interview to the program's anchor, Ted Koppel.
Mr.
Clinton had agreed to give "Nightline" an interview on each of five consecutive nights this week, an arrangement that has had the other networks grumbling.
But the President refused to answer questions on Wednesday about the decision to seek a special prosecutor in the investigation of the Whitewater Development Corporation, so no interview was conducted.


Bitter Rivals Are Also Fighting for Big Dollars
They began skating at age 3 or 4, and lessons followed, early-morning practices in frigid rinks, and when the skating got serious, so did the money.
Costume costs ran to $2,000 and beyond.
Training costs approached $50,000 a year.
After all that training, all that money spent, their entire careers would come down to four minutes at the Olympics.
For Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan, the upcoming Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway, was to be the Super Bowl and the World Series wrapped into one.
There is lucrative money to be made on tour with ice shows, titles to be won at national and world championships, but the Olympics are the one moment when the whole world is watching, when a reputation can be made, when a gold medal can be worth $10 million to $15 million in endorsements, tours, appearances and merchandising.


CLINTON, IN RUSSIA, IS FIRM IN SUPPORT OF YELTSIN'S AIMS
President Clinton came to this wintry capital today and embraced President Boris N. Yeltsin almost without qualification, despite the surprisingly strong nationalist, anti-Yeltsin revolt evident in the parliamentary elections on Dec. 12.
On his first visit to Russia as President, Mr.
Clinton and his top aides conceded that many people here had suffered acute economic privation in the transition from Communism to a free market.
They spoke of the need for a redesigned net of social services to ease the pain.
But they nonetheless pressed for a sustained or, in some areas, increased pace of reform.


Inside Connection Concern to Skate Community
In their absence tonight, Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan were still the main topics as the United States Olympic figure skating team performed in an exhibition at George Mason University's Patriot Center.
Both Harding and Kerrigan were originally scheduled to attend, but fans tonight were greeted with signs apologizing that neither was here.
Organizers denied the news media access to the skaters and building management said there was added security.


Jeanne S. Mintz, 71, Analyst at Pentagon Of Asian Economies
Dr.
Jeanne Shirley Mintz, an authority on Indonesia and an Asian affairs specialist in the Defense Department, died on Tuesday at Memorial-Sloan Kettering Hospital.
She was 71 and lived in Washington.
The cause was congestive heart failure, her Pentagon office said.


Youth Fatally Shot by Officers Was Convicted in a Drug Case
As District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn began a preliminary investigation of police conduct in the shooting death Tuesday night of an unarmed youth in East New York, a picture began to emerge yesterday of the teen-ager's involvement in the drug-soaked world of the neighborhood where he was killed.
A law-enforcement official said yesterday that the 17-year-old youth, Shu'aib Abdul-Latif, was arrested March 27 on a charge of criminal possession of a controlled substance with intent to sell.
The official -- who spoke only on condition of anonymity, since the case was sealed because the defendant was only 16 -- said Mr.
Abdul-Latif had 22 vials of crack in his possession at the time of his arrest and was convicted in June of the Class B felony.
He was sentenced to five years' probation, said an investigator who also spoke only on condition of anonymity, because Mr.
Abdul-Latif was a minor and because it was his first offense.


Trenton Shovels Resumes as Well as Snow
In the days after Gov.
Jim Florio lost to Christine Todd Whitman, the story goes, you couldn't find a plain envelope, one without a state government return address, in all the capital.
It seems they were all snatched up by the soon-to-be jobless Floriocrats, to send out their resumes.
True or false, the results of those job searches are coming in.
For some the yield has been heartwarming; for others, still with no place to go, apparently slim.
Amid all the desk-emptying and office-clearing, there is carping about the Clinton Administration.
It loved the Florio people when they beat the gun lobby and seemed to be winning the election, but it is now said to be slow in finding new perches for the losers in a season of defeat.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  CLINTON SALUTES YELTSIN  Almost without qualification, President Clinton embraced President Yeltsin on the first day of his visit to Moscow.
Mr.
Clinton nodded to Mr.
Yeltsin's nationalist foes by conceding that Russians were suffering, but overall, he pressed for economic reform.
A1  FOR RUSSIANS, MAINLY A SIDESHOW  Already bracing for legislative battles, Russia's unruly politicians are showing friendly but mostly detached interest in Bill Clinton.
A1


Paris Journal; With Head Unbowed, Communist Boss Bows Out
During Georges Marchais's two decades as leader of the French Communist Party, support for his movement fell from 21.4 to 9 percent of the electorate.
Then, as a final blow, the collapse of the Soviet Union undermined the very ideology that he had long espoused.
But as he prepares to retire as party leader this month, the 73-year-old former metalworker with the trademark bushy eyebrows sees no reason to apologize for being a Communist.
"I don't view what has happened as a personal failure," he said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ATTEMPT TO HEAL TENSIONS FAILS
An effort by the Giuliani administration to calm tensions between the Police Department and black New Yorkers crumbled in recriminations after the new Police Commissioner shunned a meeting with representatives of the Nation of Islam and other blacks.
A1.


Ghostly Residents Protest in Atlanta
To the Editor:
"Despite the protest of residents who will be displaced," a Jan. 10 news article reports, "the State of Georgia will begin developing a 72-acre Olympic park in downtown Atlanta on a site now occupied largely by distressed residential and commercial properties." This is misleading.


Filtration Will Cleanse Water of Contaminants
To the Editor:
Shooing Canadian geese and ring-billed gulls from the Kensico Reservoir is not a satisfactory alternative to filtering New York City's water supply.
A principal justification of filtration is control of the pathogenic protozoan organisms giardia and cryptosporidium.
Bird control will not eliminate the organisms.


Columbia Rejects a Student Accused of Sex Harassment
The 18-year-old Swarthmore College student who was planning to transfer to Columbia University at Swarthmore's expense to resolve a sexual harassment complaint against him was rejected by Columbia late yesterday afternoon.
Fred Knubel, a spokesman for the university, said the committee on admissions had denied admission to the student, Ewart E. D. Yearwood, "based on his academic record."


Media Services Unit For Ally &amp; Gargano
Ally &amp; Gargano in New York said yesterday that it had formed an independent media services division from the accounts of clients who now use the agency only for media planning and buying.
The new division, called Media Partners, starts with media assignments on accounts with $75 million in billings from clients like Enterprise Rent-a-Car and Pfizer Inc.'s Plax, Ben-Gay and Unisom brands.
Dawn Sibley, the corporate media director of Ally, was named to head the new unit along with Jim Vail, senior vice president and associate media director.


Nets Win A Quarter, Not a Game
After that old sparkplug, Chris Morris, was reinserted into the starting lineup, New Jersey's offensive machine hummed like a BMW tonight.
For about 15 minutes.
Then the retinkered lineup started to sputter, allowing the Cleveland Cavaliers to rally from 13 points behind and race to a 104-93 victory over the Nets.
Morris had team highs of 20 points and 3 steals, plus an assist and 7 rebounds in 38 minutes in only his fourth start of the season.
He was sidelined by injuries starting with the second game of the season in San Antonio and eventually lost his starting job to P. J. Brown, whom he replaced as a starter tonight.


Police in Oregon Make Arrests In Assault on Olympic Skater
Tonya Harding's bodyguard and another man were arrested tonight by the Multnomah County Sheriff's Department in connection with the attack on the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan.
Shawn Eric Eckardt, 26, a 350-pound bodyguard with a past criminal history, and Derrick B. Smith, a 29-year-old unemployed resident of Phoenix, were each charged with one count of conspiracy to commit assault, a felony.
They were held on $20,000 bail each.


Restaurants
"There just aren't any real Italian restaurants in New York," lamented a Milanese journalist recently.
He was sitting in the Russian Tea Room, sipping tea with cherries and sadly recalling all the meals he might be eating if only he had stayed home.
Suddenly a smile escaped from between his lips.
He tried to bite it back.
It was too late.
"O.K.," he relented.
"I have had food at a restaurant in SoHo that tastes very much like what they serve at home."


Aspin Moves to Open Many Military Jobs to Women
In one of his last major actions as Defense Secretary, Les Aspin today announced a policy change that could eventually open thousands of jobs that are now off limits to women in the Army and Marine Corps.
It will take several months, however, to tell how the new policy works in practice.
Using a new standard defining what is risky in ground combat, the armed services will review all the positions now closed to women to determine if they should stay closed.
Troops involved in direct ground combat, like infantry and tank units, will remain all male, but several maintenance, engineering and other combat support positions could open to women.


Consumer Prices Rose 2.7% in 1993
The smallest annual rise in the cost of medical care since 1973 helped hold the overall inflation rate to 2.7 percent last year, the smallest increase in seven years, Government figures showed today.
The Consumer Price Index has now risen less than 3 percent for two consecutive years, the first time this has happened since the 1960's.


Books of The Times; Further Revisionism On Sartre and Beauvoir
Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre
The Remaking of a 20th-Century Legend
By Kate Fullbrook and Edward Fullbrook
214 pages. Basic Books. $25.
The body of existing literature about the lives of Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir is already voluminous.
There are the writers' own copious memoirs, novels, letters and diaries, of course, as well as an outpouring of recent biographies, by Annie Cohen-Solal ("Sartre: A Life"), Ronald Hayman ("Sartre: A Life"), Deirdre Bair ("Simone de Beauvoir: A Biography") and Margaret Crosland ("Simone de Beauvoir: The Woman and Her Work").


Fullback Shuttle A Bonus For 49ers
One of the worst things to happen to the San Francisco 49ers this season occurred when fullback Tom Rathman separated his right shoulder in the team's season opener at Pittsburgh and missed the next eight games.
One of the best things to happen to the 49ers occurred after Rathman was injured.


GenCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


College Draft Resolution Has the N.B.A. Worried
A resolution that allows collegiate underclassmen to return to school after declaring themselves eligible for the National Basketball Association has league and team officials worried about a volatile effect on the league's annual draft.
The resolution was approved this week by the delegates at the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention in San Antonio.
An underclassman who declares himself eligible for the draft will now be allowed to change his mind should he be dissatisfied with the outcome.
The player will have until 30 days after the draft to reverse his decision, and may only exercise the option once during his college career.


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31





Allan Eady; Publishing Executive, 53
Allan Eady, a publishing executive, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 53.
His wife, Carol Dix, said the cause was lung cancer.


MISTRIAL DECLARED FOR ONE DEFENDANT IN PARENTS' KILLING
After five months of testimony, 19 days of deliberations and several prods from the judge, a jury said today that it could not reach a verdict in the murder trial of Erik Menendez, and the judge declared a mistrial.
A separate jury continued to deliberate on the same charges against Erik's older brother, Lyle Menendez.
Both brothers are accused of murder in the killing of their parents in 1989.


1 in 2 Experiences a Mental Disorder
Close to one in two Americans -- 48 percent -- have experienced a mental disorder at some point in their lives, and 30 percent suffer from one in any given year, a national survey has found.
The odds that someone will suffer from a psychiatric disorder over a lifetime are far higher than have been found in previous surveys, which used less exacting methods.


CHRONICLE
Come April, the country will once again be playing find-the-Nina-in-the-mailbox when the postal service issues 10 29-cent stamps showing silent screen stars as seen through the eyes of AL HIRSCHFELD.
Although postal regulations forbid the use of "hidden messages" in stamps, MARGO FEIDEN, the artist's agent, says an exemption has been made for Hirschfeld sketches, which invariably include the name of his daughter, Nina, woven into a beard, say, or tucked into the fold of a sleeve.


CHRONICLE
BARBRA STREISAND is the first contributor to a fund to fight breast cancer created in memory of Virginia Clinton Kelley, the President's mother, who died of the disease on Jan. 6.
Mrs.
Kelley spent her last weekend in Las Vegas attending Ms.
Streisand's New Year's concerts.
"I am so grateful for the time I was able to spend with her," Ms.
Streisand said about the weekend, during which she praised Mrs.
Kelley from the stage.
"She died as she lived, with grace and dignity, full of enthusiasm and the joy of life. This new effort to combat breast cancer is endowed with that glowing spirit."


Sounds Around Town
Playing in the Park
Illinois Jacquet Big Band, Chestnut Room, Tavern on the Green, Central Park at West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 873-3200.
When the exuberant tenor saxophonist Illinois Jacquet formed a big band in 1983, 41 years after he became famous playing "Flyin' Home" with Lionel Hampton's band, he was the last of the instrumental stars of the Swing Era to take that step.
The band, now 16 pieces, has survived since then, playing one-night stands and weekend engagements.
It has now taken a big step toward the successful days of the big bands in the 1930's and 40's.
It is in the midst of a four-week, six-nights-a-week stay at the Tavern on the Green, which began on Jan. 4.
This weekend the band plays tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11 for a music charge of $23.50, and on Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M., when the music charge is $17.50.
There is no minimum at any time.
JOHN S. WILSON Nichols's Notes
The Jazz Composers' Collective, "The Music of Herbie Nichols," Greenwich House Music School, 46 Barrow Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 995-1552.
Herbie Nichols was an unusually promising pianist and composer who took part in jazz sessions at Monroe's Uptown House in Harlem in the late 1930's when the seeds of be-bop were being laid.
Although technically on a par with the other musicians there, he felt uneasy in their company because of his lack of musical education.
As a result, he got relatively few jobs and those he did get were not in his own style but in the swing manner of such jazz musicians as Illinois Jacquet, Lucky Thompson and Arnett Cobb.
By the time he died, at 44 in 1963, he had not established an identity of his own and he has remained in obscurity, despite the fact that his playing was very readily communicative.
His music will get a rare hearing in a concert tonight, played by a group that includes Ted Nash, Adam Kolker and John Schroeder on saxophones, Ron Horton on trumpet and fluegelhorn, Charlie Gordon on trombone, Frank Kimbrough on piano, Ben Monder on guitar, Ben Allison on bass, and Jeff Ballard, Tim Horner and Matt Wilson on drums.
Admission to the concert, which starts at 8 P.M., is $7 ($5 for students).
J.
S.
W.
Dearie at Twilight
Blossom Dearie, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
The singer and pianist Blossom Dearie has returned this month to the weekend twilight concerts that have been her specialty for several years.
Her repertory of wry and witty songs, many of them by Dave Frishberg, Bob Dorough, John Wallowitch and herself, as well as classics by Cole Porter and Sheldon Harnick, are sung in a teeny, tiny voice of innocence that underlines their sophistication.
Miss Dearie, who likes to get to bed early, starts her program tonight and tomorrow at 6:30 -- or thereabouts -- and gets off promptly at 8.
Tickets are $15 for each performance; there is also a two-drink minimum for each show.
J.
S.
W.


Fossils Point to a Walking Ancestor of Whales
Scientists have discovered unusually complete fossil remains of what could be an ancestor of modern whales that walked on land and hunted in the sea about 50 million years ago.
Looking at the structure of the bones, the researchers said today, the creature that was discovered in an ancient sea bed in Pakistan appeared to waddle around on land like a sea lion.
Judging by its anatomy, they said, it was also a powerful and agile swimmer, like a sea otter.


Driver Hits 4 People, Then Crashes Into a Doughnut Shop


Bhutto Fans the Family Feud, Charging Mother Favors Son
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto said today that she was "deeply pained" by the feud that has opened a deep rift in Pakistan's leading political family, but she rejected her mother's demand to be restored to the leadership of Pakistan's governing party.
In a bitter response to a series of angry charges from Nusrat Bhutto, her mother, the Prime Minister said, "I do feel she says it to damage me and pave the way for the son that she feels should be, in her own words, the heir."


Seizing the Opportunity to Break the Ice


INSIDE
1993 Increase in Inflation Was Lowest in Seven Years
Consumer prices rose at an overall rate of of 2.7 percent last year, the smallest increase in seven years, the Government said.
Separately, retail sales climbed a strong eight-tenths of a percent last month.
Page D1.
Military Jobs for Women
In one of his last major actions as Defense Secretary, Les Aspin announced a policy change that could open thousands of jobs that are now off limits to women.
Page A22.
Massachusetts Welfare Plan
Gov.
William F. Weld proposed a welfare overhaul that would force a majority of able-bodied recipients into community service.
Page A12.
Blacks Moved Into Project
Eleven black people were moved into an all-white housing project in Vidor, Tex., as Federal marshals and police officers kept guard.
Page A20.


In Banja Luka, Terror Seems Uncannily Normal
To the Editor:
I wonder how many of your readers have seen Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List," and how many have heard of Banja Luka, Bosnia, in the heart of Europe?
Banja Luka is the de facto capital of Serb-controlled Bosnia.
The Banja Luka region is unusual in the tragedy of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in that it was never directly affected by war.
Minority Muslim and Croat residents never took up arms against the Serb majority.
Their reward for their loyalty was massacre, rape and the concentration camps of Omarska, Manjaca and Turnpolje (which briefly received attention from a horrified world in 1992).


A Prototype Controller for Movies on Demand or Electronic Shopping


Review/Photography; Technique as the Gateway to the Spiritual
Using photography to create abstract images and allude to spiritual matters might seem somewhat perverse, like trying to play a violin with a hammer.
But as a marvelous exhibition at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton demonstrates, that's precisely what Ralph Eugene Meatyard did with remarkable success, in the course of a short but brilliant career.
Meatyard, who died in 1972 at the age of 46, is one of the most interesting, if underknown, figures in recent photography.
In the 1960's, working in scraps of time left over from his job as an optician in Lexington, Ky., Meatyard managed to produce some of the most far-reaching photographs being done anywhere at the time.


For Children
'The Al E. Gator Show'
The Puppet Company  Metropolis Cafe  31 Union Square West (at 16th Street)  Manhattan  (212) 741-1646  Recommended ages: 3 to 8  Through April 24
Al E. Gator, an amiable marionette with a Jimmy Durante voice and an Ed Sullivan demeanor, is the host of a revue of limber marionettes, some new, some old, like the lovable Clockettes and their crisp chorus-line number.


Review/Art; A Love Affair With Surrealism
Despite his formative role in the development of American vanguard art around World War II, David Hare (1917-1992) has never entered the Valhalla reserved for the first generation of New York School artists.
And looking at his sculptures and paintings in the show titled "A Tribute to David Hare" at the New York Studio School, one begins to see why.
They are the work of an intelligent, purposeful, highly literate artist, but one who somehow got left behind in time, frozen in a style that many of his colleagues moved beyond.
Originally a photographer, Hare began making figurative sculpture in the early 1940's when European Surrealist art struck him with the force of a revelation.
This watershed moment, however, coincided with the rise of Abstract Expressionism, a movement that established painting as the privileged international medium. (Hare himself didn't start to paint until the late 50's.) It also came at a time when many of his most adventurous New York colleagues were taking the plunge into pure abstraction.
Hare didn't follow their lead.
His devotion to Surrealism -- with its psychological preoccupations and its interest in fantasy and myth -- was complete, and would remain so for the rest of his life.


The Battle for Macy; Against Long Odds, Retailer Fights To Remain Independent and Intact
Myron E. Ullman 3d, the chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, has vowed to keep the department store company independent in the face of an attempted takeover by its longtime nemesis, Federated Department Stores, but most analysts and retail watchers say that could be difficult.
He might find a white knight with a packet of cash, or scotch Federated's overtures by finding another suitor.
Or he could pay off Federated entirely; a creditor paid off in a plan of reorganization has no further say in the bankruptcy process.


Motorola Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mutual Fund Buyers at Banks Found Naive
As banks become increasingly important sellers of mutual funds, a survey released in Washington yesterday shows that more than 80 percent of bank customers falsely believe that the mutual funds they buy there are protected by Government guarantees against loss.
The findings were issued jointly by state securities administrators and consumer groups.
And they came just as Federal bank regulators and Congress are debating how to provide adequate protection for the growing number of consumers who are buying these securities at their local banks instead of through traditional brokers or mutual fund companies.


Yanks Sign Ex-Met Boston
DARYL BOSTON, a veteran outfielder who spent three seasons with the Mets, could return to New York this year, but with the Yankees.
Boston, who became a free agent after spending last season with the expansion Colorado Rockies, agreed yesterday to a minor league contract with the Yankees, making him the fourth free agent signed by the Yankees in less than a month.
The Yankees will pay Boston $50,000 for going to spring training, and if he wins a job with them, his salary will be $400,000.
He also could earn $200,000 in bonuses based on plate appearances, gaining the maximum with 400.
Boston batted .261 and hit 14 home runs in 124 games with the Rockies.


Diner's Journal
Young and Zany
"Do you want to know what we're out of?" The waitress then listed everything we had decided on.
It was only 7 o'clock, and this was not the best introduction to a restaurant.
Especially one where so much money has obviously been spent.
There's not a straight line in the room, and absolutely everything looks handmade, from the chairs to the lights to the undulating columns that slouch through the room.
Iridium looks like a place that the Seven Dwarfs might have imagined during a particularly hallucinogenic acid trip.


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Inside Art
Not Heat, but Humidity
Frank Lloyd Wright took his time designing and building the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum (17 years from start to finish).
So complex was his design that the only builder he could find to execute his drawings economically was a man whose expertise was constructing concrete parking garages and freeways.
Now the Guggenheim is taking its time again, but the issue is how best to solve some of the longstanding problems (a few left over from Wright's design) that weren't fixed by the museum's $45 million restoration and expansion in 1992.
Again, museum officials say, lack of money is part of the problem.
This winter's harsh weather hasn't helped.
While it may not be noticeable to the average visitor, the museum is grappling with condensation problems.
Everyone connected with the museum -- from conservationists to architects -- says that when it is particularly cold outside, moisture from skylights and windows that have not been sufficiently insulated drips down some interior walls.


Review/Music; Dutoit Lets a Philharmonic Violist Shine
An admirable facet of Zubin Mehta's tenure as music director of the New York Philharmonic was the extent to which he allowed solo opportunities for orchestra members, a practice Kurt Masur has continued with good success.
This week Cynthia Phelps, the orchestra's principal violist, is doing a star turn in Berlioz's concertolike "Harold in Italy," somewhat upstaging the guest soloist.
Ms.
Phelps, well remembered for a New York recital two years ago, is indeed a virtuoso of soloist caliber.
She has also played a crucial role in the rejuvenation of the Philharmonic over the last few years.
In Mr.
Masur's seating plan, the violists are up front, and Ms.
Phelps's alert, involved presence aptly symbolizes the leadership she has brought to the section, now one of the orchestra's strongest.


Procter Sets New Closings
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company announced more consolidations of its manufacturing operations yesterday, this time saying it will close four plants and shut down production lines at six sites in North America.
The latest reductions, which will be completed over 18 months, will result in the furlough, transfer or early retirement of 1,800 employees.
That is about half of the total manufacturing jobs that the company had said would eventually be cut from its North American operations.


Irish Hires Defensive Coach
Nearly two weeks after coaching against Notre Dame in the Cotton Bowl, Texas A&amp;M's defensive coordinator, BOB DAVIE, is the newest Fighting Irish assistant coach.


Smith Prepared to Play Through the Pain
Three days before the Dallas Cowboys' playoff game here against the Green Bay Packers, Emmitt Smith spent an hour today for in-person questioning and a national news media conference call.
Almost all of the questions concerned his right shoulder, which suffered a slight separation two Sundays ago against the Giants.
Is the shoulder better?
Can he play Sunday at full speed?
Is the pain still great?


Robert C. McNamara, A Book Publisher, 86
Robert C. McNamara Jr., a retired book publisher, died on Wednesday night at the Brewster Manor Nursing Home in Brewster, Mass.
He was 86.
The cause was heart disease, his family said.


Jews in the New Europe: 10 Films at Lincoln Center
Beyond "Schindler's List": The Jewish Museum and the Film Society of Lincoln Center present "Tradition and Renewal: Jews in the New Europe," a 10-film series that began Wednesday and runs through Thursday at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
The subjects are widely varied, ranging from the autobiography of a Soviet emigre returning to his homeland from Israel ("And the Wind Returneth," a 1991 Russian film by Mikhail Kalik) to the video version of a live performance work featured at the 1993 Venice Biennale ("Metamorphosis of a Melody," by Amos Gitai).
Another film by Mr.
Gitai, "In the Valley of the Wupper," is a drama examining the impact of bigotry on a small German town.
The series' opening night film was "Why Wasn't He There" (1993), by the Hungarian director Andras Jeles, a strange and fanciful effort to capture the thoughts of a 13-year-old girl on the eve of World War II.
Pretty and privileged, young Eva lives a cosseted existence that is slowly altered by the prospect of German invasion.
Early parts of the film are experimental and uneven, employing devices like a magnifying glass in the middle of the frame and frequent escapes into the world of "David Copperfield," a book that looms large in Eva's imagination.


MORGAN (J. P.) &amp; CO. (N)
Fourth-quarter profits at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company jumped by 77 percent over the previous year, to $392 million.
The investment bank made $1.92 a share, higher than the $1.71 expected by Wall Street analysts.


Hurley Returns to Arena
BOBBY HURLEY, looking gaunt and weak but vowing to play basketball next season, yesterday returned to Arco Arena in Sacramento, Calif., for the first time since his nearly fatal car crash.
Appearing at his first news conference since the Dec. 12 accident near the arena, Hurley walked unassisted from the parking lot to the arena, stopping to autograph a basketball for a fan. (AP)


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's meeting with President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine misstated the year of the Yalta conference.
It was 1945, not 1943.


Harlem Boys Choir Dedicates New School


A Victory for Yeltsin in the Upper House, a Noisy Row in the Lower
The upper chamber of Russia's new Parliament today elected one of President Boris N. Yeltsin's close lieutenants as Chairman, while the lower house rang again to Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky's antics.
The meetings of the two chambers, separated by several miles, were played out against the pomp and traffic jams of President Clinton's official visit, which added yet another dimension to Moscow's political maneuverings.


Arnold Advertising Appoints an Officer
Francis J. Kelly 3d, the partner and chief operating officer who left Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly in Providence, R.I., last week, has been named to the new position of executive vice president and chief marketing officer at Arnold Advertising in Boston, effective Feb. 15.
"After five exciting years at a smaller creative shop, I felt it was time to move back to Boston to an agency with more resources and larger clients," he said yesterday.


Search Begins for Special Prosecutor on Land Deal
Attorney General Janet Reno began a search for an independent prosecutor today, sorting through names of what aides described as a "handful" of candidates for the politically perilous job of investigating President Clinton's role in a failed Arkansas land deal.
Justice Department officials said Ms.
Reno and several top advisers have weighed the names of several well-known lawyers as potential candidates and have telephoned some to determine whether they were interested.
The officials would not identify the prospective choices but said they did not expect to have difficulty finding a prosecutor.


A French Surrender on Terrorism
When governments speak of "reasons of state," look for a squalid act that offends common decency.
France won't explain why it brushed off a Swiss extradition request and released two Iranians wanted in Switzerland for the murder of an Iranian dissident.
According to the right-of-center Government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, the reasons are "linked to the national interest." When the Clinton Administration protested this breach of anti-terrorism policy, France's Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, refused to respond because "I am not an employee of President Clinton."
One has to sympathize with Mr.
Pasqua, since the likely explanations for France's action are embarrassing.
The possibilities are (1) that France has violated the European Charter on extradition to secure a market in Iran for its high-tech exports; (2) that it has yielded to Iranian threats of terrorism, and (3) that the Balladur Government, with an ear to anti-immigrant sentiment, places less value on human life if the victim is a non-European, like the Iranian dissident who was slain in Geneva.


Senator Accuses School Agency of Shoddy Repairs
Standing outside a Manhattan high school damaged by leaks, the chairman of the State Senate's Investigations Committee accused the School Construction Authority of shoddy repair work at dozens of public schools across New York City.
The chairman, Roy M. Goodman, a Manhattan Republican, said a check of 48 of the 2,000 repair projects completed over the last few years found that most had a history of leaks and other problems.


Bosnian Army Seen in Big Gain and Setback
United Nations officials confirmed on Thursday that Bosnian Government forces had delivered a severe setback to Croatian forces in central Bosnia, practically cutting in half the last major Croatian-held pocket in the region.
But the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Army will be threatened with a defeat of greater proportions if it is confirmed that Bosnian Serb forces have breached Bosnian Army lines near the town of Olovo and are threatening to cut a road used to supply the northern city of Tuzla.
The report was made today by the Serbian radio but denied by Bosnian military officials.
United Nations officials here could not confirm it.


On My Mind; Killer at the Summit
On Sunday, the President of the United States will enter a conference room in Geneva and shake hands with Hafez al-Assad, President of Syria, one of the world's most experienced negotiators.
Mr.
Assad is also one of the world's most experienced killers.
Does that matter?
Should it matter enough to Bill Clinton to shape what he says to Mr.
Assad?


2 Performers Die as Ringling Circus Train Derails
A Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey circus train derailed yesterday on a foggy stretch of track a mile east of Lakeland, Fla., killing a nationally known elephant trainer and a clown and injuring 15 people.
The Polk County Sheriff's Department said the cause of the derailment was unknown and is under investigation.
The 53-car train, which derailed at 9:15 A.M., carried 200 performers and circus workers as well as 60 animals in the circus's Blue Unit, one of two Ringling shows that travel across the country in circus trains.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Bullets Leave the Rockets Red-Faced  In Landover, Md., Don MacLean's 30 points and Rex Chapman's 27 more than offset Hakeem Olajuwon's season-high 45 points last night as the Washington Bullets surprised the Houston Rockets, 120-102.
The loss deprived Coach Rudy Tomjanovich of the Rockets of his 100th career victory.
He has coached 150 National Basketball Association games.
Michael Adams had 17 points and 12 assists, and Tom Gugliotta added 16 points, as Washington won its second straight game. (AP) Spurs 107, Suns 88: David Robinson had 27 points and 16 rebounds as San Antonio registered its ninth victory in 10 games, giving visiting Phoenix its first two-game losing streak of the season.
The Spurs outscored the Suns by 23-4 in the final 4:49.
Robinson scored 12 points in the fourth period.
The Suns were without injured All-Stars Charles Barkley (torn knee tendon) and Kevin Johnson (ankle sprain). (AP) Jazz 101, Bucks 83: Reserve Jay Humphries scored 12 of his 14 points in the first half as Utah snapped a season-high three-game losing streak by routing Milwaukee.
A rookie, Vin Baker, led all scorers with 17 points and added a career-high 13 rebounds for the Bucks, who shot just 33 percent compared to Utah's 54 percent. (AP) N.H.L.
Recchi's Jumper Cables Do Trick for Flyers  Mark Recchi jump-started Philadelphia's struggling offense by collecting two goals and an assist last night at the Spectrum as the Flyers beat the Boston Bruins, 6-2.
The Flyers, who have won two straight for the first time since Nov. 26, are 13-2-2 against Northeast Division opponents. (AP) Panthers 2, Penguins 2: In Pittsburgh, goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck made 39 saves as Florida held on for the tie with Pittsburgh.
Despite blowing a 2-0 lead, the Penguins remained unbeaten in overtime at 4-0-10.
They have more overtime games and points than any other N.H.L. team.
They have played four consecutive overtime games, winning two and tying two. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras Advances to Final  The defending champion Pete Sampras moved into the final of the New South Wales Open with a 6-3, 6-3 victory Friday in Sydney, Australia, over Petr Korda in a sloppy, windswept match.
Korda, seeded fifth, had eight double-faults, the final on match point.
Sampras will face Ivan Lendl or Todd Martin in Saturday's all-American final.
Lendl slammed 28 aces yesterday to defeat compatriot Richey Reneberg and reach the semifinals, 7-6 (7-2), 4-6, 6-3. (AP) YACHT RACING  Winston Stretches Its Lead  The American yacht Winston stretched its lead to more than 100 nautical miles yesterday as it sailed toward the southern tip of Tasmania, the island state off the southern coast of Australia, in the third leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.
Winston, captained by Dennis Conner, was averaging two knots faster than any other boat in the race.
The 32,000-mile race is expected to end at Southampton, England, in July. (AP)


For Ewing, The Court Is His Oyster
The Knicks only had one consistent offensive player tonight.
Fortunately for them, it was Patrick Ewing.
Led by Ewing's dominant 42-point effort, the Knicks overcame the struggling Detroit Pistons, 94-80, at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
New York (23-9) has won three consecutive games, and five of its last six, while the lowly Pistons (8-24) have lost 11 consecutive games.


Welfare Plan Places Limit on Cash Grants
Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts today proposed an overhaul of the state's welfare system that would force a majority of able-bodied welfare recipients into full-time community service after 60 days.
Joining a growing number of other governors who are also pushing new welfare rules, Mr.
Weld said in his State of the State address tonight that his plan would put 50,000 welfare recipients -- about half the state's total -- to work.
The state would continue to provide health insurance and food stamps, as well as day care.


Kansas City Puts Itself In Montana's Hands
Joe Montana is not wrapped up in himself; he is wrapped up in sweatshirts.
The coldest winter he had ever spent was a summer in San Francisco, but then he moved to Kansas City.
That's a pouch in his jersey, a sled in his backyard, an ice scraper in his glove compartment and a glove on his throwing hand.
"Well, I like the white Christmases," Montana said today.


Hilton Hotels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MGIC Investment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wilder Exits Virginia Politics With a Feisty Flourish
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, whose election in the crucible of the Confederacy was so extraordinary that the Rev.
Jesse Jackson compared it to the falling of the Berlin Wall, will make his surprise exit from politics on Saturday with more critics than friends.
On Wednesday the Governor waited until he was 38 minutes into his 42-minute State of the Commonwealth speech to announce that he would not run for the United States Senate, which would have meant a grubby Democratic primary battle with his nemesis, Senator Charles S. Robb.


Sounds Around Town
Sanchez at Birdland
David Sanchez, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, Manhattan, (212) 749-2228.
The young tenor saxophonist plays with a beautifully balanced sound and sensibility.
His solos, clean and spare, radiate a concern for nuance.
And his tone, big but careful, underscores his improvisations.
Mr.
Sanchez will be leading a quartet, and it's a chance to hear a young musician who's clearly on the way up.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9, 10:30 and 12.
There is a $10 cover and a $10 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Multi-Idiom Man
Don Byron, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
Mr.
Byron, a clarinetist, ranges through the nebulous downtown area between jazz, classical, klezmer and other idioms.
He's capable of writing striking melodies and playing them with a gorgeous, fat tone -- and he has a sense of humor.
Best of all, behind his virtuosity exists a thoughtful mind.
He will bring a band that includes the cornetist Graham Haynes.
Shows are tonight at 9 and 11.
The cover is $12.
P.
W.
New Orleans Guitarist
Earl King, Tramps Cafe, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
This guitarist is one of the last great New Orleans rhythm-and-blues stars to have come up through the Dew Drop Inn, and he knows how to entertain.
He will duck walk, and play behind his head and between his legs.
He's also one of the funniest songwriters New Orleans, a funny place, ever produced; his songs have iron lungs, psychiatrists and trysts all over them.
Sets tonight through Sunday night are at 9:30, 11 and 12:30.
Tickets are $10; there is also a two-drink minimum at the tables.
P.
W.


TVWeekend; In the Gulf War, the Cameras Didn't Catch It All
"Anatomy of a War" brings back the Persian Gulf war in whiz-bang fashion.
Tonight's two-hour edition of "Investigative Reports" is powered by what Bill Kurtis, narrating, calls "some of the most stunning and dramatic pictures ever shot."
The scenes live up to the description:


Special Counsels, and Their Risks
Most recent Presidents have faced the quandary of how to respond to potentially damaging questions about their conduct, and their inclination has been to trim, hedge and dissemble.
The tactic has had mixed results.
For Richard M. Nixon, it was a disaster that cost him his Presidency.
For Ronald Reagan, it succeeded in preserving his reputation and getting George Bush elected to succeed him.


GTE Says It Will Cut 17,000 Jobs
In the latest tremor to rock the nation's telephone workers, the GTE Corporation, the largest local phone company, said yesterday that it would cut 17,000 jobs and take a $1.8 billion charge against earnings.
The job cuts, constituting more than 14 percent of GTE's 120,000 workers worldwide, will come primarily from the company's local telephone operations during the next three years.
More than one of every five local phone workers and managers will be leaving the payroll.


Art In Review
Group Show
Tom Cugliani Gallery,  40 Wooster Street (near Broome Street)  Through Feb. 26
Three anonymous post-mortem photographs, one from the 19th century and two from early in this century, provide the keynote for this show about the physical and the spiritual in photography.
Two images show a young woman in a casket, surrounded by flowers; the other depicts a girl in a simpler coffin, clutching a doll.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "OLEANNA," Orpheum Theater, 126 Second Avenue, at Eighth Street, East Village.
A drama, written and directed by David Mamet, about a middle-aged professor, a young female student and allegations of sexual harassment.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $29.50 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Israel-Syria Talks Hinge On Clinton Meeting
After months of being shoved to the side, Israel's peace talks with Syria are about to regain center stage, but senior Israeli officials say they do not know if the negotiations can be pulled out of the bog they are in.
The key for them is a meeting scheduled for Sunday in Geneva between President Clinton and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, an encounter that has received such a buildup here that one could be forgiven an impression that the rest of Mr.
Clinton's European journey is a mere cover for his appointment with the Syrian.


Man Fires Into a Subway Car in Manhattan, Wounding 3
A gunman opened fire aboard a crowded subway car as it pulled into a Manhattan subway station during rush hour yesterday evening, injuring three passengers, including a woman who the police said was the gunman's former girlfriend.
The crack of gunfire sent passengers diving for the floor of the No. 9 train and screaming for help, witnesses said, and the gunman continued shooting even after the train stopped.
They said he stepped out on the subway platform and fired into the car through the open door.


NASA Pronounces Space Telescope Cured
Radiating the joy of hard-won triumph after three and a half years of embarrassing gloom, space officials and scientists today proclaimed the repairs on the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope a complete success.
They released striking before-and-after pictures to show that the spacecraft should now begin to live up to its original promise of peering deep into the universe.
"It's fixed beyond our wildest expectations," Dr.
Edward J. Weiler, the project's chief scientist, said at a news conference at the Goddard Space Flight Center here.


Superhighway or Couch Potato Heaven?
To the Editor:
Russell Baker raises valid questions about promises being made for the "information superhighway" in "But Will It Fly?" (column, Jan. 4).


CHRONICLE
When the French have the blues, they sometimes say, "J'ai le cafard," which, literally translated means, "I have the cockroach." This may well may describe the mood of MAURICE MSELLATTI, the former managing director of Le Fouquet's restaurant.
He was fined $6,600 Wednesday after a Paris court was told that Government inspectors had found cockroaches in the kitchen of the legendary Champs-Elysees cafe.
They also found processed cheese listed on the menu as made-on-the-farm chevre and such.
Mr.
Msellatti denied the charges, calling the trial an attempt "to destroy this last bastion of French gastronomy," Reuters reported.
The charges were based on a July 1993 report by the inspectors that also cited "many flies" in the potato larder.
"There are always flies around potatoes in July," retorted Mr.
Msellatti, who is known professionally as M. Casanova.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Inflation last year was held to the smallest increase in seven years, the Government reported.
The Consumer Price Index rose two-tenths of a percent last month, for an annual rate of 2.7 percent.
Amid the low inflation, the economy continued to show signs of a modest recovery.
In a separate report, retail sales climbed a strong eight-tenths of a percent last month.
The reports encouraged most economists to agree with the Clinton Administration in predicting there would be little pressure to increase interest rates.  [ Page D1. ]
More than 80 percent of bank customers falsely believe that the Government protects the mutual funds they buy at banks against loss, a survey found.
Regulators and Congress are debating how to provide adequate protection for the growing number of consumers who buy securities at local banks.  [ D2. ] Companies
GTE Corporation, the nation's largest local telephone company, plans to cut 17,000 jobs, or 14 percent of its work force, over three years.
GTE is the latest telephone company to seek cost cuts through large job reductions.  [ D1. ]
Citicorp will sell the Quotron financial information service, which has lost money since it was bought in 1986, to Reuters.
The banking company also said that fourth-quarter earnings would be much higher than what Wall Street analysts had expected.  [ D1. ]
The investigation of Prudential Securities intensified as subpoenas were said to have been delivered for the first time to current and former executives of the firm.
At the same time, Federal prosecutors have expanded their investigation into the sales of VMS Mortgage Investment Fund, one of the biggest limited partnerships sold by Prudential in the 1980's.  [ D1. ]
The chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company faces a difficult task in trying to keep the retailer independent and intact in the face of an attempted takeover by Federated Department Stores.  [ D2. ]  The Cooper Companies and its former chairman, Gary A. Singer, were convicted of participating in a conspiracy to profit from advance tips about a mutual fund's junk-bond trades.  [ D3. ]
The president of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company said he attended a meeting on the approval process for sales letters used to solicit customers about six weeks before Florida officials said some of those letters were misleading and deceptive.  [ D3. ]
The chairman of Coopers &amp; Lybrand is expected to announce today that he had decided not to run for re-election.  [ D3. ]
Computer and communications companies said at a conference that they would back an industry coding standard from RSA Data Security for protecting the privacy of communications, in opposition to a standard pushed by the Clinton Administration.  [ D3. ]
Southern New England Telephone announced plans that could make Connecticut the first state to be fully tied into the nation's developing fiber-optic telecommunications network.  [ B1. ] Markets
Blue-chip stocks fell on profit taking, with the Dow dropping 6.20 points.
But Nasdaq stocks edged into record ground.  [ D4. ]
The price of the Treasury's long bond fell in a selloff prompted in part by comments by a Federal Reserve official.  [ D12. ]
The strong retail sales report lifted the dollar, which rose to a two-year high against the German mark.  [ D11. ]
Corn futures prices jumped after the Agriculture Department reported the smallest corn harvest since 1988.  [ D11. ] Today's Columns
Figgie International, a conglomerate trying to turn itself around, has fallen from favor on Wall Street.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
The life of the party at a bar may be a paid actor in an unusual promotion for a Cognac brand.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D15. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.93
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.93
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.10
3.10
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.21
5.10
6.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.26
6.18
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.15
8.46
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.51
5.48
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CLINTON IN EUROPE: Reporter's Notebook; President Finds Muscovites Warm but a Bit Preoccupied
For most Russian politicians, the Clinton visit was a pleasant but not particularly relevant event during a week in which the new Russian Parliament was setting the stage for new battles with a new set of players elected just a month ago.
"It would have been better if he had put it off for two months," said the former Mayor of Moscow, Gavriil Popov, "until things here had had a chance to sort themselves out." Vadim V. Bakatin, who served as head of the K.G.B. during Mikhail S. Gorbachev's last months in power, said that he was still waiting for the American President to present new ideas to help lead the world in the post-cold war era.


CHRONICLE
Speaking of Valentino, when the curtain rises at the John F. Kennedy Center for Performing Arts in Washington on Saturday for the premiere of "The Dream of Valentino," an opera by DOMINICK ARGENTO, there will a Valentino in the audience.
The Italian fashion designer VALENTINO, who created the costumes for the opera about his namesake, will be bringing a contingent of New York socialites to the performance.
After seeing Valentino's costumes, inspired by the roaring 20's, Mr.
Argento said, "I'm almost speechless."


Sports of The Times; In Long Run, Harding Was Hurt the Most
HE did Tonya Harding no favors, whoever it was who whacked Nancy Kerrigan on the knee.
Barring some spectacular collapse, Kerrigan was going to come out of the Winter Games with a great deal to offer the public.
Even with a gold medal, Harding would still have been a harder sell for corporate America.
Life is not fair.
Not all gold medals are equal.
Now Tonya Harding may be forever defined by the ugly attack on Nancy Kerrigan eight days ago in Detroit.
Last evening, two arrests were made in the case.


Allen Lesser, Editor, Biography Author, Javits Assistant, 86
Allen Lesser, a writer, editor and former executive assistant to Senator Jacob K. Javits, Republican of New York, died yesterday en route to Curacao with his wife, Frances.
He was 86.
As Senator Javits's executive assistant from 1960 to 1965, he played a major role in the drafting of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and of legislation that established Medicare and the National Endowments for the Arts and Humanities.


New York Bid to Ease Police-Black Tension Falters
An effort by the Giuliani administration to calm tensions between the New York City Police Department and black New Yorkers crumbled in recriminations yesterday after the new Police Commissioner shunned a meeting with representatives of the Nation of Islam and with others he said had not been invited.
The meeting between Police Commissioner William J. Bratton and the Muslim leaders was one of several efforts yesterday by City Hall to manage the problems created by two recent confrontations involving the police -- a melee at a Harlem mosque on Sunday night in which eight officers were injured and a fatal shooting of a 17-year-old man by police officers on Tuesday night.
Yesterday a picture began to emerge of the teen-ager's involvement in the drug-soaked world of East New York.  [ Page B2. ]


Critic's Choice/Film; A Young and Promising Kubrick
"Fear and Desire," a 1953 film "directed, photographed and edited by Stanley Kubrick," is a skeleton in Mr.
Kubrick's closet.
Or at least that's the way he sees it: Mr.
Kubrick recently asked Warner Brothers to issue a letter to call this fledgling effort a "bumbling, amateur film exercise" and "a completely inept oddity, boring and pretentious." Nevertheless, "Fear and Desire" opens today for a weeklong run at the Film Forum, together with "Killer's Kiss," Mr.
Kubrick's second feature.
Hindsight can be very convenient in a case like this.
It would be nice to think that the film maker's first feature, made when in his early 20's on a budget of $40,000 and then described as "a drama of 'man' lost in a hostile world," is a harbinger of things to come.
And as a matter of fact, "Fear and Desire" is better than the director now says it is, although his own description is largely fair.
Definitely pretentious, and indeed sometimes boring, the 68-minute "Fear and Desire" is still a revealing and in some ways impressive effort.
The few viewers who saw it in 1953 -- among them the critic James Agee, who offered backhanded praise -- must have realized it was a work of great promise.


U.S. Sees a Ray of Hope in Haiti Talks
A week after President Clinton voiced frustration with Haiti's ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Administration officials said today that they were now optimistic that a political conference organized by the Haitian for this weekend in Miami could be an important step toward his return to power.
On Monday, in a signal of impatience with Father Aristide, the Administration threatened to boycott the conference.
But the State Department said today that it would send a high-level official because it was happy with how the three-day meeting was shaping up, especially that a broad range of Haitian officials had been invited.


Anti-Zionists Do the Work of Anti-Semites
To the Editor:
"U.S. Jews Don't Clamor for Spy's Release" (letter, Dec. 30) by Alan V. Stone, president of the American Council for Judaism, is an unfortunate example of the way serious, controversial issues can be exploited to advance a private agenda.


Metropolitan Life Meeting Investigated
The president of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company said yesterday that he attended a meeting where the company's lawyers and its leading salesman argued over the approval process for sales letters used to solicit customers about six weeks before Florida officials said some of those letters were misleading and deceptive.
In response to the Florida allegations, Metropolitan Life began its own investigation, which led to the dismissal at the end of last year of seven employees, the highest ranking being a senior vice president.
Ted Athanassiades, Metropolitan's president and the company's No. 2 executive, was not among the executives disciplined for involvement in improperly selling insurance policies across the country through the Tampa office.


Critic's Notebook; Sex and Terror: The Male View Of the She-Boss
LORENA BOBBITT aside, there are some very scary women out there.
And the scariest of all, whether in the news or in the forefront of popular culture, are suddenly high-powered career types with a yen to humiliate men.
The motivating force in "Mrs. Doubtfire," the season's most popular film, is a woman who kicks her husband out for no good reason, and whose crisp professionalism is presented as her worst character flaw.
Meanwhile, back at the bookstore, Michael Crichton's latest movie-on-paper is "Disclosure" (Alfred A. Knopf), about a female executive who connives her way to the top and then tries to force an ex-boyfriend to have sex with her.
"Remember the night we broke the bed?" Mr.
Crichton's Meredith Johnson asks playfully, at the start of a closed-door session that is supposed to be a business meeting.
But Tom Sanders is suspicious, as well he should be: Meredith forces a drink on him, then arranges for her assistant (also a woman) to deliver a package of condoms and lock the door to Meredith's office.
If Senator Bob Packwood were accused of this particular behavior it might sound embarrassingly clumsy, but Mr.
Crichton presents Meredith as a serious threat to Tom's well-being.
"She moved toward him in a steady, confident way, almost stalking," he writes in another scene.


Poor Grades on Smoking
On Jan. 12, 1964, this newspaper devoted a large part of its front page and thousands of words to an extraordinary story.
The United States Government was warning Americans that a habit -- smoking -- that 70 million of us had taken for granted was lethal.
Surgeon General Luther Terry promised there would be no "foot-dragging" by the Government in taking remedial action.
Foot-dragging, however, is more or less what a coalition of health groups, seven former Surgeon Generals and a former President accused the U.S.
Government of when they issued a report card this week on 30 years of anti-smoking efforts.
They gave the White House and most agencies D's and F's.
Only the Environmental Protection Agency, which has put environmental tobacco smoke in the worst category of pollutants, and the Veterans Affairs Department, which has banned smoking in all its hospitals, got B's.


Data Highway Accelerating In Connecticut
Southern New England Telephone, the local phone company in Connecticut, announced plans today for upgrading its service that could make the state the first to be fully tied into the nation's developing fiber-optic telecommunications network.
Nearly 40 percent of the state will be connected within three years, and every home and business will follow by the year 2009, executives of the independent telephone company said.
They predicted that the project will give Connecticut a strong advantage in competing with other regions for businesses and jobs in an age of computer and video communication.


Industry Defies U.S. on Data Encryption
The Clinton Administration's newly articulated information technology policy of persuasion, rather than dictation, is getting an early test.
At an industry conference here this week, computer hardware, software and telecommunications companies as well as a major bank, are saying they intend to adopt an industry coding standard for protecting the privacy of electronic communications, rather than support a standard being pushed by the Administration.


Value of New York City Real Estate Still Falling
The value of real estate in New York City has fallen for the fourth year in a row, and though the rate of decline has slowed, the figures indicate that the city's economy is only fitfully climbing out of the depths of recession, the city's Department of Finance said yesterday.
The decline in market values means a decline in the assessed value on which the city bases its tax bills, compounding the difficulties facing Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani as he tries to close a gap in next year's budget that his aides estimate has now grown to $2.3 billion.


German Terrorist's Death Is Called a Suicide
A German prosecutor asserted today that a suspected terrorist who died of a point-blank gunshot wound during a botched police raid last year was not killed by a police agent, as originally reported, but committed suicide.
The victim, Wolfgang Grams, was surprised at a provincial train station on June 27 by a squad of more than 50 agents from the elite GSG-9 anti-terror squad.
They were unable to capture him, and in an ensuing gunfight he killed one of the agents.
His companion, Birgit Hogefeld, was arrested.
Both were members of the far-left Red Army Faction.


TBWA International Starts Shop in Greece
TBWA International Inc. said yesterday that it had expanded into Greece by acquiring majority interests in two Athens-based agencies and merging them to form Producta-TBWA S.A.
Terms of the transactions were not disclosed.
By combining the shops, Producta S.A. and Oxygen S.A., to form Producta-TBWA, TBWA has created the 10th-largest agency in Greece, with billings estimated at $15 million from accounts like Bayer aspirin, Sega toys and Longines watches.
Nicos Nicopoulos, the chairman of Producta, will head the new agency as president.


Paramount Bid Policy
Lawyers for the board of Paramount Communications Inc. attempted yesterday to clarify the complex bidding procedures in the battle for the company, a person involved in the bidding said.
The law firm, Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, reaffirmed in letters to the rival bidders, Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc., that Feb. 1 would be the ultimate deadline for final bids.


Even Better Than the Real Thing? Imitator Tests Giants' Collins
The most dangerous receiver in football, Jerry Rice, has been telling Mark Collins all week how to stop him: "O.K., Mark, if I see you back-pedaling too long, I might just keep running. Make sure you watch me. Don't turn your hips too quickly."
Actually, it's Kevin Evans, a former teammate of Rice's, in a Giants uniform, shouting advice.
It is make-believe, but to Collins it is as close to the real thing as he will get until Saturday's playoff game.


Times Picks Executive
The New York Times announced the promotion of David A. Thurm yesterday to be the newspaper's vice president for project development and administration.
Mr.
Thurm, who is 40, has been executive director for those areas since last year.
A lawyer, Mr.
Thurm joined The Times's legal department in 1982 and moved to the production department in 1989.


Bengals Assistant Quits
RON LYNN, who engineered the dramatic improvement in the Cincinnati Bengals' defense over the past two seasons, has resigned.
The Bengals (3-13) finished the 1993 season with the worst record in the National Football League.
With an offense that produced only 187 points, defense was all the Bengals could point to with satisfaction. (AP)


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL PHYSICS CORP., Columbia, Md., a training and consulting service for power plants, has agreed in principle to acquire substantially all of the operating assets of GPS Technologies Inc., also of Columbia, for about $40 million in cash, stock and debt.
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES INC., Chicago, plans to acquire Bay Indies, a 1,309-site mobile park, in Venice, Fla., from Mobile Park Properties Inc. for $42 million.


Art in Review
Hiroshi Sugimoto  Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Feb. 5
For more than 20 years, Hiroshi Sugimoto has photographed the interiors of movie theaters in a distinctive way.
Using long exposures, Mr.
Sugimoto shoots each theater while a movie is running; the screen at the center of each picture is transformed into a glowing white rectangle.


NISSAN TO SELL FORDS IN JAPAN AND MOVE SENTRA TO U.S.
The Nissan Motor Company said early today in Tokyo that its largest dealer was planning to sell cars made by the Ford Motor Company in the Tokyo area.
Tokyo Nissan, a dealer in which Nissan owns a 25 percent stake, is now talking with Ford, a Nissan spokesman said.
In 1992, Nissan pledged to sell 3,000 Ford cars a year through its dealers in Japan.
But nothing came of the pledge, partly because Ford wanted to concentrate its sales through Autorama, a Japanese dealer network it owns with the Mazda Motor Company.


Prudential Executives Get U.S. Subpoenas
The criminal investigation of fraud at Prudential Securities has intensified, with subpoenas in the inquiry by Federal prosecutors being delivered for the first time to current and former executives of the firm, people involved in the case said yesterday.
The delivery of subpoenas, said to have begun Wednesday, is a sign that the pace is quickening in the investigation of wrongdoing at the firm in the 1980's into the early 90's, including in its sales of limited partnerships.


Wanderlust for a Cozy New York Hotel Bar
YOU know things have slumped to a new low when life becomes a serious impediment to life style.
Certainly there's nothing like a mortgage and a steady job with a mingy vacation plan to interfere with what I used to live for: travel.
Not so many years ago, this would have been an article about Airport Bars I Have Known and Loved.
But because my bank account now so clearly warns that next year will not be in the Maldives, I have taken up vicarious travel in a big way.
Over the years, for example, I have become an aficionado of the great hotel bars of New York.


BEAR STEARNS COS. (N)
Wall Street firms are just now beginning to show how lucrative were the last three months of 1993, a record year for investment firms.
The Bear Stearns Companies reported yesterday the results for the second quarter that ended Dec. 31, and the numbers were stunning.
The company said profits for the quarter were up 110 percent from the comparable period a year ago.
Investment banking, where revenues soared by 180 percent on heavy underwriting and merger and acquisition business, and proprietary trading, where revenues were up 58 percent, were the big contributors to the bottom line of Bear Stearns.


A Gallery of Rogues and Reformers
"WHILE the Presidency can elevate even average people," Wallace S. Sayre and Herbert Kaufman wrote decades ago in "Governing New York City," their seminal study, "the mayoralty is the highly vulnerable symbol of all defects in the city and its government."
The names of the 106 previous New York City Mayors fill two and a half pages in the Green Book, the official city directory, but typically have been spared anonymity only by the rectangular street signs (Cortlandt, Bayard, Livingston, Clinton, Havemeyer, Van Wyck and Hylan, among others) that carry their surnames.
How much any single mayor can accomplish is arguable.
Collectively, their memorabilia from campaigns and service at City Hall provide a vivid panorama of a still-evolving metropolis that will never be finished, one that often has been personified by the man -- no woman is among the 107 Mayors who have served so far -- chosen to save the city from itself.


2 Devils Weaknesses Strengths for a Night
Aside from an impressive 5-2 victory over the Washington Capitals tonight at the USAir Arena, there were two other reasons for the Devils to gloat.
They finally scored a power-play goal and they got two goals from their defensemen.
John MacLean scored the power-play goal on the first of four manpower advantages for the Devils, who came up empty in eight such situations Wednesday night during a 3-2 loss at Montreal.
"It'll give us some confidence because we were struggling," MacLean said.


Tie Vietnam Status to Rights Reform
To the Editor:
"Vietnam: An Outdated Embargo" (editorial, Jan. 6) prematurely calls for the United States to "declare victory and get out," normalizing relations with Hanoi.
The Vietnam War taught us to think carefully before jumping in and to avoid false declarations of victory, two lessons you miss.
Vietnam, unlike its former Communist allies, has not "transformed its economy along capitalist lines," as you suggest.
Although the economic devastation caused by decades of drought, corruption and mismanagement prompted some reforms by Hanoi to boost foreign investment and aid, just last June the Communist Party Central Committee repeated its unequivocal commitment to the Marxist-Leninist tradition.


Iran-Contra Report Clears A Hurdle to Public Release
Lawyers for some of those named in the report of Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor who investigated the Iran-contra affair, declined today to continue challenging its disclosure, meaning the long-awaited document will probably be released on Tuesday morning.
People who have seen portions of the report, a detailed three-volume work summarizing Mr.
Walsh's six-year investigation, say it accuses some of President Reagan's top aides of conspiring to cover up elements of the Iran-contra matter.
The report is Mr.
Walsh's final word on the investigation, which cost about $36 million and effectively ended when President Bush pardoned many of the principal figures in December 1992, just before leaving office.


Wal-Mart Entering Canada
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said yesterday that it would move into Canada for the first time, buying 120 of 142 Woolco discount stores in that country from the Woolworth Corporation.
Analysts said the move by Wal-Mart, which is based in Bentonville, Ark., was likely to invigorate Canadian retailing and possibly result in consolidation among regional merchants.
The 142 Woolco stores had sales of $1.5 billion (Canadian) or $1.14 billion (United States), in 1993.


Maryland May Sit Out
RUSSELL MARYLAND and MARK TUINEI watched from the sidelines yesterday as the Dallas Cowboys held their final major practice for tomorrow's playoff game against the Green Bay Packers.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.94
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.94
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.12
3.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.24
5.21
6.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.29
6.26
7.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.26
7.23
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.54
5.51
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


COMPANY BRIEFS
CENTENNIAL CELLULAR CORP., New Canaan, Conn., agreed in principle to buy the assets of MidSouth Cellular L. P. for $44.5 million in cash and an unspecified amount of Centennial shares.
CONTICO INTERNATIONAL INC., St.
Louis, a plastics manufacturer, announced plans to build a plant for $10 million to $12 million in Springfield, Mo., that will employ about 300 people.
DELCO ELECTRONICS CORP., a unit of General Motors Corp., has acquired full ownership of Mecel A.B., a vehicle electronics development company based in Amal, Sweden.
The terms were not disclosed.
DRESSER INDUSTRIES, Dallas, an energy and natural resource products manufacturer, and Petro-Hunt Corp., are seeking up to $50 million from the Overseas Private Investment Corp. of the United States for a proposed oil and gas exploration project in western Siberia.


Isles Have Winning Habit Only Against Les Habitants
If the Islanders could play the Montreal Canadiens more often, they might not be bouncing along near the bottom of the Atlantic Division and the defending Stanley Cup champions might not be challenging for the lead of the Northeast Division.
For the third time in three games this season, the Islanders beat the Canadiens tonight, this time by 5-2.
The result ended Montreal's seven-game unbeaten streak.
And it was only the second victory for the Islanders in their last eight games.


Expecting the Worst, Jittery Residents Stock Up (Again)
With a deep freeze threatening the New York area this weekend, Woodrow Stewart spent much of the day worrying about his steep, slush-covered driveway.
The problem, he said, was that he had visited five stores across Westchester County but all were sold out of the rock salt he needed to prevent the sinking temperatures from turning his driveway into a virtual skating rink by Saturday night.


With Defense of Police at Mosque, Giuliani Moves to Isolate 2 Critics
Adamantly defending the police as "the only victims" of last Sunday's melee at a Harlem mosque, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday moved to isolate two of the city's most outspoken black figures, the Rev.
Al Sharpton and C. Vernon Mason, who had suggested in recent days that Mr.
Giuliani was too quick to support police accounts of the incident.
His new Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, held an unannounced meeting with several officials of the Nation of Islam yesterday after shunning a meeting with them the day before, in part, because Mr.
Sharpton and Mr.
Mason had accompanied them.


Review/Dance; The Many Facets of Balanchine's Plotless 'Jewels'
The New York City Ballet's superb performance of "Jewels" on Thursday night was just the uplifting remedy needed to wash the winter blahs away.
Acclaimed as an instant masterpiece at its premiere in 1967, George Balanchine's so-called three-act plotless ballet has never ceased to reveal new levels of meaning.
This particular cast gave each of the sections, identified with different gems, a firmly dramatic reading and yet never crossed the line into what Balanchine himself would have derided as acting.


The Deep Freeze Tightens in the Midwest


Justices to Decide on a Right Of Review of a Jury's Award
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the right to judicial review of a jury's award of damages is constitutionally required to protect defendants against excessive judgments.
The case is a challenge to an Oregon rule that makes the size of jury awards unreviewable either by the state trial judge or by an appellate court.
The Supreme Court appeal was brought by the Honda Motor Company, which an Oregon jury ordered to pay $735,000 in compensatory damages and $5 million in punitive damages to a man who was injured when a three-wheel all-terrain vehicle made by Honda flipped over on him.


National City Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Black Coaches Agree to Delay Basketball Boycott
One day before its bitter dispute with the National Collegiate Athletic Association could have led to the interruption or cancellation of college basketball games across the country, the Black Coaches Association agreed yesterday to postpone a planned boycott.
The urging of Representative Cardiss Collins, Democrat of Illinois, and the intervention of the Justice Department as a potential arbitrator convinced organizers to continue discussions with the N.C.A.A.
The key point of contention was the vote at the recent convention here against the restoration of a 14th basketball scholarship for Division I men's teams.
Both the Black Coaches Association and the larger National Association of Basketball Coaches had vigorously supported the proposal on the ground that an extra scholarship would provide educational opportunities for hundreds of disadvantaged athletes.


Toyota Head Likely to Lead Trade Group
The chairman of the Toyota Motor Corporation, Shoichiro Toyoda, has been tapped to become the next leader of Japan's most powerful business organization, making him the chief spokesman for Japanese industry at a time of political and economic upheaval.
Dr.
Toyoda, 68, is expected to become chairman of the Federation of Economic Organizations, known in Japanese as the Keidanren, after the retirement of Gaishi Hiraiwa, who is from the Tokyo Electric Power Company.
The Keidanren chairman has been called the "prime minister of the business world" because of the organization's influence.


Brazil Shows a Capacity for Cleaning House
To the Editor:
I was disappointed to read the pessimistic conclusions in "A Vast New Scandal is Shaking Brazilians' Faith in Democracy" (front page, Jan. 4).
Brazil does have its problems, but in recent years its political system has shown an unquestionable capacity to purge itself.
It is true that several months of diligent investigations have implicated a few apparently corrupt public figures, but this should strengthen our faith in Brazil's democracy, not weaken it.
A more complete analysis would note that Brazil in the last three years has been far more aggresive in dealing with corruption problems than most other countries.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


CLINTON IN EUROPE: A Russian Tightrope; The President Does Not Fall Down, But He Does Wobble Now and Then
American Presidents used to come here to treat with monolithic governments.
On his arrival here this week, Bill Clinton found no real government at all, but rather two inchoate groups, one composed of reformers, the other a mix of "go slow" pragmatists and counter-reformers, all struggling for power, staggering into an unfathomable future.
That put the young, inexperienced President on something of a diplomatic tightrope, fighting to keep his balance.
He did not fall off, but he did not make it across without a few wobbles this way and that.


The Indonesia Test
Can the United States use the threat of trade penalties to get authoritarian governments to treat their own people with more respect?
Indonesia presents an important test case.
The Clinton Administration must decide by next month if Jakarta has relaxed its repressive labor policies enough to warrant renewal of a special U.S. trade preference that allows $650 million worth of Indonesian goods to enter the United States duty-free.


Drug Is Found to Improve Memory in Tests on Rats
Scientists say they have found a drug that greatly enhances memory in laboratory animals.
The experiments are important because drugs to improve memory have been sought for many years without much success, and because the drug is the first in a new class that stimulates the operation of neurons in the brain rather than dampening them, as other psychiatric drugs do.


Family Gets 2d Autopsy In Shooting
Seeking evidence to support the contention that Shu'aib Abdul Latif, 17, was slain by police officers as he tried to surrender, his family said yesterday that they had had a private pathologist perform a second autopsy on the youth's body.
The teen-ager's father, Imam Al-Amin Abdul Latif, a prominent Muslim cleric in Brooklyn, said in an interview, "We requested an independent autopsy because we believe there was a murder and a coverup." He said the family hoped the private autopsy "will bear out that there was no struggle and that my son was shot at a distance after he raised his hands."


CHRONICLE
Two visible women for one very visible job: LISA RUDOLPH and VICTORIA CORDERI are television news correspondents and new mothers who will share one job.
Ms.
Rudolph, who has a 5-month-old daughter, and Ms.
Corderi, who has a 19-month-old daughter and expects her second child in June, will divide the assignments normally given to one correspondent at NBC.
They will appear on the magazine programs "Dateline NBC" and "Now With Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric."


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO ORDERS A SPECIAL SESSION  Escalating an election-year war of posturing over crime, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo took the unusual step of ordering the Legislature to meet on Monday to consider legislation aimed at curbing gun violence.
The special session, on Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday, had been rejected last month by the Republican leadership of the State Senate.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  2-PRONGED APPROACH TO MOSQUE INCIDENT  Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani adamantly defended the police as "the only victims" of Sunday's melee at a Harlem mosque and moved quickly to isolate two of the most vocal critics, while his new Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, met with several officials of the Nation of Islam.
Page 1.  2d AUTOPSY ON YOUTH SHOT BY POLICE  Seeking evidence to support the contention that Shu'aib Abdul Latif, 17, was slain by police officers in Brooklyn as he tried to surrender, members of his family said that they had a private pathologist perform a second autopsy on the youth's body.
Page 25.
SANITATION COMMISSIONER REAPPOINTED  Mayor Giuliani reappointed Emily Lloyd as Sanitation Commissioner, saying he had been impressed with her command of the department during recent snowstorms.
Page 27.
REGION  ALBANY OFFICIALS PREDICT SURPLUS  New York State will end its fiscal year on March 31 with a $300 million surplus, a result of a slowdown in Medicaid inflation, a moderate increase in tax revenues and tighter spending policies, state officials said.
Page 26.
FESTIVITIES FOR WHITMAN BEGIN  Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman opened two days of preinaugural festivities, winning a warm welcome from Mayor Sharpe James of Newark and offering a promise to New Jersey's cities.
Page 26.
MOST STUDENTS FAIL CONNECTICUT TESTS  Only 1 in 5 public-school students in Connecticut meets or exceeds statewide academic standards, according to the results of new, more rigorous Connecticut Mastery Tests.
Page 24.
WHITMAN KEEPS HUMAN SERVICES CHIEF  Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman said she would keep William Waldman, a career social services official, as Commissioner of the Department of Human Services, the largest in state government.
Page 26.
SITTER CHARGED WITH ARSON-MURDER  A live-in baby sitter who was rescued unconscious from an Atlantic City house fire, where she had been trapped with a toddler who died in the blaze, was charged with arson and murder.
Page 27.
FIGHT AGAINST ISLAND'S PURCHASE ENDS  Suffolk County is dropping its appeal of a Federal bankruptcy court decision allowing a Wall Street financier to buy Robins Island, County Executive Robert J. Gaffney said.
Page 24.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25  Neediest Cases 25  Chronicle 24


Joan Avnet, Dealer, Collector and Donor Of Art, Is Dead at 80
Joan Avnet, an art collector, dealer and philanthropist, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 80.
The cause was complications of Alzheimer's disease, said her daughter Rosalind Avnet Lazarus.


COMPANY NEWS;
A Long Island corporation that makes valves for the Navy's nuclear-powered fleet has agreed to pay $17.5 million to settle civil charges that top executives fraudulently overcharged the Navy, Justice Department lawyers said yesterday.
They said the settlement with the Target Rock Corporation was significant not only for the amount of the payment, which they said was among the larger settlements in fraud cases involving military contractors, but also because the company was the sole manufacturer of certain valves used in nuclear-propulsion systems.


Outside, Looking Ahead: Kerrigan Gets Set to Skate
Nancy Kerrigan said yesterday that she has begun making jumps and rehearsing her figure-skating routine on the floor of her parents' home in Stoneham, Mass., and that she expects to return to the ice in a few days.
It may be as soon as today, her coach said.
Standing in the snow outside her parents' home, Kerrigan appeared buoyant, relaxed and confident as she made her first public appearance since returning from the national championships in Detroit, where she withdrew after being clubbed on the right knee by an assailant last week.
Three men have been arrested in the case, including the bodyguard of Kerrigan's chief American rival, Tonya Harding.


Democrats Offer a Plan For Tax Cuts
Seeking to move ahead of New York's new Republican Mayor on tax cuts, the two most powerful Democrats on the City Council offered a plan yesterday to reduce taxes on commercial rents, hotel rooms and cooperative apartments and condominiums.
Later Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani endorsed the principle of cutting taxes on city businesses.
He said that he would present a budget on Feb. 2 that included some cuts in the hotel tax and the commercial occupancy tax but that he believed that a reduction in the property tax on co-ops and condominiums was unlikely this year.


Richard E. Gordon, Best-Selling Author, And Psychiatrist, 71
Dr.
Richard Edwards Gordon, a psychiatrist and author, died on Thursday at North Florida Regional Hospital in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 71 and lived in Gainesville.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Holiday on Monday
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday will be observed on Monday.
Here are schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and New York City offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Option to close.
PARKING Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION Pickups and recycling, but no street cleaning.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open, with exception of Government securities markets.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, and Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state offices closed; municipal offices, option to close.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Option to close.
TRANSPORTATION Most buses on regular weekday schedule, some on Saturday schedule.
Rail service on regular schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES State and city offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


Business Digest
The Economy
Evidence mounted that the economy grew at a rate exeeding 5 percent in the final quarter of 1993, faster than many economists had expected.
Industrial output jumped in December and the operating rate of factories, mines and utilities reached its busiest pace in four and a half years.
Economists are now raising their sights for this year, particularly for the first quarter.  [ Page 1. ]


A Present for Those Who Pay Estimated Taxes: 72 Extra Hours to File This Time
People who make estimated tax payments normally have to pay their final installment for the previous year by Jan. 15.
This year, they have an extra 72 hours because the deadline falls on Saturday, and Monday is a Federal holiday in honor of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
The Tuesday deadline affects taxpayers with significant income from interest and dividends, the self-employed, and many professionals whose pay is not subject to withholding.


Tokyo Raids Seek to Halt Aid For North Korea on Missiles
The Japanese police raided companies throughout the Tokyo area today, searching for evidence that they had shipped to North Korea electronic instruments that could be used in the construction of missiles.
The raids came after the United States, trying to strengthen its effort to bring the North's nuclear and missile projects to a halt, quietly pressed Japan to stem what appears to be a steady flow of electronics and other goods to the Government in Pyongyang.
American intelligence officials have said in recent weeks that they are tracking a number of efforts by the North Koreans to purchase electronic parts in Japan, apparently in an effort to improve the accuracy of their missiles.


Let Recording Technology Work Its Wonders
To the Editor:
William Safire's criticism in "Art vs. Artifice" (column, Jan. 3) of Frank Sinatra's "Duets" album, and the technology used to record it, is illogical.
One can agree or disagree with Mr.
Safire's judgment of the album's artistic quality; the two million units that have sold worldwide attest to differing audience tastes.
However, when Mr.
Safire refers to the performances as "a series of artistic frauds," he has crossed the line from criticism to ignorance of recording industry technologies.


Hubble Telescope Chalks Up Discovery About Aging Stars
Astronomers today announced the first discovery made by the Hubble Space Telescope since its vision was restored with corrective optics.
It was no surprise, but it was something never before detected by the Hubble or from the ground, and it further confirmed the orbiting telescope's improved ability for cosmic exploration.
In one of the first post-repair pictures by the faint-object camera, astronomers identified a large population of aging stars, known as white dwarfs, in a dense field of other stars, a conglomeration known as a globular cluster.
White dwarfs are dim, and in globular clusters they have previously been obscured by the light of their brighter neighbors.


New York State Reports Surplus of $300 Million
State will end its fiscal year on March 31 with a $300 million surplus, the result of a slowdown in Medicaid inflation, a moderate increase in tax revenues and tighter spending policies, state officials said today.
State officials welcomed the projection as new evidence of an improving regional economy.
The surplus in the $32 billion budget will be the second in a row for the state, which laid off thousands of workers and cut services to close budget gaps at the height of the recession.


Observer; Victims Of Telephone
Great news from my telephone company!
It came in the last phone bill.
"Important Notice," it said.
"Thank God!" I cried.
"At last!"
My wife's face, careworn and exhausted from endless days and nights of trying to persuade various telephone-company salesmen that we did not want to abandon our present telephone company and hire theirs -- yes, that dear but careworn wifely face looked for all too brief a moment young and vibrant once again as it had looked in days of yore before the telephone wars began.


3 Bombs Explode in Teheran
The Iranian authorities said today that an exiled opposition group had claimed responsibility for three bomb explosions on Thursday in Teheran that left three people wounded.
But the group denied that it was responsible.
The bombs, which had been placed in sidewalk trash bins in the business district, exploded at an hour when traffic was minimal, the state-run news agency IRNA said.


Head of Coopers &amp; Lybrand Won't Seek Another Term
Eugene M. Freedman, the head of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, told his 1,250 partners yesterday that their responses to a poll he circulated last month convinced him not to seek a second term as the accounting firm's chairman and chief executive.
His current three-year term expires in September.
Though Mr.
Freedman is one of the accounting industry's more avid pitchmen, he would have needed to convince his partners to loosen the partnership agreement so that he could seek re-election in May.
Current rules bar him from seeking office once he hits the firm's mandatory age of 62 in February.


National Westminster Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Dance; 3 Works by Bebe Miller Disclose a Private World
Bebe Miller may be the most invigoratingly irritating modern dance choreographer at work in New York today.
Ms.
Miller seemed to be interested in re-creating thought processes and fragments on stage in the three world premieres presented by her company on Wednesday at the Joyce Theater as part of the theater's Altogether Different festival.
Hermetic and discontinuous, the dances were not the most welcoming of artistic efforts.
But they are hard to dismiss or to forget.
In the first piece, "Heaven and Earth," Ms.
Miller resembled a rapt worshiper caught up in a private vision of the Lord.
A kind of meditative speaking-in-tongues for the whole body, the solo gained much from its set, Caroline Beasley-Baker's high free-standing portal and curtain in rich tones of purple and black.
Ellen Fullman contributed an excruciating buzz saw drone of an electronic score, laced with slivers of religious music by Clarence Fountain and the Five Blind Boys.
Ms.
Miller's fatigues, the color and texture of a dried leaf, were the intriguing work of the costume designer Yafemi.


Beauty Beyond the Turnpike; Jokes Aside, New Jersey Tries to Shed Inferiority Complex
Here's a classic New Jersey story, offered instructively as Christine Todd Whitman prepares to govern a state with probably more diversity than it knows what to do with.
Two business travelers on a plane strike up a conversation.
Both are from New Jersey but don't know it.


Third Suspect Arrested by F.B.I. In the Attack on Olympic Skater
A man who authorities say struck Nancy Kerrigan on the knee two weeks ago, rendering her unable to compete in the national figure skating championships in Detroit, was arrested today by Federal agents in Phoenix.
Two other men were arrested on Thursday in the attack, including the bodyguard of Tonya Harding, the Portland skater who won the gold medal in Detroit.
The bodyguard, Shawn Eric Eckardt, and the other man, Derrick B. Smith, a Phoenix resident, were arraigned today in a state court, where each was charged with a single count of conspiracy to commit assault.


City Ballet Jazz Dance
Jazz-oriented dances by George Balanchine, Peter Martins and Jerome Robbins will be presented in the New York City Ballet's 10th annual family matinee program tomorrow at 1 P.M. at the New York State Theater.
There will also be intermission demonstrations of elements of jazz by musicians from the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra.
Tickets are $10 to $57.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Golden State Delivers Sonics' 2d Loss in a Row  Latrell Sprewell scored 25 points and the Golden State Warriors led the entire way in beating the Seattle SuperSonics, 121-100, last night in Oakland, Calif.
It was the second straight loss for Seattle, which still has the league's best record at 26-5.
Sprewell clinched the victory with an uncontested 3-pointer after stealing the rebound of a missed free throw by Chris Mullin, who got only the second triple-double of his career.
The 3-pointer made it 106-90 with 5 minutes 2 seconds to go.


Bridge
A year ago James E. Cayne of Manhattan visited Shanghai to establish an office for Bear, Stearns Inc., the brokerage of which he is president and chief executive.
Combining pleasure with business, he competed in a bridge tournament there, donated a Bear, Stearns trophy for Swiss Team play and won it himself.
In Shanghai tomorrow he will defend this title with the American-Chinese foursome that won a year ago.
His teammates are Kathie Wei-Sender of Nashville, long a link between the bridge players of the United States and China; Qian Xuezhong and Lu Yulin.
On the diagramed deal he demonstrated the skill that has won him many national titles.


No Headline
After the Ivy Leagues and other colleges went coed in the 1970's, there was an expectation that the world of equality had come, that there would be a level playing field for men and women in education.
But in fact, the stereotypes have not been broken. - ELIZABETH KENNAN, president of Mount Holyoke College.  [ 1:3. ]


Zurbriggen Loses Title
A disputed victory awarded to Switzerland's HEIDI ZURBRIGGEN in women's World Cup super giant slalom at Altenmark, Austria, last Saturday was wiped out yesterday by vote of the International Ski Federation.
The race jury had called the event a no contest because only 32 of 85 scheduled starters completed the run before bad weather made the course hazardous and forced a cancellation.


Sports of The Times; A Boycott Deferred, For Now
THERE'S a saying from the 60's and 70's that the fear of the riot is often greater than the riot itself.
So for the last five days, university presidents, conference commissioners, athletic directors and coaches scrambled in the face of threats from the Black Coaches Association that it would stage a boycott of college basketball games.
They never said when.
However, the news media assumed that with Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday today, and with the holiday on Monday, this would be a perfect time.


Let Recording Technology Work Its Wonders; Many Good Years
To the Editor:
Re "Art vs. Artifice," William Safire's Jan. 3 column criticizing Frank Sinatra and the 13 artists who recorded "Duets" with him:
As executive producers of the album, we can say that modern recording technology allowed the artists to perform at the times and places best for their needs.
More specifically, Mr.
Sinatra prefers to record live with the orchestra.
He did all vocals on "Duets" in one or two takes, similar to all his previous recordings.


INSIDE
Alaskan Timber Pact to End
The Administration announced plans to end a 50-year contract providing a company low-cost wood from the nation's largest remaining rain forest, the Tongass National Forest.
Page 8.
From New Jersey, and Proud
Years of jokes and toxic dumping notwithstanding, there are signs of progress in the battle to prove that beauty lies beyond the turnpike exit ramps.
Page 23.
Basketball Boycott on Hold
Black college basketball coaches agreed not to boycott today's games after the Justice Department agreed to intervene in their dispute.
Page 29.


David L. Stone Dies; Software Expert, 51
David L. Stone, a computer-software expert who was a top executive with A.T.&amp; T. Network Systems, died on Thursday night at his home in Bernardsville, N.J.
He was 51.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Damascus Journal; Persecution Ended, Syria's Jews Stage an Exodus
The only bakery to make Passover matzohs and cakes has closed, after its owners got exit visas and moved to Europe.
The last kosher butcher shop will go this spring, one more casualty of Jewish emigration.
A few months ago, the Chief Rabbi in Damascus even discovered, to his surprise, there was no longer anyone left in Syria qualified to perform the circumcision ritual for newborn Jewish boys; he had to send to America for help.


CHINA IS RELEASING 2 TIBET DISSIDENTS
In what a human rights group said was an effort to appease Western concerns about human rights violations, China announced today that it would free two Tibetan dissidents.
American officials and human rights campaigners said the release was especially noteworthy because it was the first time China had released dissidents before they were even tried.


Mayor Praises Dinkins's Sanitation Chief, and Reappoints Her
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani reappointed Emily Lloyd as Sanitation Commissioner yesterday, saying he had been impressed with her command of the department during recent snowstorms.
"It would really be impossible to improve on her performance," Mr. Giuliani said.


B. W. Honeycutt, Art Director, 40
B.
W.
Honeycutt, art director for Details magazine, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.


Hampton Left, Hampton Right, Hampton, Hampton
The last thing Rodney Hampton ever wants to be is the focal point -- of anything.
On the field, he would run over his own mother.
Off the field, he is as quiet and soft-spoken a man as one will ever meet.
A pounder not a partyer, the 235-pound Hampton is the Giants' jackhammer, a running back with the speed of a player who weighs 180 pounds.
But whether he likes it or not, when the Giants and the San Francisco 49ers meet at Candlestick Park on Saturday in a National Football Conference divisional playoff game, all eyes will be on Hampton.
He is by far the biggest key of the game for both teams, especially the Giants.


New York Sharpens Bid to Aid Homeless
As a mass of bitterly cold air churned toward New York City, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city would step up its outreach programs for the homeless and that he would visit some of the city's homeless shelters this weekend.
Mr.
Giuliani, whose campaign proposals to deal with the homeless have come under attack, said he hoped to see firsthand the conditions in the city's shelters as they tried to cope with the demand brought on by the cold.


Mandela's Party Publishes Plan to Redistribute Wealth
With the white political monopoly rapidly expiring, the African National Congress today published an ambitious program to end economic apartheid by redistributing land, building more than a million low-income houses, asserting state control over the mighty mining industry and breaking up white-run conglomerates.
The document, which lays out in the greatest detail yet the congress's intentions for its first five years after the April elections, stops far short of the egalitarian, state-run utopia that was the once-banned congress's economic vision.
But the program, if enacted, would represent a stunning reorientation of Africa's most prosperous -- and most lopsided -- economy.


Even Gold Won't Get Green for Harding
Michael Rosenberg ended his nearly three years as the agent for Tonya Harding last November by terminating the contract with his hard-to-handle client.
Their split, he said politely yesterday, was caused by "a serious but honest difference of opinion about her career."
Rosenberg, whose client list includes Oksana Baiul, the reigning women's world champion, and Viktor Petrenko, the 1992 Olympic gold medalist, said: "I've managed football players, golfers and entertainers, and figure skaters are generally the easiest, most educated, least spoiled and most focused. There are exceptions and prima donnas. Tonya was one of the difficult ones."


Reminders of a Life and a Holiday


Wife Says She Does Not Recall Cutting
Lorena L. Bobbitt testified today that she did not remember cutting off her husband's penis and that only as she drove away from her apartment holding it in her hand did she realize what she had done.
When it happened, she said, her mind had been overwhelmed by nightmarish "pictures" of her husband's past psychological and sexual abuses, evoked when he raped her moments before.
But on cross-examination, the prosecution confronted Mrs.
Bobbitt with prior statements in which she offered specific recollections of the episode, in which she severed her husband's penis with a kitchen knife.
The prosecution suggested that Mrs.
Bobbitt, far from acting spontaneously, had once told a friend that she would cut off her husband's penis if she ever learned that he had been unfaithful to her.


CHRONICLE
JACK LIMPERT, the man at the top of the masthead of the Washingtonian magazine, is not one to trumpet his own celebrity or power.
So when it came time to celebrate his 25th anniversary as the magazine's editor, all he wanted was a large platter of carrots, bagels and chocolate cake.
"One of my vices is carrots," Mr.
Limpert explained after a party that staff members held yesterday at the office.
"I am a noncelebrity editor in this world of celebrity editors, so I don't want my picture in the magazine."


In New Jersey, 'Down With the Old' Is Just Updating


Livery-Cab Driver Is Killed
A livery-cab driver was shot and killed in Brooklyn yesterday, the first to be killed in 1994, the police said.
Unlike most of the 42 taxi drivers killed in New York City in 1993, the driver -- identified only as a 34-year-old man from Brooklyn -- was apparently shot in an argument with another driver about a traffic infraction, and not in a robbery.
Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman, said the driver was found dead about 6 P.M., lying beside the open cab door on Nostrand Avenue near Fulton Street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section.
His money was not taken.


Reno Narrows Counsel Search
Attorney General Janet Reno has narrowed her search to several candidates for a special prosecutor to investigate President Clinton's Arkansas land dealings, aides said today, but she left for a weekend trip to Arizona and Texas without announcing her choice.
The aides said the leading candidates were undergoing intensive screening to enable Ms.
Reno to make a quick choice, possibly before she returns on Tuesday.


U.S. to Cancel a Timber Deal in Alaska
Reversing decades of preferential treatment for a timber company in Alaska, the Clinton Administration said yesterday that it intended to end a 50-year contract providing low-cost wood from the nation's last largely intact rain forest, the Tongass National Forest.
The National Forest Service told the Alaska Pulp Corporation, one of two timber companies that have long-term contracts to harvest trees in the lush forests in Alaska's southeastern panhandle, that the company had breached the contract by shutting down a pulp mill at Sitka last year.


Investing Over There Over Here: A.D.R.'s
SOME foreign markets may have gotten a January chill, but their 1993 postings will long warm many investors' hearts: Foreign stock mutual funds rose 40 percent last year and Latin American funds soared 57 percent.
Because hot markets always contain red-hot companies, even these impressive fund results pale next to Telebras, the Brazilian telephone company, which jumped about 300 percent last year, or Advanced Info Services in Thailand, which has grown 250 percent since early 1992.


Religion Notes
To Honor a Philosopher
FEZ , Morocco


Most Markets Open Monday
The Government securities market will be closed Monday, when the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. will be observed, but other financial markets will be open.
Many businesses will be open, but banks have the option to close.


Music Notes; A Rare Find in the Vatican's Trash
A previously unknown recording of a 1940 recital at the Vatican by Mieczyslaw Horszowski -- a tape literally rescued from a trash heap -- has been digitally restored for release in the spring by Pearl Records, an English label that specializes in historical recordings.
After the pianist's death last year at the age of 100, Allan Evans, a record producer who describes himself as a "piano archeologist," began working with Horszowski's widow, Bice, on a reissue series.
The plan is to restore many of the pianist's early recordings to the catalogue after several decades' absence, and to include radio recordings not heard since their original broadcasts.


Dow Corning Taking $415 Million Charge
Beset by injury claims from women who reported illnesses and injuries from silicone breast implants, the Dow Corning Corporation said today that it would reduce its fourth-quarter earnings by $415 million, reflecting the company's best estimate so far of liability from thousands of lawsuits.
The charge against earnings includes the cost of administrative, legal and research costs associated with the suits, Dow Corning said.


Public &amp; Private; The Smoke Bomb
Thirty years ago this week, the first Surgeon General's report linking cigarette smoking to cancer was released in Washington.
The press conference was held on a Saturday, lest the news cause a panic on Wall Street.
Ever since, the relationship between commerce, health and cigarettes has been a touchy and a two-faced one.
On the one hand the government facilitates the sale and use of tobacco through farm programs and trade negotiations.
On the other it decries its use through scientific papers and public education.


No Coleman, Lots of Gilliam for Nets
Armon Gilliam, filling in for Derrick Coleman, scored 24 points and snagged 11 rebounds to lead the Nets to a 103-96 victory over the Denver Nuggets.
Four of the five Nets starters scored 20 points or more as the team raced to victory before a full house of 20,049 at the Meadowlands.
Chris Morris and Kenny Anderson scored 21 points apiece, while Kevin Edwards shot 50 percent from the floor and finished with 20 points.


Cleric in Bomb Plot Treated at Hospital
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the spiritual leader of the group of men accused of plotting to blow up New York City landmarks, was taken from jail to a hospital early yesterday morning after complaining of swelling in the legs.
He was treated and returned about 6 A.M. to the Metropolitan Correctional Center in lower Manhattan, where he is being held, according to one of his lawyers.
Mr.
Rahman, who has diabetes and a heart condition, was feeling better and did not seem to be in grave condition, said William M. Kunstler, who serves as a legal adviser to him, although he has been barred from representing Mr.
Rahman in his upcoming trial.


Helping Russia -- and Ourselves
Why should the United States spend $3 billion this year to help revive Russia's crumbling economy?
The answer: Containing the fractious, militaristic Russia that might emerge from total economic collapse could cost 10 times that much every year.
With Russia stabilized and tranquil, America could substantially reduce the defense budget and plow the savings into reclaiming our cities, revitalizing our failed education system and preparing for the challenges of the next century.
Only now is Bill Clinton wresting the problem from the International Monetary Fund and speeding the aid the U.S. has already pledged.
By taking the initiative, he shows he understands how much Americans have to lose from further delay.


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bill? Ben? Legend? Or a Postal Gaffe?
Sixty-two years after his death under the hooves of a stampeding horse, the nation's foremost black cowboy, Bill Pickett, is being honored with a Postal Service stamp that brands him a legend of the West.
That would be terrific, but for one problem: the face on the stamp may not be that of Bill Pickett.
Mr.
Pickett's descendants and some cowboy historians say it is his brother Ben, the backstage promoter of Bill's traveling crew of bronco busters.


Russia's New Parliament Chooses Ally of the Communists as Speaker
As President Boris N. Yeltsin gave President Clinton general assurances that economic change would proceed in Russia, its newly elected lower house of Parliament chose an anti-reform Communist stalwart as its Speaker today.
The vote was another graphic reminder of the political realities facing Mr.
Yeltsin once Mr.
Clinton goes home.
The victorious candidate, Ivan P. Rybkin, had the support of the Communist Party and its allies, and of the far-right nationalist party headed by Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky.


Blackman Fined And Suspended
Rolando Blackman, the Knicks' backup shooting guard, was suspended for one game without pay and fined $2,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for throwing a punch during Thursday night's Knicks-Pistons game.
He will miss this afternoon's game against Detroit at Madison Square Garden.
The incident occurred with 2 minutes 1 second left in the Knicks' 94-80 victory at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
Blackman said he was hit in the back by David Wood, a forward, as he was battling for rebounding position.
Blackman who had back surgery in June to repair a ruptured disk retaliated with a right-hand punch that missed.
Blackman was given a technical foul and he remained in the game.
But after reviewing a videotape of the incident yesterday, Rod Thorn, the league's vice president of basketball operations, said Blackman had to be suspended because he threw a punch.
"Any time a player throws a punch, whether it lands or not, he should be ejected and the one-game suspension is automatic. He should have been ejected, but the officials did not see the whole thing.


Sabo Chooses the Orioles Over Mets' Bigger Package
The sins of the Mets' recent past caught up with them in the present when Chris Sabo shunned their potentially more lucrative offer yesterday and signed with the Baltimore Orioles.
"The Mets certainly offered a lot better financial package," Jim Bronner, the third baseman's agent, said, "but I think he felt more comfortable with a team that has a chance to be in championship contention rather than be in a rebuilding situation."


Suffolk Halts Fight to Block Sale of Robins Island
Suffolk County is dropping its appeal of a Federal bankruptcy court decision that allowed a Wall Street financier to buy Robins Island, County Executive Robert J. Gaffney said today.
The announcement ends a decade of the county's efforts to buy the uninhabited 445-acre island in Peconic Bay as a nature sanctuary and furthers the plans of the financier, Louis Moore Bacon, to use it as a hunting preserve and family compound with controlled public access.


Shamir Memoirs Say He Ordered Killing in 1943
Former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel admits in excerpted memoirs published today that in 1943 he ordered the killing of a comrade in an outlawed Jewish underground group that was fighting the British authorities in Palestine.
Mr.
Shamir's involvement in the killing of the comrade, Eliahu Giladi, had been alleged for many years but never proved.


Messages for Neediest Cases: Someone Cares
For many regular contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, sending a donation is a way to show gratitude for business success, to remember a loved one, to celebrate an anniversary or simply to feel they have done their civic duty.
The checks arrive with a small note attached or sometimes with only a few words jotted next to a signature.
But there are scores of other donors who feel it is not enough just to contribute.
In a city where friendliness can seem in short supply and where it is easy to become inured to suffering, these donors see the Neediest Cases Fund as a way to let their fellow New Yorkers know that they are still affected by the poverty they see around them every day.


Frigid Bills Forgotten Contender Of Playoffs
The buzz surrounding the American Football Conference playoffs this weekend has been about Joe Montana in a possible fifth Super Bowl, the Houston Oiler defense and its feisty coordinator, Buddy Ryan, and Jeff Hostetler's leading a resurgent deep passing game for the Los Angeles Raiders.
Lurking in the background are the Buffalo Bills.
With a 12-4 record -- the best in the A.F.C. -- and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs, the Bills will take their first step toward a fourth consecutive Super Bowl at 12:30 P.M.
Saturday when they play host to the Raiders at frozen Rich Stadium.


The Sermons Clinton Should Give
When President Clinton speaks at black and Latino churches about escalating violence in their communities, on the face of it this effort to reach out would seem to be a compassionate gesture.
I voted for Mr.
Clinton because I believed that he was capable of compassion.
But when I read that Stanley Greenberg, Mr.
Clinton's pollster, approved of these appearances, I became suspicious.
According to news reports, Mr.
Greenberg was in part responsible for the episode during the Presidential campaign in which Mr.
Clinton publicly scolded Jesse Jackson for inviting the rap artist Sister Souljah to appear before a meeting of the Rainbow Coalition after she rapped some lyrics that some interpreted as anti-white.
Many observers concluded that Mr.
Clinton's remarks had been deliberately aimed at Reagan Democrats, whom he was wooing by standing up to one of the nation's most prominent black public figures.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  ONWARD, CLINTON TELLS RUSSIANS  Plunging into a nationally televised "town meeting" in Moscow, President Clinton urged Russians to stay the course toward a free market and democracy and to find a "new definition of Russia's greatness." 1  Reporter's Notebook: Fielding questions and dispensing sympathy.  6  News analysis: Mr.
Clinton made it across a tricky tightrope.  6  ASSEMBLY ELECTS A COMMUNIST  The newly elected lower house of Russia's Parliament chose a Communist stalwart who opposes reform as its Speaker.
It was a graphic reminder of the challenges facing President Yeltsin once President Clinton leaves Moscow.  1  A.N.C.
ENVISIONS A REDISTRIBUTION  With the white political monopoly rapidly expiring, the African National Congress published an ambitious program to end apartheid by redistributing land, building more than a million low-income houses and asserting state control over the mighty mining industry.  3  CHINA PLEDGES TO FREE 2 TIBETANS  In what a human rights group said was an effort to appease Western concerns, China said it would free two Tibetan dissidents.
American officials said it was the first time China had released dissidents before they were even tried.  5  A KILLING BLURS ISRAEL'S MIRROR  The arrest of three Israeli youths in the brutal killing of an Israeli cab driver has set off a frantic debate.
Some call the killing a terrible anomaly; others say it proves that Israeli society has changed.  4  Yitzhak Shamir recounts his days in the guerrilla underground.  4  BITTERSWEET EXODUS FROM SYRIA  Damascus Journal: After enduring years of suspicion, even persecution, Syria's Jews now face the challenge of their own dwindling numbers.
But it seems the face on the stamp may not be that of Bill Pickett.  7  MRS.
Samuel Bronston, film producer.
Joan Avnet, art collector.
Dr. Richard E. Gordon, a psychiatrist and an author.
Jack Aron, a dealer in coffee and metals and a collector.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Helping Russia -- and ourselves.
Jim Florio's good governance.
The Indonesia test.
Topics: Double check.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: The smoke bomb.
Russell Baker: Victims of telephone.
Ishmael Reed: The sermons Clinton should give.
Randy M. Mastro, Eric B. Schnurer: A truly independent counsel.
Bridge 14 Chronicle 24 Crossword 17


U.N. Mustn't Control Environmental Laws
To the Editor:
As you report Jan. 2, a United Nations-sponsored international treaty to protect endangered species around the world will be submitted shortly to the Senate for ratification.
Our Government spends about $100 million annually to save what it considers endangered species, 40 percent of them moths, beetles, rodents and snails.
The Fish and Wildlife Service proposed in 1991 to spend more than $2 million to save from extinction the Aspiduchus cavernicola, or Puerto Rican Tuna Cave cockroach.


The Voice of a Mind That Survived
JULIA Tavalaro, unspeaking and unmoving in her hospital bed, has been somewhere more unimaginable than outer space and has suffered experiences more frightening than shipwreck.
About to turn 59, she lies in Goldwater Hospital, where she has lain for the last 26 years, silent, with her hands pressed involuntarily to her chest.
From there she logs her journey, using eye movements to spell out hundreds of poems composed in deepest solitude.
Here, in heartless outline, are the details of her life: Born in upper Manhattan.
Graduated from high school.
Married.
Played tennis, swam.
Gave birth to a daughter in 1967.
Three months later she suffered a stroke.
She was brought to the hospital on Roosevelt Island, where she was judged to be incapable of either comprehending language or expressing herself.
In fact she understood.
She heard the staff refer to her as a vegetable and she heard visiting relatives talk about her as if she were dead.
She was aware that her daughter was not being brought to visit for fear the child would be traumatized.
She realized people stopped coming.


NEW SET OF DATA BOLSTERS OUTLOOK FOR THE ECONOMY
Evidence mounted today that the economy grew at a rate exceeding 5 percent in the final quarter of 1993 as car and truck production powered an unexpectedly big jump in December industrial output.
The operating rate of American factories, mines and utilities also climbed last month, reaching its busiest pace in four and a half years.
Many economists, who until recently had estimated economic growth in the final months of last year at about 4.5 to 5 percent, are beginning to raise their sights for this year, particularly for the year's first quarter.


Charles Moore Memorial
A memorial service honoring Charles W. Moore, the architect and former dean of the Yale School of Architecture, will be held next Saturday at 3 P.M. at Yale University's Battell Chapel, College and Elm Streets, in New Haven.
Among the scheduled speakers are the architects Philip Johnson, Robert A. M. Stern and Hugh Hardy.
Mr.
Moore died on Dec. 16 at the age of 68.


Women's Colleges Find a New Popularity
Women's colleges and girls' high schools are seeing a resurgence in applications unprecedented in the last 20 years, even as applications to private, coed institutions have remained stagnant.
Since 1991, applications to the 84 women's colleges across the country are up 14 percent and enrollment is at a 14-year high of 98,000 students, up from 82,500 students in 1981, according to the Women's College Coalition in Washington.


Topics of The Times; Your Share Is $500
What good is that trade agreement signed by 117 nations in Geneva last month?
According to Gary Hufbauer and Kimberly Elliott of the Institute for International Economics, it will save the typical American family $500 a year.
The two researchers estimated that existing tariffs and other barriers to foreign-made goods jack up prices in the United States by about $1,000 for the typical family.
The trade agreement, when instituted, will cut that cost in half by opening up markets to low-cost imports.
Even better, the poorest American families will reap the biggest dividends; the prices of goods they buy the most -- clothing, dairy products and other foods -- will tumble the furthest.


Dutch Buyer Acquires BPI
BPI Communications L.P., the publisher of Billboard magazine and The Hollywood Reporter, has been acquired by VNU, a Dutch media conglomerate, for $220 million, the two companies announced yesterday.
VNU acquired the company from a group of investors made up of BPI management, Boston Ventures and The New York Times Company.
The Times Company acquired its one-third interest in BPI Communications last year through its acquisition of Affiliated Publications Inc., the publisher of The Boston Globe.


Review/Music; A Mix of Tuneful New and Comfortable Old
With 15 seasons behind them, the Sylvan Winds have become deft programmers, with an ear for interesting juxtapositions of standard and unusual repertory.
The quintet that makes up the core of this flexible band opened the group's 16th season on Monday evening at Weill Recital Hall with two tuneful and generally picturesque American works and two comfortable oldies.
The opener was George Rochberg's "To the Dark Wood," a 1985 work that includes everything the title might lead one to expect, from flutey bird calls to passages of tension and uncertainty, though rarely outright mystery.
Mr.
Rochberg is generous with melody; each of the five lines has its share of shapely turns.
But the piece also has harmonic bite; in fact, sections are downright acidic.


Firstier Financial Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When Devilish Details Block a Mortgage
Dr.
Daniel Fass, a radiation oncologist with a private practice in Greenwich, Conn., and his wife, Jessica, expected to breeze through the mortgage process for their first home.
After all, he had the money for a down payment, a squeaky clean credit history and a rock-solid career.
The lender sized up the situation far differently.
Dr.
Fass was rejected because he could not show that his practice had been profitable for at least two years, the customary requirement for someone self-employed.
"It was a real Catch-22," he said, explaining that his office had been open only a year.


Junk Bond Group May Have Some Life Left
The junk bond market bottomed out in late 1989 and 1990, and then took off like a rocket, resulting in 20 percent-plus annual gains for many of the top junk funds over the last three years.
Those big returns are not likely to continue, analysts say.
Still, the category may have some life left.


For Clinton in Russia, TV and Empathy
Just as he has on "Donahue" and MTV, and at town hall meetings in scores of American cities, President Clinton perched himself in a studio audience here this afternoon, opened himself to inquiries from far and wide, and assured the uneasy that he could sense their pain.
"Let's go to Nizhni Novgorod," the President commanded at one point in the broadcast, which was carried live throughout much of the former Soviet Union on Government television.
As Russian producers cut to a hookup from that industrial capital, Mr.
Clinton looked into the wide screen and asked: "Did I say it right?"


May Nora Shea, Supporter of Charities, 77
May Nora Shea, a volunteer worker and supporter of diverse causes, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai South Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 77 and lived on the West Side of Manhattan.
The cause was a respiratory ailment, her family said.


Jews' Killing of Jew Stirs Israel Soul-Searching
The crime so horrified Israeli Jews that a common first reaction was that it could not possibly have been done by one of them.
It had to be Arab terrorists who killed Derek Roth, a 53-year-old taxi driver found slumped over the wheel of his cab last weekend with several bullets in the back of his head.
At Mr.
Roth's funeral in the coastal city of Netanya, local rightist politicians made speeches about Jews being killed only because they are Jews who want to live in the Land of Israel.


Review/Television; A Dastardly Tory Up to More Mischief
Francis Urquhart has become Prime Minister of an England set sometime in the near future.
The aging Francis, played with venomous relish by Ian Richardson, is not just an unscrupulous opportunist; he's a murderer, as those who have seen the BBC's "House of Cards" well know.
In the final scene of that dandy mini-series, the politically powerful Tory whip tossed his young mistress, a journalist about to expose his nasty deeds, from a tower of the Palace of Westminster.
Now, in the somewhat less-than-dandy "To Play the King," the four-part "Cards" sequel beginning tomorrow on "Masterpiece Theater," Francis finds his vastly increased power being threatened by bigger game: the King himself.
The Queen has been succeeded by her son (Michael Kitchen), who just happens to have an estranged blond wife (Erika Hoffman) and a fat, indiscreet sister-in-law (Bernice Stegers).
British television makes a habit of bringing a special verve to this sort of political thriller.


Another Jersey No One Will Ever Wear Again
BOB LOVE , the slender forward who led the Chicago Bulls in scoring seven straight seasons beginning in 1969-70, last night became the second player in franchise history to have his number retired.


German Giant's Ills Endanger a U.S. Oil Company
Ripples from the financial crisis confronting Germany's Metallgesellschaft A.G. have spread across the Atlantic to the Radnor, Pa., home of a small oil company.
On the eve of last-ditch talks between the Frankfurt-based conglomerate and its creditor banks, the Castle Energy Corporation said yesterday that the banks' failure to approve a $1.95 billion restructuring package could impair Castle's ability to finance its operations.
That is because Castle, whose stock is owned in part by the metal conglomerate and its senior executives, relies on Metallgesellschaft for much of its revenue.
Revamping Could Be Affected
The paradox is that Metallgesellschaft's relations with and commitment to Castle may be a major impediment to its restructuring.


Review/Music; Two Styles, One Cloudy, One Crisp
Anthony Davis has long been a fan of the composer Earl Howard, and on Thursday night at Merkin Concert Hall he shared his ensemble, Episteme, with Mr.
Howard.
The concert of three works each by Mr.
Davis and Mr.
Howard was presented by the World Music Institute as part of its Interpretations series.
Both composers work with texture as much as melody, and both are happy to let improvisation take a role in what usually sounds like classical chamber music.
But where Mr.
Howard's compositions were like cloud formations, one amorphous territory coalescing into the next, Mr.
Davis's pieces were crisper and more pointillistic, their sections and motifs more clearly defined.


49ers Edgy and Tense, With Good Reason
The San Francisco 49ers are edgy. They are tense.
Some players describe it as "good tension."


Jack Aron, a Dealer In Coffee and Metals And a Collector, 86
Jack R. Aron, an importer of coffee and a dealer in precious metals in Manhattan for 50 years, died yesterday in the Tulane Medical Center in New Orleans.
Mr.
Aron, who lived in New Orleans and Kings Point, L.I., was 86.
The cause was respiratory failure, said his son Peter A. Aron.


Jim Florio's Good Governance
Gov.
Jim Florio did the right thing, and that is why his time is up.
Christine Todd Whitman succeeds him as New Jersey's chief executive on Tuesday, in large part because of the huge hike in taxes enacted in his first 100 days.
It was a necessary move, but many voters regarded it as a betrayal.
It set off a tax revolt that propelled the Republicans in 1992 to control of the Legislature, and now Mrs.
Whitman to the governor's mansion.
If Jim Florio failed on that count, he succeeded on gun control.
In the same burst of activity that saw reluctant Democratic legislators approve his tax bill, he put through a ban on semiautomatic assault weapons.
New Jersey was first to do so; Governor Florio dared take on the powerful lobbyists of the National Rifle Association.
Indeed, he beat them twice, on the original legislation in 1991 and again last year when he stood down the now-Republican Legislature's attempt at repeal.


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Founder of Anti-Drunk-Driving Group Now Lobbies for Breweries
Legislators who knew Candy Lightner as the founder of Mothers Against Drunk Driving may be startled when they next hear from her.
Ms.
Lightner, whose daughter was killed by a drunken driver in 1980, is now a lobbyist for a trade group representing breweries and restaurants -- and her first project is working against state laws tightening the standards for drunken driving.


Topics of The Times; Double Check
Two public schools, across-the-street neighbors in lower Manhattan, won top honors last month at the Pan-American Team Chess Tournament for colleges and high schools.
Stuyvesant High, renowned for its gifted students, placed first among the high schools.
More spectacularly, the Borough of Manhattan Community College -- 17,000 students, mostly minorities, typically poor -- won the collegiate division, defeating Harvard in the finals.
It was the first community college to take the prize since the tournament began in 1946.
The winners were four young immigrant Americans, from Belarus, Azerbaijan, the Philippines and what remains of Yugoslavia.
They are not your average undergrads.
For example, Gennady Sagalchik, the one from Belarus, is a 24-year-old computer science major and father of two who teaches chess for a living.
Nikola Duravcevic, 21, the Yugoslav, majors in math; his full-time job as a doorman in Queens kept him from team training sessions.


Rangers Show Old Form And Put an End to Skid
The Rangers were not worried about the three-game losing streak they took into last night's game at Madison Square Garden.
They had, for the most part, brushed off their rocky play in the month of January.
And they hadn't allowed themselves to panic.
But they still talked about it, among themselves, when the doors closed to the locker room.
The veteran players had a message to get across to the others: Good teams don't let these things snowball.
Let's get it over with now.


Bank of New York Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prices of Treasury Securities Drop
Treasury securities prices fell yesterday, closing a week of seesaw trading.
Stronger-than-expected economic data released yesterday continued to rattle bond traders who were already worried about economic growth, the potential for rising inflation and possible moves by the Federal Reserve to tighten credit.
By late in the day yesterday, the price of the Treasury's 30-year bond declined 1/2 point, to 9917/32 , to yield 6.29 percent, up from 6.26 percent on Thursday.
The rate on shorter maturities rose slightly, with three-month and six-month bills up 2 basis points, to 2.96 percent and 3.14 percent, respectively.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Transactions
Football  National Football League INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Fired Jack Bushofsky, director of player personnel.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Chris Hakel, quarterback.
Released Keith Traylor, defensive end.


Executive Changes
CMI CORP., Oklahoma City, a designer and manufacturer of automated highway construction and maintenance equipment, appointed Lou Aguilera executive vice president of international operations.
MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGIES CORP., Jackson, Miss., parent company of Skytel Corp., named Bernard Puckett president and chief operating officer.
He had been senior vice president for corporate strategy and development at I.B.M.


Getting Kendall Square on Course
Briefing a somber group of about 100 computer engineers and programmers recently in Kendall Square Research's company cafeteria, William I. Koch, the acting chief of the supercomputer maker, was trying to calm the troops.
The company's founder and chief executive had just been discharged, the Securities and Exchange Commission had begun an investigation, and at least 10 shareholder suits had been filed accusing the company of using false earnings reports to inflate the stock price.


Providing Day Care in the Home, Legally
Christoira Smith toyed with the idea of a day-care business for som etime.
In 1990, she even took the courses required by Community Coordinating Child Care, a New Jersey agency known as the 4C's, which licenses small day-care operations in people's homes.
The nine hours of training covered topics like setting a daily routine, using contracts and whipping up a homemade version of Play-Doh.
When she discovered she was pregnant with her third child in 1992.
Mrs.
Smith, at age 28, decided it was time to open for business.


U.S. Warns Japanese Over Trade
The United States warned Japan today that it was being inflexible in talks to open up its market to foreign goods, although American efforts to sell more cars in Japan have begun to register some success.
In both Tokyo and Washington, American officials warned that tensions could mount before Japan's Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, visits Washington on Feb. 11, unless there was progress in talks aimed at increasing Japanese purchases of foreign cars, auto parts, medical equipment and telecommunications equipment.
Nissan Dealer to Sell Fords
There was some good news for the Americans today.
The Nissan Motor Company said its largest dealer, Tokyo Nissan, was planning to sell cars made by the Ford Motor Company.


Emotional Divide in the Menendez Trial
At first, the judge in the Menendez brothers' murder trial just didn't seem to get it.
What does child molestation have to do with homicide?
"I think this whole issue is being blown out of proportion," he told the court at the start of trial.
"It doesn't prove anything."
But the judge, Stanley M. Weisberg of Superior Court, let the defense proceed, with both brothers graphically testifying about years of sexual abuse by their father, a wealthy entertainment executive.
Legal experts now agree that the decision to allow this testimony was the turning point that blunted the prosecution of the brothers in the August 1989 shotgun killings of their parents, Jose and Kitty Menendez.


Noted Kenya Conservationist Resigning in a Political Storm
After weeks of a growing political storm in which he was accused of corruption, racism and mismanagement, Richard Leakey, renowned paleontologist and director of the Kenya Wildlife Service, resigned today.
In his five years as head of the wildlife service, Mr.
Leakey had been widely praised by both Kenyans and conservationists for rescuing and reinvigorating the organization, by ridding it of corruption and poachers and rebuilding its ranks.
In a country where wildlife is not only the biggest tourist attraction but also the major foreign exchange earner, Mr.
Leakey attracted millions of dollars in foreign aid money and transformed the moribund agency into a success story.


Cuomo Declares an Election-Year War on Crime
Escalating an election-year war of posturing over crime, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo took the unusual step today of ordering the Legislature to meet on Monday to consider legislation aimed at curbing gun violence.
Last month, the Democratic Governor asked the Legislature to convene for a special session on Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday, an invitation rejected by the Republican leadership of the State Senate.


Move Over, Mr. Gretzky
ANDREW GIULIANI , 7-year-old son of Mayor RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI and co-star of his father's recent inauguration, will help his dad drop the puck for the opening face-off at the National Hockey League All-Star Game next Saturday in Madison Square Garden.


Mediators Can Help Cut Lawsuit Expenses
To the Editor:
Stephen A. Hochman's Jan. 7 letter speaks of the mediation program instituted in the United States District Court for the Southern District, which has had success and saved parties the expense of prolonged litigations.
Mediation is also available outside the jurisdiction of the District Court's program, at no expense to the public.


Editors' Note
An article on Jan. 7 described a rare trip home to Oregon by Senator Bob Packwood, who is under investigation by a Senate committee because of sexual misconduct complaints by more than two dozen women.
The article noted that Mr.
Packwood had long refused to speak to reporters for The Oregonian, the state's leading newspaper, because he felt that it had not treated him fairly.
In this context, Mr.
Packwood was quoted as saying, "Their publisher assured me in the summer of 1992 that they wouldn't pursue" reports of sexual impropriety.


Q and A
Giving Closely Held Stock  Q. How can I fix the value of a minority share in a private corporation that I am donating to a nonprofit institution?
SELMA RATTNER, Long Island City, Queens


U.S. Study Bolsters Case for Minority Scholarships
Handing the Clinton Administration a sharp tool for its defense of minority scholarships, the Government Accounting Office today issued a report finding that those awards played an important role in fostering racial and ethnic diversity on America's college campuses.
Though the report does not specifically encourage colleges to grant such scholarships, it says they are "valuable tools for recruiting and retaining racial or ethnic minority students."


Low Interest Rates in Credit Card Offers Are Often Just Teasers
The new year brings an onslaught of credit card offers -- some very enticing to consumers laden with holiday bills.
If the offers look too good to be true, make sure you read the fine print.
A popular ploy is a teaser rate, a very low initial rate that may rise markedly after a short period.


No Headline
Rabbi Eugene J. Lipman, a national leader of Reform Judaism and a past president of the Central Conference of American Rabbis, died yesterday at a nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
Dr.
Lipman, a prominent figure in social causes, was 74 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was brain cancer, his family said.


Review/Music; Melancholy Melodies In Armenian Tradition
From jazz saxophonists and classical cellists to Irish pipers and Japanese shakuhachi players, musicians know that one of their most difficult tasks is to make a slow, plain melody ring with emotion.
At Washington Square Church on Wednesday night, in a World Music Institute concert of Armenian music, Djivan Gasparyan devoted nearly all of his concert to slow songs, and he turned nearly every one into a quiet, riveting drama: elegiac, sultry, nostalgic, reverent.
He was helped by his main instrument, the duduk, a keyless double-reed pipe made of apricot wood that may create the world's most melancholy tone.
It sounds less incisive than an oboe or an English horn, its closest European relatives, and more like a combination of an alto clarinet, a Gypsy violin and a contralto's sigh.
In Mr.
Gasparyan's hands, the duduk's long tones float and throb; musical lines curve upward to aching sustained notes, then taper off with a desolate tenderness.


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Newark, Whitman Opens Festivities With Pledge to Cities
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman opened two days of preinaugural festivities tonight, winning a warm and generous welcome from Mayor Sharpe James and offering a promise to New Jersey's cities.
Mr.
James, a Democrat, introduced Mrs.
Whitman, a Republican, to about 1,000 people at a benefit reception at the Newark Museum as a "people person" and a "star among stars." He thanked her "from the bottom of our hearts" for selecting the state's largest city to kick off the celebration leading to her inauguration in Trenton on Tuesday.


Samuel Bronston, Film Producer, 85; Made Epic 'El Cid'
Samuel Bronston, a Hollywood film producer whose credits include the historical epics "El Cid," "King of Kings" and "Fall of the Roman Empire," died on Wednesday at Mercy Hospital in Sacramento, Calif.
He was 85.
The cause was pneumonia secondary to Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter Irene Bronston.


On Russian TV, Clinton Backs Reforms
President Clinton plunged into a nationally televised "town meeting" today to urge Russians to stay the course toward a free market and democracy and to find a "new definition of Russia's greatness."
Clearly stimulated by candid and provoking questions from a live, youthful audience at the Ostankino television center in Moscow and similar groups linked by television from other cities, Mr.
Clinton was alternatively professor, politician and preacher as he counseled Russians to "choose the future."


Let Recording Technology Work Its Wonders; Classics on Radio
To the Editor:
The loss of "The Listening Room" on New York City's radio station WQXR hurt us all.
Robert Sherman's live performance and interview program was an institution.
In 1991, WNYC-FM began its own live musical performance and interview program, "Around New York" -- and we'll tell anyone that it was inspired by Mr.
Sherman's program, which had all but disappeared by then.


A Hard Life Spent Searching For Money and a Gold Medal
Arriving back home in Portland this week, Tonya Harding was asked about her thoughts on next month's Olympic Games.
"To be perfectly honest," said Miss Harding, newly crowned as the American national figure skating champion, "what I'm really thinking about are dollar signs."


New York City's Taxes Drive the Tourists Away
To the Editor:
The New York tourist industry is keeping its fingers crossed that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo makes good on his promise to cut the special occupancy tax on hotel rooms that cost more than $100.
New York has a 21.25 percent total levy on hotel rooms, the highest in the country.
Our tax tacks $23.75 onto the average New York City hotel room, compared with $11.36 in Chicago and $10.48 in Washington.


Cult Had Illegal Arms, Expert Says
A firearms expert from the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified today that 48 fully automatic weapons were found in the charred ruins of the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex.
The find was the first physical evidence in support of the Government's contention that David Koresh's followers had converted semiautomatic weapons into illegal automatic weapons.
Federal agents had obtained search and arrest warrants for Mr.
Koresh based on suspicions that the group was hording the weapons, which can shoot nonstop once the trigger is pulled.
Four Federal agents and six cult members died in a shootout when agents raided the compound to serve the warrants on Feb. 28 last year.


Challenge to Pennsylvania's Abortion Law Fails
Abortion rights advocates received a major setback today when a Federal appeals court here ruled that a Pennsylvania law restricting abortions could take effect without further hearings on its impact on women.
The court, a three-member panel of the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, unanimously ruled that the law could not be challenged until it had taken effect; only then could opponents try to prove that its provisions had harmed women.
Barring intervention by the United States Supreme Court, the law could take effect in 22 days.


The Search for Sara Anne Wood Continues


Review/Opera; Of Romance, Sex and Fashion
"How to Make Love" is a somewhat disorganized, altogether pleasant one-act comic opera by Lawrence Widdoes, a longtime teacher at the Juilliard School.
Mr.
Widdoes's librettist is his wife, C. C. Widdoes.
The first of three performances was on Thursday at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater; the last will be tonight.
In the list of featured players, Azan Kung, the costume designer, has to be pretty near the top.
Indeed, if there is a thread of coherence in "How to Make Love," it is the steady stream of women's fashions that were paraded before Thursday's smallish audience.
The scene is an upscale dress shop and the center of attention its young saleswoman.
She is Sharon (Laura Hemphill), lovesick and happy to fortify her fantasies through illustrated books on romantic techniques and how-to-do-it sex.
Mannequins (Elena Comendador and Alan Hineline) come to life periodically and dance out her daydreams.


A Truly Independent Counsel
President Clinton has finally responded to calls for an independent investigation of his real estate dealings.
On Wednesday, he asked Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate the matter and report back to her.
Therein lies the problem.
A prosecutor who reports to the Attorney General, a member of the President's Cabinet, is hardly an "independent" investigator.
No matter how qualified the counsel is, some people may still wonder whether the Whitewater investigation is a whitewash.


A Life Under Fire
LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War Zones.
By Peter Arnett.
Illustrated. 463 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Catherine Sullivan, Henry Stevenson
Catherine Ellinwood Sullivan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter S. Sullivan Jr. of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Henry Edminster Stevenson, the son of the late Lieut.
Col.
Henry E. Stevenson and the late Judge Almira A. Stevenson.
The Rev.
Helen M. Moore, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Middlesex School chapel in Concord, Mass.
Ms.
Sullivan, 39, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale College and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
She is an assistant district attorney for Middlesex County in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is a writer and lecturer who retired as the science editor of The New York Times.


For Rebels With Causes
AS the owner of a small business, the president of a civic group or just a disgruntled taxpayer you want something from the Legislature but don't have enough money to hire a lobbyist or to make the size of campaign contribution that causes lawmakers to take notice.
What to do?


Family Affair


Removal of Interior Walls Can Prove a Tricky Piece of Work
IF cabin fever has you yearning for open spaces, maybe it is time to consider enlarging a living area by removing a wall.
Planning is the key to success.
Call the building inspector to learn whether a permit is required.
Unless you are experienced or the job is very simple, it is usually best to have these systems relocated by professionals.
Also find out from the garbage carter about disposing the old material.
Building rubble generally has to be handled separately from ordinary trash.


Giuliani Announces a 25 Percent Cut in the Mayoral Payroll
As he campaigned for Mayor of New York City, Rudolph W. Giuliani ridiculed and railed against the behemoth bureaucracy of New York City.
Yesterday, he unveiled his first cuts to tame the municipal beast: in his own office.
Mr.
Giuliani announced that he had reduced the size of the Mayor's office by 25 percent, by hiring only 92 people in the executive offices, compared with the 123 in the office of former Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Jan. 2 misstated the availability of advance reservations at Continental Airlines.
They are accepted 338 days, not 12 months, in advance.


Plants Need a Vacation at Times, Too
HOW about a rest now?
Most of the house plants are enjoying relaxation, so why not the gardener?
This rest period is essential for many plants growing in pots.
If they do not have it, they often become sluggish and do not bloom later in the year when they are supposed to.
The easiest way to tell if a plant needs a rest is to consider when it blooms.
The amaryllis bulb, for example, may just be finishing its bloom period.
So its foliage must grow on to nourish the bulb.
But if the amaryllis bloomed last spring and was summered outdoors, then by all means the bulb should be resting now.


No Headline
"Some sex is scary, some sex is sad and some sex is loving. But kids only see the sad and scary parts." ROYAL HONOR, a 16-year-old who helps teach teen-agers to say no to sex.  [ 19:3. ]


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
HANNAH ARENDT -- KARL JASPERS: CORRESPONDENCE, 1926-1969 Edited by Lotte Kohler and Hans Saner.
Translated by Robert and Rita Kimber.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $19.95.
These two scholars had the privilege of knowing each other during particularly turbulent times; their epistolary subjects range from the coming of the Holocaust to the student protests of 1968.
"It is a privilege to enter their studies," Richard A. Shweder said here in 1992.


The Art of Protest
When the 1960's ended, so did the large output of cautionary and protest graphics that littered the streets.
This was particularly true in the United States, where the antiwar, free speech and civil rights movements had inspired artists and graphic designers to create reams of visual agitation -- some of which became icons of the era.
Memorable graphics were noticeably absent during the 1970's.
Yet by the 80's, concurrent with Ronald Reagan's Administration, social and political activism was again on the rise throughout the world, and so were political graphics.
Liz McQuiston, a graphic design critic and historian in London, surveys the wide range of graphic arts produced internationally during the past three decades in GRAPHIC AGITATION: Social and Political Graphics Since the Sixties (Phaidon/Chronicle, $49.95).
The book is the first comprehensive overview of these posters, billboards, flyers, periodicals, buttons and T-shirts.
Ms.
McQuiston writes that during the 70's the environment and human rights were significant issues, and not until the 80's did social movements and individuals refocus their attention on community issues and redirect their efforts toward producing visual propaganda.
Sexual orientation and AIDS became focal points for artists, many of whom belonged to poster brigades and graphics collectives and engaged in guerrilla activities that included billboard defacement and illegal bill posting.
Ms.
McQuiston offers an extensive collection of both familiar and rare materials gathered from scores of grass-roots and urban advocacy groups.
The effectiveness of recent productless, issue-oriented advertisements for mainstream businesses (such as those for Benetton) is also scrutinized.
This ambitious chronicle is a must for the scholars, students and practitioners of alternative media.
STEVEN HELLER


C. L. Weinstock, David Garfinkel
Cheryl Linn Weinstock, a daughter of Ellen and Samuel Weinstock of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
David Adam Garfinkel, the son of Pauline and George Garfinkel of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi John Schechter officiated at the Pierre in New York.


Inside Albany: A Guide to Power Centers
EXPLAIN Albany?
Assemblywoman Deborah J. Glick seemed momentarily puzzled by the question.
But as Ms.
Glick, Democrat of Manhattan, pondered the satirical possibilities of the Legislature in general and, perhaps, the Lilliputian role of the Assembly Republicans in particular, she hit upon the real guidebook.
"Read Swift," she said, struck by the absurdist parallels between "Gulliver's Travels" and modern-day state politics.


Emotions Can Be Dangerous Or Be Put to Expressive Use
Young instrumentalists today, while hardly ruffled by technical challenges, tend to be less at ease in the realm of emotional response and commitment.
In his "Essay on the True Art of Playing Keyboard Instruments," published in 1753 and admired by Beethoven, C. P. E. Bach wrote, "A musician cannot move others unless he, too, is moved." This principle has guided the philosophy of the pianist Karl Ulrich Schnabel during his seven decades on the concert stage.
"I urge my students to bring real emotions to the keyboard," Mr.
Schnabel said here recently.
"The challenge is to do so every time we play. Musicians can dare to handle emotions that would kill any other human being. If your love isn't reciprocated, you may stand at the window 30 floors up and want to jump. Instead, we jump to the keyboard. Then the emotion is used; it's not dangerous anymore."


Let's Pick Up Garbage Only Once a Week
This is the season for the approval of town and village budgets, which keep going up every year as the cost of living rises and as new services are added.
Rarely, however, are services reviewed to determine if they can be cut back because of a change of circumstances.
A case in point is sanitation services.
The present schedule of two garbage collections a week was initiated before recycling.
At present, recycling accounts for about 25 percent of the refuse collected countywide, and the quantity of garbage being collected has been reduced considerably.
The sanitation supervisors to whom I have spoken indicate that a change to once-a-week collection would result in considerable savings.


The Man From Treasure Island
DREAMS OF EXILE Robert Louis Stevenson: A Biography.
By Ian Bell. 296 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.


HOLLYWOOD AT A FEVER PITCH
I cannot start my workday until I tell you how much I enjoyed the hilarious piece on the wonderfully horrific Scott Rudin ("Hollywood at a Fever Pitch," by Philip Weiss, Dec. 26).
He is like a breath of fresh air in this smarmy age of rain-forest-loving celebrities.


Awaiting Repairs at the Fish Market
After a fire on Oct. 31 displaced several wholesalers at the Fulton Fish Market, city officials promised swift repairs to get them back in business for the holiday season.
Eleven weeks later, repairs have yet to begin.
The fire gutted 109 South Street and forced the evacuation of two adjoining buildings.
The brick buildings, all landmarks in the South Street Seaport Historic District, are boarded up and cordoned off by police barricades.
The residual scent of smoke competes with the market's fishy aroma.
And the fish dealers who worked in the three buildings are still in temporary quarters across the street; city officials did not know the exact number of companies affected by the fire.


Journal; Mickey Does 42d Street
The expansionist Walt Disney Company is poised to gain a foothold on the least Disneyesque thoroughfare in America: naughty, bawdy 42d Street.
Is Disney's $30 million plan to turn the decrepit old New Amsterdam Theater, the former Ziegfeld palace, into a showplace for family stage fare yet another sign that Goofy is minding the store?
Disney's corporate behavior has been so Mickey Mouse of late that you have to wonder.


When You Owe, Low Inflation Is a Curse
INFLATION is down.
And for some companies that made heavy investments in the late 1980's, that is horrible news.
To pay the debts incurred then, they desperately need to charge high prices.
And too often it turns out they can't.
Investors who ought to be nervous about that phenomenon, but evidently aren't, are those who own stock in the world's most ambitious public works project, Eurotunnel.
Its shares now stand at 613 British pence, up 43 percent in two months.


Giants Out of Breath When Smoke Cleared
If you are in a race in which you have horses and they have mules, then you make the mules run quick and fast and you make 'em gasp.
It is like fanning the flames of a fire -- a quicker burn is always more deadly than a slow burn.
So, let's give the San Francisco 49ers complete credit for knowing their foe, inside and out, yesterday afternoon at Candlestick Park before the largest crowd ever to come to watch them play.
The 49ers knew that in tackling the Giants in the playoffs, a quick start meant a good finish.
You get a run-oriented team down fast and see just how patient or effective it can be with its run-first attack.


Holiday on Monday
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday will be observed tomorrow.
Here are schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and New York City offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Option to close.
PARKING Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION Pickups and recycling, but no street cleaning.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open, with exception of Government securities markets.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, and Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state offices closed; municipal offices, option to close.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Option to close.
TRANSPORTATION Most buses on regular weekday schedule, some on Saturday schedule.
Rail service on regular schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES State and city offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedule.


Putting Education First
Bank Street College of Education honors Henry R. Kravis; Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Jan. 10.


Midway Offers Miles For Flights and Calls
Midway Airlines, which in November started flying between Midway Airport in Chicago and La Guardia Airport in New York after going out of business two years ago, is wooing passengers with a lucrative but complicated frequent flier mileage program.
Starting mid-January, Midway (800) 446-4392) will add a nonstop flight between Chicago and Denver, connecting to Philadelphia.


Broader Acceptance Sought for King Holiday
The Rev Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday will be officially observed for the ninth time on Monday, but the holiday is still struggling for broad acceptance: widely observed by governments, mostly ignored by businesses and in danger of being viewed as a black holiday rather than a national one.
Admirers of Dr.
King are rethinking the national observance and trying to change the public perception of it from civil rights to broader themes of nonviolence and public service and prevent it from being marginalized as a second-tier holiday.


Scenes From Downtown
The opening of a Neke Carson retrospective, Jan. 12 at the Helander Gallery.


Good Food. Good Vibes. Lousy Business.
"WHAT are you going to do when your dream suddenly happens, before you're ready?" asked Daphne Mahoney, sitting in the dim, empty hush of that dream, waiting for customers.
"You have to go for it. But you better make sure you don't forget how to laugh."
Daphne's Hibiscus Restaurant is wilting in the arid bleakness of East 14th Street, that forsaken street, but Daphne Mahoney ("I don't care about Ms., Miss, Mrs., call me Daphne") is unwilling to point a weary finger at the city.
"We are five intelligent people and we should have done our homework. We could have found out there would be construction. We could have figured it would go on forever. That the zoning was not right for cabaret. And that you can't have an outdoor cafe here."


When the Lanes Open, More Drivers Will Come
To the Editor:
"The Road Wars" (Dec. 19) suggests that if lanes now closed because of road construction were open, congestion would be greatly reduced.
But experts point out that whenever there is new capacity, drivers who were using alternative routes, traveling during other times or using public transit will flock to the newly opened roads during peak hours, thus neutralizing any benefits.


The Velvet Underground Strikes Back
If ever a band was entitled to cash in on its name recognition, it was the Velvet Underground.
Although the band didn't sell many records while it existed, from 1965 to 1970, it was never forgotten.
Cited by nearly every group in punk's long lineage and by more than a few arty types, the Velvets defined New York rock, poised between street-level grit and literary irony, rock simplicity and minimalistic drones, clarity and noise.
In 1993, Lou Reed (guitar), John Cale (bass, viola, keyboards), Sterling Morrison (guitar) and Maureen Tucker (drums) reunited just long enough for a European tour.
Luckily, there's a document: a concert album, "Live MCMXCIII" (Sire/Warner Brothers 45464; two cassettes or CD's), recorded in Paris.


Time Traveler


'A Place at the Table'
To the Editor:


Ulster Church Leaders Seek End of Job Bias
In an unusual joint statement, leaders of both Roman Catholic and Protestant churches in Northern Ireland have called for vigorous efforts to combat discrimination in the work place and attract foreign investment.
The declaration, issued in Belfast on Friday, challenges a widespread view in the Protestant population and among some overseas investors that job discrimination is a Catholic issue or one linked only to Irish nationalist politics.
The statement was signed by Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Methodist and Anglican church officials.


Beg to Differ, Professor
To the Editor:
I have a problem with Prof.
Ellis S. Krauss's description of hard-working professors ("Pity the Professors in Terms of Pay," Letters, Jan. 9).


Skating And Prejudice
To the Sports Editor:
Even before the attack upon figure skater Nancy Kerrigan, The New York Times and other members of the news media had succumbed to the public relations hype surrounding her, hype that demeans the true meaning of excellence in skating, and points out the disturbing face of racism in corporate America.
Kristi Yamaguchi, the 1992 World and Olympic campion, is a far superior technical and artistic skater, yet will never earn the millions in product endorsements that effortlessly flow to Kerrigan.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Kristen Somogyi; A Basketball Champion's Latest Move
HER hair is a little bit longer, but Kristen Somogyi doesn't look much different today than she did when she broke her father's record as the highest-scoring high school basketball player in the state.
This was on Feb. 1, 1992, when she amassed 3,310 points at St.
Peter's High School in New Brunswick.
Miss Somogyi, a high school scoring legend who went on to tally 3,899 points in her career, spent last season at the University of Virginia, averaging 4.0 points and 1.9 assists in a limited role for the Cavaliers.
This season she has returned to the neighborhood where her story began, transferring to the Rutgers University campus here, where she is a sophomore.


White House Memo; Clinton's Handlers Admit, Whitewater Affair Overtook Them
Even by the White House's own accounting, its handling of questions about President Clinton's Arkansas real estate dealings has been a near fiasco.
For now, Clinton aides say they have stemmed the flood of publicity about the role of Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton in the Whitewater Development Company, a real estate investment company they formed with the owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan.
But first the aides had to persuade the Clintons, and their legal advisers -- as well as themselves -- that the only way out was to go along with the rising cry for an independent investigation.


Treading Gently; Clinton and Europe Face Their Fears
HAVE the Western democracies entered a new era of appeasement?
The question has been in the air since the war in Bosnia began, and it remained in the air here last week despite all the talk by President Clinton and the other NATO allies about welcoming Eastern Europe and Russia into a new Partnership for Peace.
Since the war against Iraq three years ago, the Western democracies have seemed willing to do anything for the principles they stand for except fight for them.
Neither the United States nor any Western European country has been willing to do what it would take to stop the appalling daily atrocities in Bosnia -- to send in combat troops to stop the war, and leave them there as long as it took.
Instead, the allies have merely threatened the Serbs with bombs that never dropped.
They threatened them again in Brussels last week, and the fighting raged on unabated.


Beyond Joey and Amy
LEONARD LOPATE'S face does not suggest guile.
It is round, and its normal expression is rather bland.
When he sits behind a microphone and listens to guests, as he does for two hours every weekday as the host of "New York and Company" on WNYC-AM radio, he radiates interest and approval, sometimes nodding with chin in hand.
His speaking voice is smooth and soothing, the aural equivalent of top-quality paint, the kind that covers in one coat.
But Mr.
Lopate is sneaky.
On a recent show, his guest was Robert Ryman, whose all-white paintings were the subject of a recent retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art.
Mr.
Ryman is a quiet, reticent man, and therefore a potential problem for Mr.
Lopate, whose chief dread in life is dead air.


Edward J. Lennon, 66, Medical College Dean
Dr.
Edward J. Lennon, former president and dean of the Medical College of Wisconsin, died on Tuesday at Froedt ert Memorial Lutheran Hospital in Milwaukee.
He was 66 and lived in Brookfield, Wis.
The college said the cause was chronic pulmonary disease.


What Price Superhighway Information?
To the Editor:
"But Will It Fly?", Russell Baker's Jan. 4 column, questions the overselling of the "information superhighway" and identifies cost as the major unknown in the formula.
He leaves the impression, however, that technology is primarily responsible for these costs, as in the overselling of atomic power and supersonic flight.


'It Runs in the Family,' a British Farce
JUST when Dr.
David Mortimore, a married neurologist with racked nerves, is warming up for a career-making lecture, in bursts Jane Tate (once Nurse Tate) with the reasons for her hasty departure 18 years and 9 months ago.
Dr.
Mortimore, you see, is the father of her 18-year-old son, Leslie, who has been picked up for drunken driving and is now crying for his "long-lost daddy."
Forthwith, one character after another is bounding through doors that swing or slam in the doctors' lounge at St.
Andrew's Hospital in London, and some are even crawling along the snowy ledge outside.


The Whitewater Case: Finding the Connections
On Wednesday, President Clinton asked Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special counsel to review his role as an investor in Whitewater Development Company, an Arkansas real estate development company, and Whitewater's links to a failed savings and loan, Madison Guaranty.
Mr.
Clinton has maintained that he and his wife did nothing except lose almost $70,000 in real estate venture; nothing that is known publicly about the investment indicates that the Clintons or anyone else in the Administration did anything illegal.


When Cats, Teacups and Feathers Join the Cast
When Ann Carlson revived "Animals" during the opening week of the Altogether Different series, which continues at the Joyce Theater, her dancing partner in one scene was a kitten.
Other soloists in this memorable work of 1988 were two goats, a dog and a goldfish.
Ms.
Carlson was not the only choreographer in recent weeks to create movements for dancers who weren't human.
Eiko and Koma filled the stage with what could be called a corps de ballet of feathers when they presented "Wind" at the Joyce.
The cast of "The Science Project," which the Everett Dance Theater of Providence, R.I., brought to the Bessie Schonberg Theater, included four people, as well as a tilting plane, a swinging pendulum, and sliding balls and teacups.


Simpler Plan for Ferry Point: A Golf Course but No Marina
New York City parks officials are scaling back a project for a combined 18-hole public golf course and marina in Ferry Point Park, under the Whitestone Bridge, after their initial proposal failed to attract developers.
The officials acknowledged that the initial plan might have been too ambitious and costly for a private developer.
They said they had eliminated the marina.


A la Carte; If Not Crab Cakes, How About a French Movie and Buffet?
NEW YORK CITY'S best crab cakes have come to Long Island, and so has one of China's most respected new wave national banquet chefs.
Meanwhile, Mirabelle's veteran chef and owner has received national recognition and also entered into an innovative French movie and meal promotion.
Guy Reuge, of the celebrated Mirabelle Restaurant in St.
James, was honored two times in the last few weeks.
He won an Evian Healthy Menu Award in a national chefs' competition.
Mr.
Reuge has also been invited by the James Beard Foundation in Manhattan to prepare a Long Island wine-tasting dinner on Thursday.


Sharing an Anniversary With the Coach House
To the Editor:
In regard to "After 44 Years and 4 Proud Stars, Dinner Is Over at the Coach House" (Jan. 2):
Bob and I were planning to celebrate our first wedding anniversary on Thursday, March 18, 1952.
As described in Cue Magazine, the Coach House seemed perfect: home-baked corn sticks, delicious fried chicken, delectable desserts.
The cost of a complete dinner (about $3.75) was within reach of our modest budget.


He Looms Large, Yet Remains Invisible
Robert Smithson may be one of the most influential unknown photographers of the last 30 years.
Not unknown in the sense that no one knows who he was -- he is a Name, and everyone acknowledges his Importance.
Artists of Smithson's generation (he was born in 1938 and died in an accident in 1973) are familiar with his work, but some younger artists and photographers who follow in his footsteps are unaware they are doing so and know only bits and pieces of Smithson's art, primarily the Spiral Jetty, his famous earthwork in the Great Salt Lake.
The startling influence his photographs have had on the medium depends largely on fewer than 20 images published in the late 60's in his articles in Artforum.
Some photography schools rely on his writings, and some pay him little attention.
Even the photo-history books that mention him seldom illustrate his work.
He looms large and remains invisible.
His influence may be a bit like that of the French philosopher Jean Baudrillard: all manner of photographers follow his precepts without having read or fully understood him.


Jan. 9-15; Cosmic Horizons Come Into Sharper Focus


Jan. 9-15: The Civil Rights Front, 1994; Another Attempt to Make Blacks at Home in Vidor
The operation, under cover of the predawn darkness and under watch of the police, evoked the civil rights struggles of the 1960's, and indeed it was the first time since then that the Federal Government had used an armed escort to enforce desegregation laws.
Four black families were moved into Vidor Village, a formerly all-white housing complex in an East Texas town that has not had a permanent black resident since the 1920's.
Despite a judicial order to integrate the project, four other black residents had moved out earlier this year, complaining of repeated harassment from some whites in town.


Films Reflecting Black Realities
A NEW film series at the Brooklyn Museum is offering the works of a group of black directors who studied at the University of California at Los Angeles in the 1960's and 70's.
The series, "The L.A. Rebellion," borrows its name from the term used within the industry to describe a creative outpouring at the U.C.L.A. film school among African-American students.
Outraged by Hollywood's stereotyped images of blacks, the students set out to make films that would more accurately reflect the realities of black life.


It's Not the Label, It's the Klutzy Consumer
To the Editor:
I read with interest and nostalgia "From Novelty to Necessity: Reminiscences of a PC Fanatic" (The Executive Computer, Dec. 26), and felt truly sorry that the author, Peter H. Lewis, was calling it quits.
But imagine my surprise when the following week I read "Dear Industry: It's the New Year and Time to Get Resolute" by Joshua Mills.
I am sorry that Mr.
Mills has had trouble installing his Sound Blaster board from Creative Technology -- but hey, maybe he should think twice before attempting to be his own computer professional.
I am sure he does not try to be his own doctor.
Neither would he try to make his own shoes -- a shoemaker makes his shoes and a doctor probably takes care of his body.


Prettification Patrol
Let's say you're trying to peddle some fake flowers.
Do you call yourself a fake-flower peddler?
Of course not; you're a floral marketer, artificial-flower division.
Now you look at your product -- sometimes quite beautiful, petals made of silk or whatever -- and you ask yourself, "Why artificial?" That's a word that turns buyers off.
You brood about that, and come up with a fresh-as-a-daisy answer: you'll create a market for permanent flowers.
That not only lends longevity to your produce, but it also knocks the noxious weeds turned out in hothouses and pesticide-ridden, inorganic, fertilizer-driven gardens as temporary flowers.


Tribulation and Luck Lead to an Arts Center
AFTER a harrowing 18 months, in which the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts first found -- and then nearly lost -- its dream home, the supporters and staff of the 15-year-old nonprofit organization have begun the year on a jubilant note.
The final scene in what some described as an agonizing drama was recently played out in Boston at a Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation auction, where the center made a successful $775,000 bid for a sprawling four-story building on Route 117 here that was once home to a newspaper.
The purchase of the building will save the much-used center from an uncertain fate when the lease for its present site, a cramped former schoolhouse in Goldens Bridge, expires in June.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Leonard Lopate doesn't talk about Joey and Amy.
Which, he insists, is not to say that his brand of talk radio isn't "sexy." NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Seventeen years and nine Manhattan restaurants: building the Empire Szechuan empire.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 13  "Splendor of Penguins" in Coney Island; a night of doo-wop in Jamaica.
MOVIE CLOCK 14  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 16  Amsterdam Avenue and environs: mostly Mediterranean, with an aromatic touch of the Burmese.
SOAPBOX 17  In praise of the old Bowery, the biggest, ugliest, lowliest skid row in America.
Plus letters and Photographer's Journal.


Selina W. Peyser, David C. Lamb
Selina Wilma Peyser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Peyser Jr. of Vero Beach, Fla., and Monkton, Vt., was married yesterday to David Coleman Lamb, a son of Sheila Keating Lamb of Stonington, Conn., and Jerry C. Lamb of North Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
David Andrews performed the ceremony at Middlebury Congregational Church in Middlebury, Vt.
Mrs.
Lamb, 30, graduated from Williams College.
She is the president of Calypso Cowboy, a sportswear and home-furnishings store, and is general manager of Island Wash, a design and fabric-finishing consulting firm, both in Darien, Conn.
Her father retired as the managing partner of Hallgarten &amp; Company in New York, an investment banking concern in which the bride's grandfather the late Frederick M. Peyser was a senior partner.


Pilots at U.S. Air Base in Italy Ready to Fly Raids in Bosnia
Whatever anyone might say about possible Western air strikes over Bosnia, for or against, no one can say the troops are short on practice.
Each day for months, American F-16, A-10, F-18 fighters, French Mirage 2000's, British Tornadoes, Turkish F-16's and Dutch F-16's have variously roared, howled or lumbered off the long runways of Italian air bases or have been catapulted off aircraft carriers in the Adriatic, Bosnia-bound.


THE WORLD: The Missile Pact's Problem; Fear of Russia Is a Way of Life for Ukraine
FOR three centuries, almost without interruption, the Russians ruled much or all of Ukraine, often brutally.
They patronizingly called Ukrainians "little Russians."
So when a referendum was held in 1991 on whether Ukraine should be an independent nation, 90 percent of the 52 million people living there voted for freedom from Moscow, a status they thought would propel them out of the Russian sphere of influence and into the rest of Europe.
"A new country has appeared on the map of Europe," President Leonid Kravchuk declared.


The Gloves Are Off, Sleeves Rolled Up
ON a quiet suburban cul-de-sac, half a dozen women strode through the shell of an unfinished wood frame building, sawdust covering their jeans and sweatshirts.
A couple of them grabbed hammers and pounded nails into two-by-fours, while others picked up electric drills or stopped to hold a beam in place.
"It's a nice house, don't you think?" Andrea Kattas, who runs a computer business in East Northport, L.I., said.
"This is going to be the kitchen with a pantry and a skylight. Those are the three bedrooms," she added, pointing to the corners of the ranch-style home-in-progress.


A New Breed Of Strongman In the South
FROM the days of the conquistadors of the 16th century to the feudal caudillos of the 19th century to the generals and their juntas of this century, Latin America has had a long tradition of strongmen ruling the masses.
And now that all countries in the region except Cuba have ushered in democratic reform, the Latin American strongman hasn't vanished, he's evolved.


Jan. 9-15: Casualty at the Pentagon; An Unconventional Choice Retreats Under Heavy Fire
Conservatives branded him a threat to national security and to the lives of United States soldiers.
Liberals defended his integrity and patriotism and said he was a victim of cold war ideological battles.
But no one disputed that Morton H. Halperin was an unconventional choice for an unconventional job, a new Pentagon position for peacekeeping.
But when Mr.
Halperin, a former Pentagon official and director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union, withdrew his name last week for the job, he fell victim not only to resistance from conservative senators but to changes in President Clinton's foreign-policy team.


Unexampled Scrutiny of Clinton Will Echo Down the Years
To the Editor:
Your call for a special prosecutor to investigate President Clinton (editorial, Jan. 4) might be better received if you at least acknowledged that the rules are being changed.
No sitting President has ever been so steadily attacked for what he allegedly did before holding office.


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; World's Worst Currency?
The Yugoslavian dinar, issued in Belgrade (which is under United Nations sanctions for backing Serbian aggression), suffers from warp-speed inflation -- about 1 million percent per year at the end of 1993.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'PHOTOGRAPHY NOW'  For many decades photography was the stepchild of the arts, valued for its documentary properties but scorned as a pretender to the title of fine art.
Many of the photographers who leaped over that chasm and staked out the high ground are included in an exhibition opening today and running through March 31 at the Rye Arts Center.


The Art of Bad Girls
Works by 27 women (and 3 men) in an opening at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo, Jan. 13.


Parks Plan Aims at Poor Areas
An ambitious program to spend billions of dollars to preserve and expand New York City's parks and open spaces over the next 10 years is being proposed by a private coalition of conservationists.
The proposal, in a report prepared for the Parks Council and the Central Park Conservancy, comes as the new administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani faces a budget deficit of $2.3 billion in the next fiscal year.
But Henry J. Stern, Mr.
Giuliani's Parks Commissioner, said the plan was "delicious" even if its price tag was unappetizing.


Anthems Aweigh
To the Editor:
Harry Warren's musical accomplishments went beyond the more than 75 movie musicals and over 1,000 songs and piano solos published.
He also wrote a mass and two service songs, "The Song of the Marines" and "Don't Give Up the Ship." The latter is still sung by the choir at Annapolis.
MARIO RAPISARDA  Norwalk, Conn.


Music Conquers Time at Nursing Home
FOR most professional pianists, the attentive silence of a concert hall -- punctuated only by the occasional cough or rustle of a program -- is essential to the performance.
But the pianist Amiram Rigai seemed oblivious to the distractions around him early this month when he performed his first hourlong program, which included the "Pastorale" Sonata by Beethoven and the Polonaise in A by Chopin, at the Hebrew Home for the Aged here.


Sports of The Times; The Edge On Winning Edge Is Too Sharp
FOR those who follow figure skating only during an Olympic year, the brutal attack on Nancy Kerrigan and the events that have followed have exposed a wicked side to a supposedly genteel sport.
The incident may also signal the intensification of competition in a highly competitive society.
If the allegations prove true -- and if it turns out that there was a competitive motive for the attack on Kerrigan -- then it may be that the idea of obtaining the winning edge has taken on a brand new form.
It is an edge that already cuts through competitors in hot pursuit of a yard, a foot, an inch that pulls one closer to victory.


Building the Szechuan Empire
CHICKEN teriyaki pizza?
Relax, some people are already eating it, but out in one of the suburban satellites of the Empire Szechuan Gourmet restaurant, not in the founding emporium itself, where Misa Chang rules as ever with an entrepreneurial sixth sense of when the Upper West Side will be ready for whatever chopstick challenge should come next.
"It take time, so maybe next menu," Ms.
Chang explains, her eyes darting carefully across a small tabletop feast in the Empire Szechuan flagship restaurant at Broadway and 97th Street.
The tiny, hyperkinetic businesswoman scrutinizes the evening's gleaming array of dishes with the same managerial eye she applies to the nine Manhattan restaurants of the Empire Szechuan chain that she oversees in her long-running, ever-evolving partnership with Jimmy Shau.


What Happens to People When Temperature Plunges
From studies in Europe, where people shivered through bitter winters without central heating, from studies of soldiers exposed to the rawest elements and of volunteers immersed in cold water, and from animal studies that investigated the limits of cold tolerance, scientists have pieced together a coherent picture of what happens when people get very, very cold.
The body has two principal ways to keep warm when the weather is cold, experts said: by generating heat through normal biochemical reactions in the muscles and through insulation by fat.


An Appalling, Shocking Attack
To the Sports Editor:
As a fan of figure skating for many years, I am angry and appalled by the violent and senseless attack on Nancy Kerrigan.
I have long admired skating's athleticism and grace, a combination unique to this sport.
Unique too, are its devotees who await with appreciation and awe for each jump, spin and spiral.


Animal House
Last Saturday our chocolate Labrador, Ruggles, attended a birthday party for Quentin and Benya, a golden retriever and a black Lab mix, who are his best friends on the block.
As at any kids' party, there was too much food and too much excitement.
I had a revelation watching Quentin sprawled on the couch sucking a T-bone: Sure, it's true that pets -- especially dogs -- tend to take over the furniture, ruining it in the process.
But I say, let them.
The fact is, animals look better on furniture than people do.
For one, they have much better posture.
When Ruggles occupies an armchair, he takes possession with a poise stunning to behold.
Head high, ears at alert, a thick necklace of espresso-brown fur fanning around his neck, he's the very image of sleekness.
Even slouching, Ruggles manages to suggest a natural nobility that rarely occurs in people.
To see him staring out the window, jowls anchored on the arm of our (once) yellow armchair, is to understand meditative bliss.
I'd rather command visitors to stop putting drinks down on the table than force him off the Biedermeier sofa.
He looks as if he were designed with the same appreciation for exquisite grains that goes into antique woodwork.
Dogs often seem to have an uncanny instinctive attraction to settings that show them off at their best.
I know of at least one English sheepdog who has been mistaken for a pillow on a chintz couch.
Dalmatians are always at home on a black-and-white-checkered kitchen floor, and dachshunds seem to be made for slipper chairs.


The Executive Computer; On-Page, In-House Color Comes to the Corporate Fold
HOW many executives watch black-and-white television?
The answer says a lot about the inevitably of more color printing in the business world.
Of course, on-screen color is already the standard in computing, and its value to ease of use, productivity and clarity are unquestioned.
With on-page color, the issue is not so much whether executives want it.
Of course they do.
The question is, are they willing to pay a premium, either in extra cost or extra time, to have it?
In "Barriers to Color Adoption," a report prepared 13 months ago, Blackstone Research Associates, a consulting firm in Uxbridge, Mass., concluded that the main obstacles to color in the office were the inability of printers to make color printouts as easily and cheaply as they produce monochrome ones.


Dining at Macy's, Cocktails in SoHo
Benefits raise funds for cystic fibrosis, the Gay Games IV and Olympic athletes.


On Sunday; Facing Up To Firepower Of Bandits
AS he lies healing in a hospital bed, Louis McLendon is a wonder of ballistics: He has nine bullet holes in him from six slugs fired from three different weapons.
Pretty good shooting considering the blur of a target he presented in the Montego Bay clothing store in Jamaica, Queens, on New Year's Eve, when he suddenly, rather maniacally, stood up to a terrifying holdup gang of five young men brandishing a semiautomatic arsenal.


Not Totally Unrecognized
To the Editor:
Michael Feinstein's essay on Harry Warren, "Can't Get His Tunes out of Our Heads. But Who Was He?"  [ Dec. 26 ] , failed to mention that there is in existence today a theater named after the prolific songwriter.
The Harry Warren Theater is located at Bay 38th Street and Bath Avenue in Brooklyn.
A repertory company produces both serious plays and musicals there, many of them original productions.
FRAN KOCH  Brooklyn


Sports of The Times; L.T. Decides 'It's Time For Me to Go'
Behind him, a few fans were chanting, "L. T., L. T.," louder and louder.
On the sideline, standing tall in his white jersey with the blue 56 on it, Lawrence Taylor was watching the game wind down.
And his career.
When the Giants' 44-3 rout by the 49ers was official, this linebacker like no other hurried out on the field to find Referee Bernie Kukar.
"I wanted his flag," he would say later with a smile, meaning the official's yellow penalty hanky.
"He's thrown it against me enough."


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about plans to redesign the northeast corner of Central Park misstated the first name of the designer of a Duke Ellington statue to be placed at the park entrance.
He is Robert Graham, not Mark.


Battery Park City's Original Concept
To the Editor:
How ironic to read that the current administrators of Battery Park City are considering the introduction of subsidized housing units ("A New Neighborhood Along the Hudson," Dec. 26).


UNITY TO BE THEME OF TOWN MEETINGS
The Clinton Administration is planning to finance several nationally televised New England-style town meetings to explore the bonds that hold American society together.
Public forums using a variety of formats, topics and participants will be tested without television cameras in four or five cities sometime in the next several weeks, said Sheldon Hackney, the chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, which is directing the project.
Televised meetings would take place next winter.


The Old West
To the Editor: In Judith Anderson's Old West article, I was surprised not to see the One Book Bookstore listed under the sights in Bisbee.
The One Book Bookstore is maintained by Walter Swan, author of "Me and Henry," a history of himself and his brother and their lives in old Arizona, which he published himself and sells for $20.
Mr.
Swan, who has sold 25,000 copies of the book, is happy to meet with anyone stepping into his storefront shop at 30 Main Street.
He is not to be missed -- charming, full of stories of his life, and glad to autograph his book for purchasers.


Removal of Interior Walls Can Prove a Tricky Piece of Work
IF cabin fever has you yearning for open spaces, maybe it is time to consider enlarging a living area by removing a wall.
Planning is the key to success.
Call the building inspector to learn whether a permit is required.
Unless you are experienced or the job is very simple, it is usually best to have these systems relocated by professionals.
Also find out from the garbage carter about disposing the old material.
Building rubble generally has to be handled separately from ordinary trash.


Devils Fall Behind Early and Never Catch Up to Kings
The Devils allowed goals on the first four shots they faced, three of them put in behind the usually reliable Chris Terreri, and they never recovered, losing by 5-3 to the Los Angeles Kings tonight.
Seven goals came in the opening period, the only other score in the game being an empty-net goal by Wayne Gretzky with 3.5 seconds left in the third period.
There were 17 power plays, 10 by the Kings.


Time Expires on New Meters
One of the more pesky expenditures for the ever-strained Department of Transportation is the $1.25 million annually for parts to repair parking meters, damaged by age, reckless drivers, vandals and the elements.
So the department's hopes were high in August, when it began a test program, placing 19 new, vandal-resistant European-style meters in various parts of the city.
The test focused in particular on one crucial site -- a bustling commercial strip along Kings Highway, in Midwood -- to see how well the meters would work in crowded areas.


Arctic Chill Spreads Misery Throughout the Northeast
An Arctic air mass plunged the New York region and much of the East into a bone-warping deep freeze yesterday.
It kept millions indoors, caused one death in New York City, inflicted new miseries on the homeless and slowed travel, commerce and weekend life to a crawl.
Descending from Hudson Bay, the brutal cold covered a huge swath of North America -- all of Eastern Canada and half the United States in a vast triangle that reached from the Dakotas to Maine and south to Georgia.
It brought well-below-zero temperatures to the Midwest, where four deaths were blamed on the weather, left roads icy in many states and threatened citrus crops in Florida.


Meat-Filled Dishes Chase Away the Cold
WHEN the temperature starts falling below zero, it's time for hearty old-fashioned food that warms you up.
Sausages, stewed with mushrooms and red wine and served with a bowl of soft, creamy polenta is one of my favorite winter dishes.
Another is a simple boiled chicken, cooked with big chunky winter carrots and leeks that enrich the flavor of the meat.
At the end, the carrots are glazed in a reduction of the cooking stock, sprinkled with parsley and served, along with the other vegetables, around the chicken.


Taking Health Care To Patients at Home
IMAGINE getting a checkup after a coronary bypass, then visiting with a physical therapist to learn exercises that can strengthen your heart, then having a personal session with a nutritionist on how your diet can affect your recovery.
All without leaving your living room.


Photographers
To the Editor: As serious amateur photographers who have done quite a bit of traveling we feel compelled to respond to the letter from Elizabeth M. Sibbach (Nov. 7), who said photographers interfered with travelers' views of places visited.
We also realize that there is a problem.
But the problem is for the photographer, not for the person not interested in the hobby.


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; How Many Screenwriters Does It Take . . . ?
Credits for "The Flintstones," coming in May from Universal: "Story by Michael Wilson. Screenplay by Brian Levant and Al Aidekman and Cindy Begel and Lloyd Garver and David Silverman and Stephen Sustarsic and Nancy Steen and Neil Thompson." Maybe.
Variety says 35 writers were in on the epic.


Kimberly Ashwell, Evan R. Wilkoff
Kimberly Ann Ashwell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Ashwell of Herndon, Va., was married last evening to Evan Roy Wilkoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald J. Wilkoff of Merrick, L.I.
Cantor David Shneyer performed the ceremony at the Airlie House in Warrenton, Va.
Mr. and Mrs.
Wilkoff, both 26, graduated from the University of Virginia, from which the bride also received a master's degree in education.
She teaches geography at Swanson Middle School in Arlington, Va.


New Haven Symphony Celebrates 100th Birthday
THE orchestral season roars back to life this week, with performances in Hartford, New Haven, Stamford and, if one likes, Carnegie Hall in Manhattan.
The Carnegie Hall concert is just one of many highlights in this 100th anniversary season of the New Haven Symphony, the orchestra and its music director, Michael Palmer, performing at 8 P.M. on Friday.
Previews of the New York performance will be offered on Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M. in Woolsey Hall.
Berlioz's overture to the opera "Benvenuto Cellini" begins the evening, "Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks" by Strauss ends it, while in between listeners will hear the premiere of Ezra Laderman's Symphony No. 8, commissioned especially for the centennial celebrations, and Mozart's Clarinet Concerto, with Richard Stoltzman the guest soloist.
For tickets or other information, call 776-1444.


Edith Wharton? Meet Irene Worth, a Real Fan
"I certainly don't take on her character," Irene Worth said of the protagonist of her solo work, "Irene Worth's Portrait of Edith Wharton." "How could I ever presume to? No, I evoke her through the words."
Speaking in the precise Anglo- accented diction of an American who lived in England for 34 years, Ms.
Worth was describing the theater piece she adapted from Wharton's letters, diaries, novels and autobiography.
In previews, it opens Thursday at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; Seriously, No Parking
Attention, Mayor Giuliani: a new pollution program in Southern California offers a solution to New York City's parking, traffic and automobile pollution problems.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District is issuing smog credits, which companies can buy, sell and trade.
Each year the number of credits will be reduced.
Presumably, the free-market nature of the plan will allow companies to plot their own courses of action and timetables.
The new Mayor likes to talk of privatization.
Here's his chance to show he has the nerve and the imagination to use market mechanisms where they could really work.
The California program does not include individuals and their automobiles.
New York's could.
Here's the plan:


Technology; Virginia's Electronic Village
WHILE others toil on and talk about national information superhighways, an unusual town-and-gown alliance is paving an electronic country lane here.
The Blacksburg Electronic Village, now in the early stages, is intended to tie many of the 35,000 residents of this university town in the foothills of the Blue Ridge mountains to each other and to the world at large by means of a computer network.
Just how many electronic villagers actually sign on will become clearer as the project unfolds.
Forget about visions of full-motion video and summoning "Gone With the Wind" on a whim.
This bookish system will deal only in text.
But it will let users send electronic mail worldwide via the Internet and give them access to thousands of bulletin boards.
And through use of specialized software called Gopher, Blacksburg's electronic villagers will be able to hunt for books, documents and software scattered on thousands of computers at universities and government agencies.


Secret Sublets In Co-ops
A TICKLISH issue in the continuing debate over sublets in New York City co-ops is what to do about unauthorized subtenants -- renters smuggled in without board approval -- once they're discovered.
"It's tough to monitor," said Raymond Cohen, a vice president with Raskin Matza &amp; Cohen, managing agents handling some 45 buildings, most of them in Manhattan.
"And it's tough to cure."


I.R.A. Wing Leader Reapplies for U.S. Visa
Two months after President Clinton refused to approve a visa for Gerry Adams, the head of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, Mr.
Adams has renewed his application for permission to visit the United States.
In November, Mr.
Clinton said Mr.
Adams was being barred under laws that rule out visas for terrorists.


Ms. Hertzberg And Mr. Jurow
Barbara Serena Hertzberg, a psychotherapist in New York, was married yesterday evening to George Laurence Jurow, a judge of the Family Court in Manhattan.
Judge Judith B. Sheindlin of the Family Court performed the ceremony at the National Arts Club in New York.
Mrs.
Jurow graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and the New York School for Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is the daughter of Milton and Rhoda Hertzberg of Delray Beach, Fla., the owners of Reggie's clothing stores for women in Maine and Florida.


Ship Leaves Bronx for Somalia
A 565-foot freighter from the State University of New York Maritime College has been reactivated by the Navy and is heading for Somalia this week to assist in the withdrawal of American troops.
The vessel, the Empire State, left Fort Schuyler on Wednesday evening, chugging through the frigid waters of the East River with an eager crew of 12 instructors and other officials from the college.


The Romance in Local Beach Landscapes
"PEOPLE think of Long Island as the expressway and fast food," Carol Fonde, a photographer, said in an interview in her apartment in Manhattan.
An exhibition of her photographs at the Inter-Media Art Center in Huntington through March 5 presents a different view.
Her images depict a feast for the eye, where the only honking sound comes from wild geese.
Through her lens Long Island is an unspoiled natural paradise where the light itself seems gilded.


City's School Takeover Set Up Overcrowding
To the Editor:
On Dec. 26, The City reported the recycling of two public-school buildings ("Resurrecting Old School as Art Center" and "A Rare Warm Welcome for an AIDS Project").
While no one can quarrel with the benefits of the new projects, the articles mentioned no detrimental impact on the city, and there surely is one.


Q and A
To Russia From Japan
Q.
I would like to go to the Russian Far East by way of Japan.
Do any ferries operate between Hokkaido and Khabarovsk or Vladivostok?
Or is there some other way of getting to this area of Russia from Japan? -- Marjorie Scilken-Friedman, Washington


Rival Afghan Factions Turn to Air Strikes as Fighting Intensifies


The Whitewater Case: Finding the Connections
On Wednesday, President Clinton asked Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special counsel to review his role as an investor in Whitewater Development Company, an Arkansas real estate development company, and Whitewater's links to a failed savings and loan, Madison Guaranty.
Mr.
Clinton has maintained that he and his wife did nothing except lose almost $70,000 in real estate venture; nothing that is known publicly about the investment indicates that the Clintons or anyone else in the Administration did anything illegal.


Along Amsterdam And Off the Park
BACI


THE NATION: Curbing the Urge to Give; Where the Beggars Meet the Begged
LAST week, posters appeared in New York City subway cars as part of a campaign to discourage riders from giving to panhandlers: "Uh, oh," thinks the straphanger in the ad.
"Come on, not me. Oh pleeeeze don't come and stand in front of me asking for money. . . . Look, I feel bad. I really do. But hey, it's my money. And how do I know what you'll spend it on anyway? I don't. Sorry, no money from me."
As in cities across the country, where a variety of anti-vagrancy laws have recently been passed or enforced with new vigor, New York transit officials are getting tough with subway panhandlers, threatening to jail the most aggressive beggars and asking riders, whose complaints provoked the crackdown, to do their part by refusing to hand over spare change.


Aspin May Stay At the Pentagon As a Consultant
The departing Defense Secretary, Les Aspin, may be staying on the Pentagon payroll after all.
Mr.
Aspin has told his designated successor, Bobby Ray Inman, that he would like to serve on a high-level Pentagon commission that will study how to reduce duplication in the roles and missions of the armed forces, perhaps even as the panel's chairman.
Congress created the panel when it approved the military budget last year.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CONEY ISLAND  Aquarium Invites Children To Meet the White-Tie Set
Penguins cannot fly because they have solid -- not hollow -- bones in their wings.
Their swimming speed, aided by flapping wings, is about 15 miles an hour, but they can go twice as fast if they're frightened.
These are among the nuggets to be found at "Splendor of Penguins," a celebration of the Sea Cliffs habitat at the Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation, which will include talks, printed material and entertainment.
The first 100 children who arrive today and tomorrow will receive a free Aquarium penguin sweatshirt.
Sea Cliffs, which houses walruses, sea otters and seals (fur, gray and harbor) along with a colony of about 40 black-footed penguins, opened last year.
It increased the size of the Aquarium, a branch of the New York Zoological Society, by 40 percent and cost $22 million.
The Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation; 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. today and tomorrow; $6.75 for adults, $2 for children and the elderly, free for children under 2; (718) 265-FISH.
UPPER EAST SIDE  African Novelists Discuss Their Work and World
Chinua Achebe (pictured below), a Nigerian novelist whose most recent book is "Anthills of the Savannah" (Anchor/Doubleday), will be interviewed on stage at the 92d Street Y. After the interview, he and Maryse Conde, a novelist who has written extensively about the independence struggles of African states, will read from their works.
The event is the third in a series of writers-at-work interviews sponsored by the Unterberg Poetry Center at the Y and the Paris Review.
The interviewer will be Jerome Brooks, a professor of English at City College and a writer on African and African-American literature.
Other guests to take part in the series are Tracy Kidder, Diane Ackerman and Stephen Dobyns.
92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; tomorrow, 6 P.M. interview, 8:30 readings; $8 for each event, with student discounts; (212) 415-5760.
SOUTH BRONX  Food and Water, Country and City
"Food and Water," an exhibition by five artists who use images varying from fruit to empty bottles, has opened at the Longwood Arts Gallery.
"The emphasis of the show is to look at the way food and water are used within the context of a landscape, or in a city environment," said Betti-Sue Hertz, the show's curator, "and to see how they change their function as they shift from the rural environment to the place where we see it, in the city."
The artists are Noah Baen, Sung Ho Choi, Christy Rupp, Fritz St.
Jean and Nereyda Garcia-Ferraz (pictured below, his 1992 oil "Jungla Navegante," or "Floating Jungle").
Longwood Arts Gallery (formerly P.S. 39), 965 Longwood Avenue; noon to 5 P.M.
Thursdays and Fridays; noon to 4 P.M.
Saturdays; through Feb. 26; (718) 931-9500.
JAMAICA  Night of Doo-Wop Recalls Rock's Own Cool Youth
Courage -- five teen-age a cappella singers from the La Guardia High School of Music and the Arts -- will perform at Junior High School 8 on Tuesday.
Ken (Spider) Webb, a KISS-FM deejay, will also be on stage to answer questions from the audience about the music business.
The singers say they chose their group's name because of the courage required to do five-part harmony in a world obsessed by hip-hop.
They specialize in doo-wop but also perform rhythm-and-blues and pop as well as their own songs.
While Courage has performed at the Apollo, its members are looking forward to a show at a junior high school.
"To me, it means giving something back to the community," said Danny Nieves, who at 19 is the group's oldest member.
"We all grew up in rough neighborhoods, so it's like giving back."
The program is part of a series of events for families sponsored by the Jamaica Arts Center.
Future events in the series include workshops on how to make musical instruments out of gourds, a traditional African and Latin craft.
Another performance by Courage will take place on Jan. 25 at Public School 15 in Red Hook.
Junior High School 8, 108-35 167th Street; 7 P.M.
Wednesday; free; (718) 658-7400.
NINA REYES


NEW ONTARIO LAW BOLSTERS STRIKERS
The scrap wood burning in a rusty oil drum warmed the hands of Anna Sarra during a break from the picket line.
The temperature was below zero, and there was a chill wind as she huddled around the crackling fire with other members of Local 175 of the United Food and Commercial Workers Union at a shopping mall in northwest Toronto.
The 38-year-old cashier, who had been earning an hourly wage equivalent to $12.40 in American currency, is one of 6,500 Miracle Food Mart workers who walked out last Nov. 18 after management in Montvale, N.J., said it wanted to close stores, lay off hundreds of workers and slash wages.


The Oilers Have the Form but Montana Has the Formula
When Houston Oiler fans show up for the boxing match today, hopefully a football game will break out.
When last seen on national television, Buddy Ryan, the Oilers' defensive coordinator, threw a right cross at Kevin Gilbride, their offensive coordinator, and the only reason there's a truce is Joe Montana.
The Oilers need all the unity they can get to subdue the Kansas City quarterback in this American Football Conference playoff game.


'Most Expensive' School District
"Most Expensive District," the Dec. 12 article about the Union County Regional High School District, has some omissions and misstatements.
Declining enrollment: This was never cited as a reason for closing Brearley High School.
Enrollments at Brearley, the Union County Regional High School District, Union County and New Jersey are increasing and have been since 1988.


After a 15-Year Run, the Old Mustang Yields to a Fresh Colt
MADONNA was jogging when she spotted the car, so she stopped by.
Larry Hagman, breakfasting instead of acting, also noticed, and he came out for a look.
And Ross Roberts was there at Tavern on the Green in Central Park, too, although that was less surprising.
Roberts is the head of Ford Division, and he was trotting out the company's new Mustang, an important replacement for the long-of-tooth car whose previous incarnation hadn't really changed since it first appeared as a 1979 model.


At 70, an Enfant Terrible As Elder . . . Statesman?
AS STATESMEN, THE ELDERS OF American composition have proved an uneven lot in recent decades, often showing little care for social grace and tact.
Although William Schuman was a suave administrator and diplomat, and Aaron Copland projected a sweet public persona, Virgil Thomson, Leonard Bernstein and John Cage could be brash and unruly.
And David Diamond remains as waspish as Elliott Carter and Milton Babbitt are amiable.
Now Ned Rorem, the once and future enfant terrible of American music, has turned 70.
He does not act it, and certainly does not look it, his ruddy, boyish face still uncreased.
Nor, he insists, does he see himself as a grand old man.
But he has mellowed with age.
He gently boasts that after decades of flaunted philandering and conspicuous indulgence, he has lived monogamously with James Holmes, an organist and choir director in New York, for 27 years; that he has not touched cigarettes or alcohol for 23 years; that he never uses "naughty words" (well, hardly ever).


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MATHEMATICS  THE WORLD'S MOST FAMOUS MATH PROBLEM  The Proof of Fermat's Last Theorem and Other Mathematical Mysteries.
By Marilyn vos Savant.
St.
Martin's, paper, $7.95.


Administration Hoping to Lift Vietnam Embargo
The Clinton Administration has reached a consensus about lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam, but has taken steps to reduce the political backlash expected from veterans groups.
These steps include meeting with veterans groups, starting talks with Hanoi about its human rights performance and sending an admiral to assess progress in learning about Americans missing in Vietnam.


Schools Do Injustice To Ulysses S. Grant
To the Editor:
I agree with "Dishonor for a Hero President" (editorial, Jan. 2), which urges care for Ulysses S. Grant's tomb on Riverside Drive.
The monument's condition disgraces Grant's memory and New York City.


Skating Rink Hopes to Draw New Players
The opening of a new regulation-size rink overlooking the Hudson in Riverbank State Park has raised hopes of ice-hockey fever in untraditional territory.
The rink, only the second full-size one in Manhattan, is already attracting new and established leagues from private schools, with teen-age players from the Upper West Side and Upper East Side.
And next week, Ice Hockey in Harlem, a private group that began at Lasker Rink in Central Park seven years ago, is scheduled to begin playing at the new rink.


A Fresco Medley and a Preoccupation With Color
VIEWERS interested in a fresco revival should drop everything and hasten to the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, on Staten Island, for the last day of "Fresco: A Contemporary Perspective." This is one of two shows under review; the other is a solo by Larry Zox at the CS Schulte Galleries in Millburn.
The fresco medley has an appropriate setting in the cultural center's Newhouse Galleries.
For it was in the arly 1830's, when Snug Harbor opened its doors as a rest home for seamen, that American fresco got its start -- thanks largely to the Italian artists then arriving in the country.


A New World, a New Look at Clinton
As President Clinton left Moscow today, reaction to his visit seemed to divide roughly into two camps.
One group tried to weigh the visit in the categories of old, seeking to revive an era when Soviet-American summit meetings reverberated through the world, moving markets and easing fears.
They debated what was the most important result, the tripartite arms agreement with Ukraine, the agreement to buy Russian uranium or the promise to aim nuclear missiles away from one another.


'Romance Boutique' Opposed
Residents of West 80th Street were surprised recently by a cardboard sign on the door of a basement shop at 212: "Coming in February -- Naughty 'n' Nice Romance Boutique for Adults."
Many area residents -- some with small children, others concerned about property values -- have joined a growing cadre of New Yorkers angry about pornographic businesses moving into their neighborhoods.


From Soaring to Swinging Away As a Superstar Looks to Spring
Michael Jordan, man with the self-proclaimed "competition problem," can't be happy that Nolan Ryan had the nerve to retire.
"Bring me your heat," Jordan would've told Ryan, digging into the batter's box.
"Right in my wheelhouse."


Where to Go for Help With Nynex: the President
To the Editor:
I have some advice for Robert Lipsyte after reading his columns about his troubles with Nynex (Jan. 2 and 9).
He should have followed the first rule of reporting and checked the phone book.
On page 1, under "Unresolved Complaints," he would have found a listing for the "President's Help Line" (Nynex's, not the United States').


The Hips vs. the Head
AS A GENRE, HIP-HOP IS equally obsessed with social criticism and rhythmic grooves.
But few rap artists can combine music for the hips with music for the head.
Public Enemy regularly did: many of its songs sound like a lesson from Malcolm X set to a funky beat.
Similarly, KRS-One calls himself an "edutainer" because he blends education and entertainment.
But Public Enemy and KRS-One are masters of the form.
On new albums, Queen Latifah and the female trio Salt-n-Pepa illustrate the difficulty of making music that is powerful in the clubs and the classrooms.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LITERARY FABLE  THE GLASS MOUNTAIN  By Leonard Wolf. Overlook, $19.95.


Fire Investigators Seek Men Who Fled Gay Club
Investigators, still trying to determine the cause of a fire that killed one man and destroyed a gay men's club in Flushing, have focused on tracking down patrons who fled the scene in an afternoon of confusion and panic.
So far, fire investigators have interviewed about six people who were inside the Northern Men's Sauna and Health Club at 33-65 Farrington Street when the fire erupted on Jan. 2.


In America; Mr. Mayor/Mr. Tough Guy
All last week came the vivid profusion of images.
Emotionally charged, even supercharged, they tumbled about, sometimes converging, sometimes conflicting, until it was difficult to pull a coherent message from the whole, or even to know whether to be hopeful or despairing.
New York is trying to adjust to the Rudolph Giuliani era. It's not easy.


Giuliani Backer Reports Possible Threats
Two bullet holes and a handwritten note were found Friday morning at a housing project in Harlem that is named after a supporter of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in Harlem, the police said.
Investigators were trying yesterday to determine whether there was a connection between the note and the bullet holes, said Mr.
Giuliani's spokeswoman, Cristyne F. Lategano.


From Jarvi, Billions and Billions of Records and Still Counting
Publicists for the volcanically prolific Neeme Jarvi might consider setting up a running digital tally of his recordings, next to those billboards showing how much money MCI saves and the Federal deficit squanders.
The Estonian-born conductor's projects are piling up in stupendous numbers; just in the last month or two, he has produced a five-disk set of Stravinsky orchestral works, the complete symphonies of Nielsen and new installments in symphonic cycles of Mahler and Shostakovich.
Before the millennium is out, he will probably be the most recorded conductor in history.
Mr.
Jarvi's reputation does not rest merely on the volume of his work.
He is, first of all, a marvelous musician who draws committed playing from a wide array of orchestras.
He also demonstrates a tireless and discriminating commitment to unknown and underrated music.
He championed his Soviet colleagues Arvo Part and Alfred Schnittke long before they became fashionable (and ceased to be Soviet).
One of his current enthusiasms is the early-20th-century Danish composer Rued Langgaard, whose Symphony No. 6 he will conduct with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday.


Two Nature Tours To Madagascar
Accommodations and other tourist facilities remain at a bare minimum on Madagascar, but next spring, its unspoiled environment will draw an increasing number of nature tours.
Cortez Travel in San Diego is offering "Madagascar Discovery," from March 25 to April 11.
The tour takes groups from the capital, Antananarivo, through the upland rain forest region around Ranomafana National Park, the "spiny forest" on the east coast and the offshore island Nosy Komba, home of the black lemur.
Rates vary according to the number of people in the group.
The cost is $4,645 a person, double occupancy, for four people; if there are 16, the maximum size of the group, the rate will be $3,960 a person.
Included are international and domestic airfare, meals, lodging in hotels, entrance fees to parks and an English-speaking escort.
Information: (800) 854-1029 or, in San Diego, (619) 755-5136.


Surely, Poetry Can Be Fun
The attempt at clever analogy in the "Long Island Journal"  [ "Friendly Poetry Slams," Jan. 2 ]  would have been more apt if, instead of wondering how Longfellow would have liked being compared to Jackie Mason, the writer had chosen to contrast William Shakespeare and Neil Simon.
After all, Longfellow and Mason lack comparability in form and content, whereas Shakespeare and Simon often share distinctly similar esthetic concerns, theatricality, wittiness, social commentary and effectiveness of action-dialogue.


Bookshelf
FESTIVAL IN MY HEART: Poems by Japanese Children.
Selected and translated by Bruno Navasky.
Abrams. $29.95. (Ages 5 and up) This enchanting collection of poems by schoolchildren, originally published in a Japanese newspaper, has been thoughtfully illustrated with familiar and unfamiliar Japanese art, including paintings, sculpture and folded paper.
BE SEATED: A Book About Chairs.
By James Cross Giblin.
HarperCollins. $15. (Ages 8 to 12) A multicultural, historically sophisticated, well-written and aptly illustrated discussion of the things we sit in and on.
Properly provocative.


'A Place at the Table'
The automatic winner of the "Stupid Jew" contest would have to be Rudin himself.
He doesn't know where his own father works, indeed.
STAN BLEIMAN Huntington, L.I.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Wednesday
Trade deficit, Nov., billions
$10.5
$10.8
Thursday
Housing starts, Dec., millions, ann. rate
1.43
1.43
Housing permits, Dec., millions, ann. rate
1.37
1.36
Jobless claims, weekly, thousands
354
335
Monday
Martin Luther King Day; government offices closed
This Week's Developments
Wednesday
Treasury to detail two- and five-year note auctions
Thursday
Philadelphia Fed business outlook survey
Bundesbank Council meeting


All Controversy Aside, Owls Come Up Winners
The tipoff happened on time and the coaches did not walk off the court.
On the birthday of Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., two black coaches, one of them leading a top-25 team, matched up as scheduled.
But the players were flat and intensity was absent as Temple, ranked No. 13 by The Associated Press, defeated Rhode Island, 69-49, today in Keaney Gym.


Grants Support Outreach Programs
Thank you for publishing the article about outreach and prenatal care on Jan. 2 ("Taking Prenatal Care to Those in Need").
For our hard-working staff, this coverage was like starting out the new year with a round of applause.
We would like to add the following three points to the article: 1. the Maternal/Child Health Division, comprised of four different programs, is funded primarily through grants and contracts; 2. the State Department of Social Services funds large portions of the Maternal and Newborn Outreach and Support and the Healthy Start (Medicaid liaison and case management) programs; and 3. outreach workers meet with the field supervisor Snow Turner for daily supervision.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  CHINA PLEDGES RIGHTS EFFORT  China's President told an American Congressional delegation that he will make an effort in the coming months to satisfy President Clinton's concerns about human rights. 1  CLINTON MOVES TO NEXT ISSUE  President Clinton shifted his focus from Russia to the Middle East as he flew to Geneva.
He stopped in Belarus, where he became embroiled in a local dispute. 1


BEST SELLERS: January 16, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
75
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
1
11
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
3
3
14
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
5
44
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
5
4
21
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
6
6
40
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
10
6
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
8
7
16
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
9
8
5
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
10
9
10
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
11
11
13
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
12
15
7
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
13
6
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
14
16
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
15
4
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
7
4
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
2
2
13
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
1
9
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) Comments on the state of the nation.
4
9
36
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
5
4
21
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
6
3
19
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals.
7
5
15
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
8
8
7
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
6
6
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs.
10
12
75
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
11
13
15
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
12
10
15
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
13
1
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
14
15
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Inspirational essays.
15
1
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the prism of his favorite sport.
16*
1
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
25
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
12
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
3
4
34
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
2
9
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interst) ALLIGATOR DANCE: Stories, by Janet Peery. (Southern Methodist University, cloth, $22.50; paper, $10.95.) Short stories that offer insight into how people assess and change their lives, written with rigorous attention to what makes people decide to act, or not act, in any ordinary moment.
A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr.
Gaddis's fourth novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation, in fantastic combination and obsessive detail.
MAKE ME WORK, by Ralph Lombreglia. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Short stories that fizz with humor and hipness explore the lives of happy underachievers and the women patiently waiting for them to grow up.
MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B.
Breslin. (University of Chicago, $39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English, is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.
PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly realized world of 1960's Dublin.
THE PARTISAN, by Benjamin Cheever. (Atheneum, $21.) Families are made, not born, in Mr.
Cheever's funny, sad second novel, whose college-boyish hero is pervasively and fortuitously intruded upon by a preposterously handsome and sophisticated writer.
THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS, by Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $20.) The class in question is the black middle class, and Mr.
Cose's account leaves little doubt that they are daily humiliated by white people, and don't like it a bit.
SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.
VERDI: A Biography, by Mary Jane Phillips-Matz. (Oxford University, $45.) This portrait of the composer, an important account that alters accepted understanding on matters large and small, portrays him as a brutal and self-indulgent man with a remarkable capacity for lust, love, anger and compassion.
W.E.B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (which lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.
WRINKLES IN TIME, by George Smoot and Keay Davidson. (Morrow, $25.) An astrophysicist (Mr. Smoot) and a science writer relate an adventure yarn (exciting outdoor experiments go blooey) that is also an entree to modern cosmology, the science of where everything came from.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BIOLOGY  FROM THE MIND  INTO THE BODY  The Cultural Origins  of Psychosomatic Symptoms.
By Edward Shorter.
Free Press, $22.95.


Aimee Telsey, Richard Friesner
Dr.
Aimee Manette Telsey, a neonatologist at Beth Israel Medical Center, was married last evening to Dr.
Richard Adam Friesner, a professor of chemistry at Columbia University.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Mayer Perlmutter performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride received undergraduate and medical degrees from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Jacqueline Messite Telsey of New York and the late Dr.
Daubert Telsey.
The bride's mother is the executive director of public health at the New York Academy of Medicine in Manhattan.
Her father was an orthodontist in Rego Park, Queens, and a professor of orthodontics at New York University.


Radio Energy Helps in Heart Rhythms
AFTER Ty White collapsed on a basketball court in Brooklyn last year he was taken to Brookdale Hospital, where his heart was "shocked" to save his life.
Mr.
White, 20, who had had pediatric surgery to correct a congenital heart defect, was given a diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia, a rhythm disturbance caused by scar tissue from earlier surgery.
Last year Mr.
White became one of the first patients at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset to be treated for such a life-threatening arrhythmia with a procedure known as radiofrequency catheter ablation.


Schoenberg, Alive (Gasp!) And Well
JUST WHEN YOU THOUGHT MUSICAL modernism was dead, the first issue of Classical Pulse magazine announces that the second-best-selling vocal CD at the Tower Records store near Lincoln Center is Schoenberg's "Erwartung," sung by Jessye Norman, with James Levine conducting the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra on Philips.
Yes, "Erwartung": 32 minutes of atonal hysteria without a backbeat, electronic keyboards or mystical mantras.
Is the angst of Expressionism ready to return, sweeping away Minimalist cool in its Eastern and Western guises?
Perhaps, but I suspect that the sales success of Schoenberg's nightmare monodrama shows something else: that the long-term viability of musical works has nothing to do with intellectual fashions or fleeting marketing strategies.
On college campuses 25 years ago, Schoenberg was the hero of 20th-century music, and "Erwartung" was considered his masterpiece.
Here was a work that threw out all the machinery of 19th-century music: no tonality, no themes, no tunes, no repetition and, perhaps most important, no pandering to the public.
"Today the only works which really count are those which are no longer works at all," wrote the philosopher Theodor Adorno in 1948.
"Erwartung" summed up every radical tendency of the century, including contempt for the very category of masterpiece.
The fact that the public hated it only increased its intellectual cachet at the time.


As He Laid Down His Pen
To the Editor:
In his review of the two volumes of Henry James's "Collected Travel Writings" (Dec. 12), William F. Buckley Jr. says that in reading these volumes "you come upon constructions so periphrastic as to approach caricature"; and he then proceeds to quote what he must regard as an illustrative sentence by James, interpolating a small comment of his own:


Lesley A. Kelman, David J. Koeppel
Lesley Ann Kelman, a daughter of Joan Bernstein of Jericho, L.I., and Dr.
Charles Kelman of New York, was married last evening to David Joseph Koeppel, a son of Ruth and Alfred Koeppel of New York.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson performed the ceremony at the Plaza in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Koeppel, 28, is also a stepdaughter of Ann Kelman of New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is a medical social worker at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
Her father, an ophthalmologist in New York, pioneered an ultrasound technique for removing cataracts.
Her mother is a counselor advocate with the Nassau County Coalition Against Domestic Violence, in East Meadow, L.I.


What Pupils Can Learn In the Supermarket
According to Suzanne L. Karlin  [ "Education in a Store, Museum or Library?" Nov. 21 ] , children's precious time was wasted when some of Bellmore's fourth, fifth and sixth graders went to a local supermarket.
Permit me to recount a supermarket experience of the fourth-grade students at Gardiners Avenue School in Levittown.


Venezuela's Sky-High Falls
WHEN a stranger offered Jimmy Angel $5,000 to fly him to an uncharted mountaintop in southern Venezuela, the Missouri-born bush pilot jumped at the chance.
It was 1935 and Angel, down on his luck, promptly ferried his mysterious passenger to one of 100 table mountains that rise abruptly from Venezuela's forest floor.
After a bumpy landing in his Flamingo monoplane, pilot and passenger set up camp by a stream on the mesa.
In three days, they panned 75 pounds of gold.
Returning to Caracas, Mr.
Angel lost contact with his passenger, an elderly engineer.
Trying to return, but without his treasure guide, the American pilot fruitlessly scoured the 200,000-square-mile wilderness for the golden stream.
One day he crash landed in a bog on top of an 8,000-foot high mesa, Auyan Tepui.
Two weeks later the exhausted adventurer emerged on foot, bearing with him knowledge of a secret the local Pemon Indians had guarded for centuries: Churun-Meru, the highest waterfall in the world.


Removal of Interior Walls Can Prove a Tricky Piece of Work
IF cabin fever has you yearning for open spaces, maybe it is time to consider enlarging a living area by removing a wall.
Planning is the key to success.
Call the building inspector to learn whether a permit is required.
Unless you are experienced or the job is very simple, it is usually best to have these systems relocated by professionals.
Also find out from the garbage carter about disposing the old material.
Building rubble generally has to be handled separately from ordinary trash.


Officer Kills Himself At His Bronx Home
A police officer shot and killed himself in the Bronx early this morning, the first officer to commit suicide this year, the police said.
The officer, Joseph Cibarelli, 27, killed himself at his home in the Morris Park section at about 12:20 A.M. today, said Det.
Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.
He had worked in the 46th precinct and joined the New York City Police Department in June 1992.


Washington Events Mark Black History
Contributions made by African-Americans to the history and culture of the United States are acknowledged during February, which has been designated Black History Month.
Among the many cities observing Black History Month, Washington is offering a particularly diverse array of exhibitions, plays and other events.
The Frederick Douglass National Historic Site, 1411 W Street, S.E., will honor the 19th-century orator and abolitionist with a birthday celebration on Feb. 14 at 10 A.M.
The tribute is free and will include guest speakers, school choirs and laying of wreaths.
Information: (202) 426-5961.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
REVIVING ALLEN'S FILMS
Four of Woody Allen's films are to be shown at the public library in Stratford this week, billed as "Unsung Woody Week." The films were, in the estimation of the library staff, overlooked or misjudged for one reason or another.


Cousin Bobby May Kiss, but He Doesn't Tell
In his career as an Episcopal priest, the Rev.
Robert Castle has hurled himself eagerly into the fray -- whether befriending and supporting Black Panthers in Jersey City, demonstrating against the Vietnam War in Washington or agitating for social justice in Harlem.
His defiant refusal to compromise his beliefs has earned the outspoken 64-year-old cleric both accolades and arrests.
"At my age," he said, in the cluttered rectory of his Harlem church, "I don't have any hesitation about anything anymore."
Well, there was the matter of kissing Joanne Woodward.


IN SHORT: FICTION
A DAUGHTER'S SEARCH HARVESTING THE HEART By Jodi Picoult. Viking, $23.


Wall Street; Money Managers Who Cross the Line
Trading activity in the personal portfolios of money managers has been put under a microscope in the week-and-a-half since the Invesco Mutual Funds Group of Denver fired John Kaweske, one of its star money managers.
Invesco said Mr.
Kaweske violated company policy regarding the reporting of his personal trades.


A Bobsled From Oxford Goes to Olympics
IT has been nearly 40 years since the United States won a medal in bobsledding competition at the Winter Olympics.
But the 1994 games next month in Lillehammer, Norway, may provide the big breakthrough for American athletes.
The United States will be racing in a new high-tech made-in-Connecticut bobsled.
A small industrial park in the Naugatuck Valley would seem an unlikely place to spawn such a sophisticated sled.
Yet it is at Chassis Dynamics in Oxford on the Southford town line that Robert Cuneo and Robert Vallancourt have designed and built the first American-made bobsled to compete since 1956, the last year the United States won an Olympic medal, albeit a bronze, in Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy.
Leftovers From Competitors
The impetus for the American endeavor came from a stock-car racer, Geoff Bodine, the 1986 Daytona 500 winner, who provided the initial financing and organized the effort.
He turned to Chassis Dynamics, which had in the past supplied race cars for him and for Paul Newman as well.
"I knew they could do it," he said.


GRAVE IN MEXICO YIELDS 5 BODIES
With Mexican and international rights groups investigating complaints of executions, kidnappings and other abuses in the uprising in Chiapas state, officials today uncovered at least five bodies in a grave in Ocosingo that may hold as many as 20 victims of the fighting.
A group overseen by the National Commission of Human Rights began digging this morning at the grave, just inside the entrance to the municipal cemetery.


Alison Pataky And Kevin Lee
Dr.
Alison Pataky, a daughter of Ruth A. Pataky of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Milton Pataky, was married yesterday to Dr.
Kevin Lee, a son of Richard and Joyce Lee of Lapeer, Mich.
The Rev.
Reed Schorer officated at the Lord of Light Lutheran Church in Ann Arbor, Mich.
The bride was until recently the director of the anesthesia pain management center at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I., and an assistant professor of clinical anesthesiology at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She graduated summa cum laude from City College and received her medical degree from the State University at Buffalo.


The Tales a Table Could Tell
ON A TUESDAY EVENING in January 1991, Sotheby's threw a cocktail party to inaugurate the largest auction of the year in American antiques.
Two hundred people gathered in the second-floor exhibition rooms to drink white wine, nibble on canapes and pass among the antiques that competed for their attention.
Furniture was arrayed on the carpeted floors, paintings and quilts hung together on the carpeted walls, porcelain plates and silver teapots rested on shelves inside lighted glass cases.
The most prominent object on display that evening was a card table, which stood on a platform in Sotheby's main exhibition room.
The top of this table had been folded over so that it could fit snugly against a wall, and a note that rested on the dark, smooth, shiny surface read, "Please Do Not Handle."
This table was an extraordinary thing.
Lush vines dripped down its legs and the claws of its feet clung tightly to wooden balls.
If you stared at it for a while, the table almost sprang to life.
Sotheby's had stationed a guard beside the table to clarify any ambiguity in the note, which might fail to deter those guests for whom it was possible to touch a thing without handling it.
Experts at Sotheby's estimated that the card table would bring more than $1 million at the auction to be held the following Saturday.


As Whitman Nears Inauguration, Deficit Complicates Tax-Cut Vow
For Christine Todd Whitman, the hard part is about to begin.
When she becomes New Jersey's 50th governor on Tuesday, Mrs.
Whitman will sit down at a desk figuratively piled with daunting tasks: A school financing quandary that has defied solution for decades.
A surging prison population.
Cities cut off from the rest of the state, and full of despair.


Meat-Filled Dishes Chase Away the Cold
WHEN the temperature starts falling below zero, it's time for hearty old-fashioned food that warms you up.
Sausages, stewed with mushrooms and red wine and served with a bowl of soft, creamy polenta is one of my favorite winter dishes.
Another is a simple boiled chicken, cooked with big chunky winter carrots and leeks that enrich the flavor of the meat.
At the end, the carrots are glazed in a reduction of the cooking stock, sprinkled with parsley and served, along with the other vegetables, around the chicken.


Habitats: The Less-Gentrified TriBeCa; Lofty Aims, High Hopes
THE second-floor loft Jim Sullivan bought in 1987, he said, had been inhabited by "a guy who lived like a gerbil."
"It was like living at Alcatraz," he said.
"You know, one toilet, one sink and all open."


Is Broadway Fogbound In a Special-Effects Age?
Six weeks into a new job covering theater, after nearly 25 years looking at movies, I feel a little like Buster Keaton in "The Navigator" when he takes his chauffeur-driven limousine to call on his beloved.
The car makes a stately U-turn and deposits Buster across the street.
Switching from films to theater is like moving next door.
It's not only that so many Broadway shows already exist in the mind as memories of movies seen earlier.
It's also that the theater is going through -- and has been for some time -- an escalating evolution in stage trickery roughly equivalent to movies' infatuation with, and emphasis on, ever-more-special special effects.


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; How to Scan a Cat
The age of the cyberpet has begun.
Several companies have developed a system for injecting minuscule computer chips into animals as a means of identification.
The chips rest just under the skin, and when read by something like a supermarket scanner, disclose the pet's identity.
For now, the chip is little more than a high-tech tattoo.
Current uses are as innocuous as identifying the dogs in the Iditarod and tagging Washington State salmon in a Federal wildlife program known as fish and chips.


Miss Childress And Mr. Scally
Susannah Childress, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary A. Childress of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to Michael Patrick Scally, a son of Mrs.
Jerome Linder of Smithtown, L.I., and the late John P. Scally.
The Rev.
Douglas G. Scott officiated at St.
Martin's Episcopal Church in Radnor, Pa.


Corrections
An air fare listing in the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 2 misstated a fare under the heading "Unrestricted Fare." The round trip fare offered by USAir between New York and Los Angeles was $388, not $308.


Meat-Filled Dishes Chase Away the Cold
WHEN the temperature starts falling below zero, it's time for hearty old-fashioned food that warms you up.
Sausages, stewed with mushrooms and red wine and served with a bowl of soft, creamy polenta is one of my favorite winter dishes.
Another is a simple boiled chicken, cooked with big chunky winter carrots and leeks that enrich the flavor of the meat.
At the end, the carrots are glazed in a reduction of the cooking stock, sprinkled with parsley and served, along with the other vegetables, around the chicken.


Isles Have Six Years Left in Decade to Beat Blackhawks
One of these years, the Islanders will defeat the Chicago Blackhawks.
Any decade now, they will beat them in Nassau Coliseum.
But tonight wasn't the night for it, and the Islanders were probably satisfied with a scrappy 5-5 tie in a come-from-behind effort.


Key Vote Nears on Loehmann's
After years of controversy, a plan to build a Loehmann's on Sheepshead Bay is facing a key vote this week.
The Board of Standards and Appeals is scheduled to vote on Wednesday on a zoning variance that would allow a private developer, the Emmons Avenue Development Corporation, to build a store of more than 27,000 square feet in a zone where 3,500 square feet is the biggest store allowed.


St. John's Can't Stop Marshall or Connecticut
Donyell Marshall, the Connecticut all-American, took charge of the Huskies' tight game against St.
John's last night at Madison Square Garden.
Marshall accounted for UConn's final 14 points, 8 from free throws, and had a career-high 42 points in UConn's 85-81 victory.
He was 20 for 20 from the free-throw line, setting a mark for most foul shots made in a Big East game (the old record was 18) and falling 4 shy of the N.C.A.A. record for most foul shots made in a game without a miss.
That wasn't all for the 6-foot-9-inch junior forward from Reading, Pa.
Marshall took down 13 rebounds against a St.
John's team that kept pressuring the Huskies.


Business Diary: January 9-14
COMPANIES On the Job Front, Three Steps Back, One Forward  The drumbeat went on last week.
Like crazed dieters, companies kept vowing to cut thousands of jobs.
Gillette said it would cut 2,000, or 6 percent of its total, though it said it was "acting from strength" amid record profits.
Then Westinghouse's new chairman, Michael Jordan, said that as part of a sweeping set of changes -- what one analyst called "cleaning all the cobwebs out" -- he would lay off 3,400.
And GTE, the largest local phone company, said it would cut 17,000 jobs -- more than 14 percent of its worldwide total.
But in the midst of this all-too-familiar chorus, there appeared a welcome voice -- one big company would be adding, not subtracting.
Tandy said that as part of a plan to open 30 computer and consumer electronics superstores, it would hire 3,600 people.
Can it be that the end of "downsizing" is in sight?


'Me and My Girl': A 30's Musical That's Still Catchy
THE Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport is a one of a kind showplace of many kinds.
A year-round operation to be sure, the theater happens to be the state's sole surviving winter stage for musicals, with a production link to professionalism.
The Cabaret Theater's original claim to singularity remains a reassuring constant.
Bring your own comestibles, have an indoor picnic but, please, don't call it dinner theater.


Good Works And Prayers
At the meeting of the American Chamber of Commerce in Moscow last week, the American business executives had a Protestant minister open their luncheon by delivering a prayer for the Russian economy.
"Dear God," he intoned, "we pray for this land. For wise decisions. Do not let us lose hope."
It was a fitting way to begin their session and a fitting summary of American economic diplomacy toward Russia today, which relies almost as much on prayer as on policy.
It is not that there is no substance behind the American approach to Russia today.
There is.
And it is not that there is no money behind it, either.
It is that no more money will be delivered, or make a substantive difference, unless President Boris N. Yeltsin puts together a viable, concrete plan to restructure his budget in a way that will curb inflation, end subsidies to unprofitable state industries and create a body of laws to support a free market.
Bear Hugs and Vodka
That was President Clinton's message to the Russian leader this week.
It was sugarcoated in a number of ways, with many bear hugs and vodka toasts, but underneath there was always the same theme: "More money for Russia, more quickly, but only after more reform."


Wells Fargo on Frivolous Lawsuits
To the Editor:  "Millions for Us, Pennies for You" (Dec. 19) struck a raw nerve among those of us in California's business community who have spent years fighting frivolous class-action lawsuits.
How well we know the M.O. of a handful of trial lawyers who have figured out a way to legally extort money from those with the deepest pockets, while bypassing consumers almost completely.
In California, cases go on for years because trial lawyers engage in out-of control "discovery" and other litigation tactics, fishing for "evidence" they think will have jury appeal.
Rules of procedure make it difficult to summarily dispose of meritless claims.
Defendants are often forced to pay extortionate settlements to avoid years of litigation costs.


Welcome to Our Rented Nightmare
DEAR New Tenants:
Benvenuto!
We are the Weismans, the people who rented this villa for the two-week period just before yours.
We hope you didn't have any trouble finding the house.
Did you get a kick out of the agent's directions -- "left at the tennis courts and a right at the statue of the Madonna"?
We imagine that you too fell in love with the place when you saw a photograph of the villa and read the description in a catalogue of rentals -- "a renovated mill, in the heart of Chianti Classico, only two kilometers from the center of San Gimignano, a hill town famous for its beautiful towers. A perfect base for exploring Tuscany." Are you paying the same rent we did: $3,500 for two weeks?


Packers May Be Chasing the Impossible Dream, but It's All a Part of Holmgren's Plan
The Dallas Cowboys are 14-point favorites over the Green Bay Packers Sunday, an astounding spread for the National Football League playoffs.
It seems the only stumbling block for the Super Bowl defending champions is overconfidence.
Or maybe one smart psychologist in Mike Holmgren, the Packers' coach.
"When I was coaching high school football in California," Holmgren said, "before a big game, I sent myself a box of cream puffs. I opened it in front of my players and told them the other team sent them, that the other team thought we were a bunch of cream puffs. My kids went nuts. We won."


Cultivating Live Viruses? Papers, Please!
Several city agencies handle licensing requests. Here are a few. FIRE DEPARTMENT
250 Livingston Street, Brooklyn;  (718) 403-1403
Provides licenses or certificates of approval for:
Loading, storing or selling small-arms ammunition and explosives.
The storing of bulk acids, calcium carbide and other volatile chemicals including the storage of chemicals and paints in schools.
DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS
42 Broadway; (212) 487-4051
Provides licenses or certificates of approval for:
Maintenance and operation of arcades, public amusement spaces, bingo games, carousels, merry-go-rounds and games of chance.
Bus sightseeing tours.
Catering establishments.
Home-improvement contractors.
Electronics stores.
Locksmiths and keymakers. STATE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION
50 Wolf Road, Albany; (518) 457-3446
Provides licenses or certificates of approval for:
The collection, possession or sale of exotic animals.
Hunting, fishing and fishing boats.
Dog and bird breeders and sellers.  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
125 Worth Street; (212) 788-4627
Provides licenses or certificates of approval for:
Conducting of lunch rooms.
Manufacturing of mineral waters.
Grooming, boarding, selling or holding of small animals.
Any retail baking.
The maintainence and construction of swimming pools and other bathing establishments.
Performance of burials.
Mobile food vendors.
Registering as a funeral director.
Possession or cultivation of live viruses or micro-organisms. DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION
125 Worth Street; (212) 219-8090
Provides licenses or certificates of approval for:
The use of vehicles and equipment for the transport of manure.
Oversized refuse containers. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
16 West 61st Street; (212) 408-0226
Provides licenses or certificates of approval for:
Organized baseball, concerts, cricket, croquet, cross-country running, dances, exhibitions, handball contests, bicycle races, hockey, marriage ceremonies, memorial services, rallies, readings and concessions in New York City parks.


On Patrol Against Subway's Panhandlers
The Street News vendor had already finished his spiel and collected a few dollars from subway riders when he spotted the three plainclothes transit police officers coming toward him on the train.
He smiled.
"Hey, Larry, how's it going?" said Michaele Drapala, an officer who had stopped the same man many times before.
She is on the 10-member quality-of-life patrol and rides the trains looking for rule-breakers, who are ejected or ticketed.
Last week, as part of a Transit Authority crackdown, the squad began arresting the most persistent subway peddlers and panhandlers, who now may face up to 10 days in jail.


Wet 'n' Wear
They're in the colors firefighters wear, but they're designed for use by high-style city and country slickers when the rains descend.


Who?
To the Editor:
The fact that Harry Warren was so obscure a figure, while irritating to him, apparently didn't obscure his sense of humor.
His favorite line was reported to be that even his best friends never heard of him.
LES BLOCK  Minneapolis


The Arts in Arts Excel Are a Learning Tool
I was dismayed to see a photograph of students making cutouts to depict Arts Excel in "When Arts Proponents and Educators Clash' (Dec. 12). Making cutouts has nothing to do with Arts Excel. The fact is that Arts Excel is not yet operational in the schools, and the photos with the story were not of an Arts Excel program.
I have been a participant in the intensive planning for this project, which has been ongoing for over a year.
Arts Excel is not solely an arts program.
The arts in this case are a tool for learning, driven by curriculum needs and not the needs of arts institutions.
It may be difficult for those not in the field of education to embrace this approach.


Opponents Shoot Down a Game Center
A developer who planned to transform a movie house on Union Turnpike into a high-tech playroom where people shoot at one another with beams of light withdrew the plan last week amid a torrent of community opposition.
The developer, Daniel Feinstein, had considered starting the business at the Utopia Theater in Fresh Meadows as part of a franchise agreement he had with Q-Zar, a Dallas-based company that operates about 20 such game centers nationwide.


Sports of The Times; Exercising the Freedom of Choice in Buffalo
HERE is my official position on football games in zero weather in Buffalo in January: I truly do not mind, as long as they have an enclosed press box.
In matters like this, I am a civil libertarian.
This is a free country.
This game was held among consenting adults, or at least among football players and football fans, which may be slightly different.
I was not seriously inconvenienced, nor were millions of fans watching the game on television, which is why this event was held.
The targets-for-commercials saw the highly paid gladiators called the Buffalo Bills defeat the highly paid gladiators called the Los Angeles Raiders, 29-23.
It wasn't exactly behind closed doors, but no innocents were harmed.


William W. Prager, Lawyer, 92
William W. Prager, who practiced law in Manhattan for 50 years, died on Wednesday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 92 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, William W. Prager Jr.


Amy Rosenberg and Craig Anmuth
Amy Sarah Rosenberg, a daughter of Sandra and Murray Rosenberg of Roslyn Heights, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Craig Jeffrey Anmuth, the son of Linda and Herbert Anmuth of Charleston, S.C.
Rabbi Brian Walt performed the ceremony at the Horticulture Center in Fairmount Park in Philadelphia.


Tokyo Trade Pact: Dotting the I's Proves Difficult
When President Clinton concluded his last-minute trade deal with Japan here last July, his Administration hailed it as not just another in a 20-year string of agreements but a new kind of agreement.
The American negotiators, just a few months in office, insisted that they had found the key to reducing Japan's yawning surpluses in forcing the Government to promise explicit increases in imports and not just the removal of barriers.


Another Presidency Brings Another Credibility Gap
MILLIONS of Americans were exposed last week to the two contrasting images of their President that have defined the first year of the Clinton Administration.
In a "Nightline" interview aboard Air Force One, Bill Clinton showed ABC's viewers a picture of authoritative leadership as he set out on his biggest foreign trip.
He moved from tender reflections on his mother's funeral to confidently displaying a command of issues awaiting him.
By the time Mr.
Clinton got to Prague two days later, the aura of confidence was gone.
The television audience saw a man who grew testy and defensive when asked about his involvement in Whitewater, an Arkansas real estate deal of long ago that went awry.
After the second question, Mr.
Clinton stalked off, telling his interviewer,


Gold in the Mail
To the Editor:
"When Worthy Appeals Turn Into Junk Mail" (letter, Jan. 2) by Theodore D. Kemper states that if the use of what he calls "junk mail" (third-class bulk) declined, it would help the deficit in the Postal Service.
He does not know that this class of mail is the most profitable the Post Office handles -- making more from it than all other types combined.
Without it, Mr.
Kemper would probably have to pay $1 for the first class letter that now costs him 29 cents.


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; Most Overrated Players
A list, from George Vecsey:
1. Patrick Ewing, New York Knicks. Doesn't take over big games.
2. John Stockton and Karl Malone, Utah Jazz. They beat Croatia, and. . . .


Enhanced Fax Machine Does a Selling Job
IN 1989, Thomas Kadala, a software designer seeking to generate interest for a product that was not selling well, decided to attend a Las Vegas trade show.
"I was then running a small company in Hastings-on-Hudson -- Alternative Technology Corporation -- where we were custom-designing voice boards that accessed mainframe computers, but it was slow going so we decided to go for broke at the trade show," Mr.
Kadala recalled.


Harding Facing New Judges: The U.S. Olympic Committee
Leaders of the United States Olympic Committee began meeting here tonight to explore the possibility of removing Tonya Harding from the United States squad for next month's Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
However, since Harding has not been implicated in the attack on her teammate, Nancy Kerrigan, it was not clear whether the U.S.O.C. would have any legal grounds on which to have Harding removed.


As Old as the Paste Pot, as New as the Computer
ALL right, so you didn't wrap the fig tree (tar paper, the bucket on top, it's all so tiresome), and it's probably a frozen little Popsicle stick by now.
Get a grip.
Next spring, you can plant another one and do all that righteous stuff at Thanksgiving (instead of cooking and feasting and forgetting all about your poor little fig).
Or you can take a good look in the mirror and plant a hardier tree, like an oak or something.


When Life Insurance Is the Answer
To the Editor:
"It May Not Be for Everybody" (Your Own Account, Jan. 9) extensively quoted and paraphrased Tim Kochis, a California-based financial planner who claims that many people should "self insure" because insurance is a "lousy investment." That is, once people reach their 50's, the sum of their stock and bond portfolio and other property is "enough to provide for their survivors," assuming, of course, the person is liquid.
And if there are estate taxes to pay, Mr.
Kochis recommended that they be paid out of other assets.


Syrah Rediscovered
Omar Khayyam's "jug of wine" in the Rubaiyat was almost certainly filled with wine made from shiraz.
After years of relative obscurity, shiraz -- or syrah, as it is called in much of the modern world -- is enjoying something of a comeback.
In Australia, where it's still called shiraz, it was widely planted in the 19th century and is still that nation's dominant red-wine grape.
California innovators love it and even the French have developed a broader respect for it.
Both in California and France, it's syrah.


Behind African Masks and Ritual Objects, Spiritual Mysteries
AFRICA may no longer be the dark continent it was, but its art, like that of Oceania or pre-Columbian America, is still only art.
That is to say, for all the interpretive efforts of historians and anthropologists, the figures and masks that transformed European esthetics a century ago reveal little of their history and even less of their meaning.
No doubt this very muteness was part of the attraction for the early Modernists; it would certainly have lent weight to the notion of art for art's sake.
Whether the show's designer, Arthur M. Clark, had such ironies in mind when tackling "African Art: Masterpieces From Private Collections" at the Katonah Museum of Art here, the severe, almost liturgical installation that he has devised attracts attention to them.
Most of the pieces stand at different levels on bases surfaced in blue felt and trimmed with blue-green paint.
They are grouped by place of origin but are separated by Plexiglas panels and cases.


Mutual Funds; Looking Out for No.1 in Mergers
MELLON BANK'S announcement late last year that it would buy the Dreyfus Corporation capped a record year in mutual fund mergers and acquisitions, and that trend will probably pick up steam.
There are clear business benefits to the partners in these transactions, but whether that translates into benefits to investors in the funds is less obvious.


Miss McConnell And Mr. Glick
Heather McConnell, the daughter of Diane McConnell of Oldwick, N.J., and Richard McConnell of Clinton, N.J., was married last evening to David Glick, a son of Cindy and Arthur Glick of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Morton Green, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at Temple Rodef Shalom in Falls Church, Va.
Mrs.
Glick, 30, is a marketing manager at American Management Systems Inc., a computer-systems development and consulting company in Fairfax, Va.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is an executive computer-support consultant at Johnson &amp; Johnson in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother is a lawyer in Oldwick.


Mr. Clinton, Meet Mr. Assad (And Never Mind His Past)
HAFEZ AL-ASSAD didn't show much enthusiasm a few weeks ago, when Secretary of State Warren Christopher told him in Damascus that President Clinton wanted to meet him.
He had to check his calendar, the Syrian leader said, and he telephoned aides to make sure there was no scheduling conflict.
Even then, he told Mr.
Christopher that he needed more time.
The incident says a lot about the man who ultimately decided he could find time for Mr.
Clinton, and who is to meet with him today in a Geneva hotel -- one more step in the American effort to draw Mr.
Assad closer to peace with Israel.
Even though Mr.
Assad had lost his Soviet patrons, even though he felt betrayed when Yasir Arafat started bargaining with Israel on his own, Mr.
Assad felt in a position to keep the President of the United States in suspense.


For Aisles and Aisles, Buyers and Guns Galore
It is a measure of what is happening in the gun business these days that customers who drop by B and B Sales in North Hollywood must take a number and then wait their turn to talk to a clerk.
The wait can last up to 15 minutes.


Going Outdoors: A Real Test of Bravery


Meat-Filled Dishes Chase Away the Cold
WHEN the temperature starts falling below zero, it's time for hearty old-fashioned food that warms you up.
Sausages, stewed with mushrooms and red wine and served with a bowl of soft, creamy polenta is one of my favorite winter dishes.
Another is a simple boiled chicken, cooked with big chunky winter carrots and leeks that enrich the flavor of the meat.
At the end, the carrots are glazed in a reduction of the cooking stock, sprinkled with parsley and served, along with the other vegetables, around the chicken.


When the Kult of the Kustomized Kar Was King
DRESSED IN MONOCHROMATIC paint and shaped to please a wind tunnel rather than the eye, today's cars make it easy to forget the frenzied art that was sparked by the rediscovered automobile of post-World War II America.
The car had just come back then, and the country was hungry for it.
Hungry, too, to make it personal.
And a traveling exhibition, in the heart of Baltimore at the moment, brings it all back, with a sampling of the era's wild vehicles and the "customized" paintings blazoned on their bodies.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
FLOWER DISTRICT  $490.000
109 West 26th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,200-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 11 1/2-ft. ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,260, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $549,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Wells &amp; Gay Stribling; Halstead Property Co.)


After Three Years, Library Reopens
Closed for three years because a leaky roof went unrepaired, the limestone-and-brick Saratoga branch library on the border of Bedford-Stuyvesant and Brownsville reopened Wednesday after undergoing a $1 million overhaul.
The turn-of-the-century building closed in October 1990 after the copper flashing and gutters on the tile roof were stolen.
The city's Department of General Services completed repairs on the leaking roof a year later, at a cost of $45,000, but by then delay and continued vandalism made the building unusable.


Giants' Dream Season Ends in a Million Pieces
On San Francisco's first drive today, Giants safety Greg Jackson noticed something that almost sent him into a rage.
With Steve Young and his receivers slicing away at the defense, picking it apart the way someone plucks cherries from a tree, Jackson heard players in the huddle saying how good the 49ers were.
The way Jackson explained it, it was as if the Giants wanted to ask the 49ers for autographs.
He wouldn't name the players, only that they were young ones.
But he knew after that first drive, with some of the young players being so star struck by Young and Jerry Rice and others, that it was going to be a long afternoon.


Altering Rules on Who May Take Over Apartments
A MONTHLY publication called New York Landlord v Tenant is adept at boiling down the facts in lawsuits involving rent-regulated housing in New York City.
With regulatory complexity steadily growing, there is no shortage of cases.
Many of them are on the issue of succession: who has the legally guaranteed right to take over an apartment when the tenant of record dies or moves?


76ers Fail to Score Their Name With 67
Cavaliers 110, 76ers 67
The Cleveland Cavaliers turned in the best defensive performance in team history last night, routing the short-handed Philadelphia 76ers, 110-67, in Richfield, Ohio.


Harper Stars While Anthony Wonders


A Series on the Job of Being a Parent
IF you interview children about what they think God is, it will sound very quickly like E.T.," said Polly Berrien Berends, an author and lecturer who lives in Hastings-on-Hudson. "Generally, we don't teach kids to think of an underlying love and intelligence that they themselves can recognize."
Ms.
Berends, the author of "Gently Lead -- or How to Teach Your Children About God While Finding Out for Yourself" and other books, will lead off a five-part lecture series on Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the Scarsdale Congregational Church here.
Presented under the title "Parenting Throughout Life," the series will address what the church's associate pastor, the Rev.
Elizabeth Gombach, says are the concerns about child rearing that she most often hears expressed by parents, grandparents, nannies and teachers.


A Portrait of Decay


A New Look for a Steakhouse of the 50's
RUDY'S steakhouse in Bellport brings to mind the old adage, "You can't judge a book by its cover." And just like a book, Rudy's is difficult to read from the outside.
The restaurant resembles a vintage roadhouse.
It is wedged between Montauk Highway and the railroad tracks in an unfashionable section of Bellport.
A sign proclaiming, "Burglars Beware! Guard Dogs on Premises," and steel mesh over the front door do nothing to improve the image.


Karen Black on the Town
IN her movie roles, Karen Black has unself-consciously walked the line between camp and pathos, as Jack Nicholson's clingy girlfriend in "Five Easy Pieces," as the transexual in "Come Back to the 5 &amp; Dime Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean" and as the country singer in "Nashville" whose drawl was so sweet and artificial it could have freshened a bathroom.
Last Sunday, the actress, 51, whose pert nose, full figure and astigmatism have worked to her advantage in dozens of roles, was out scouting venues for "A View From the Heart," the one-woman show she's performing in Los Angeles and would like to bring east.


From Pizza Man in Canada to Croatian Kingmaker
Like thousands of ethnic Croatian emigres in the late 1960's, Gojko Susak, when he was first in Canada, dreamed of someday returning home to a rocky hilltop in southwestern Bosnia and Herzegovina, with its fig trees and old Franciscan monastery.
"I didn't go abroad to get to drive a big car," Mr.
Susak, now Croatia's Defense Minister, recalled the other day.
"It was a choice of whether or not I wanted to go to jail."


He Who Laughs Last
LEAVING HOME A Memoir.
By Art Buchwald.
Illustrated. 254 pp.
New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Heidi R. Steinberg, James E. Solomon
Heidi Rose Steinberg, a first vice president in equity research at Lehman Brothers in New York, was married yesterday evening in Sarasota, Fla., to James Edward Solomon, the president and chief operating officer of Dansk International Designs, the tableware company in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Rabbi Max Roth officiated at Temple Beth Sholom.
Rabbi David Warshaw, the bride's uncle, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Solomon graduated from Barnard College.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Jerome Breslin of Jacksonville, Fla., and the late Albert Steinberg, who was a general contractor in Cleveland.
The bride's stepfather is a systems analyst with Computer Power Inc., a computer-software company in Jacksonville.


Steeped in Traditions of the Sea, Doxsees Ring Alarm for Clams
BETTY CROCKER may never have baked a cake.
But in Point Lookout, a Doxsee is up to his elbows in chopped clams.
The name Doxsee is as synonymous with clams as the fictional Betty Crocker is with cake mixes.
Not many people know, however, that the Doxsees are a real family whose members began their clamming days back in the 1800's on the Great South Bay.
A century and a half later in a small white building adjacent to Jones Inlet, Bob Doxsee Jr. and his daughter Beth carry on the tradition.
Part of it is done anonymously.
For some of their products they can't use their name, because a branch of their clan sold the family name to Borden's Inc.


POSTINGS: East 63d Street Beaux-Arts Town House; Reviving, if Not Restoring
For the Beaux-Arts limestone town house at 21 East 63d Street, the years have been rich but not altogether kind.
Constructed by the dry-goods prince Lyman G. Bloomingdale in 1900, the building has had a succession of fascinating commercial occupants since the 1940's: Tex McCrary, the television pioneer and public-relations impresario; Jean Schlumberger, one of the leading jewelry designers of the 20th century; Diana Ross, who had offices there and, most recently, Ronald O. Perelman's MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings Inc.


No Songs By Manilow For G.O.P.
Barry Manilow may write the songs, but he will not sing them -- not for Christine Todd Whitman.
The pop singer abruptly pulled out of an inaugural concert for the Governor-elect today, surprising Mrs.
Whitman and disappointing thousands of fans who had braved freezing temperatures.


Syrians Awaiting Meeting of Assad and Clinton With Hope
In the buildup by Syria's press over the meeting between President Clinton and President Hafez al-Assad in Geneva, a Damascus newspaper this week described it as one of the most important events in the history of both Switzerland and the Middle East.
On Friday night, hundreds of Syria's Christians assembled inside the candlelit Zaytoun cathedral here to offer prayers on behalf of Mr.
Assad, and in conversations across the city, rumor and speculation were predicting, or wishing for, a breakthrough between Syria and Israel over the Golan Heights.


34th St. Heliport May Cut Flights
After years of receiving complaints about helicopter traffic over the East Side, city officials are proposing a big reduction in sightseeing operations from the East 34th Street Heliport, the busiest public civilian heliport in the world.
The City Economic Development Corporation wants to cut the annual number of all takeoffs and landings, including corporate, sightseeing and other commercial flights, from 51,000 to 27,000 by reducing sightseeing activity from seven to two days a week and the maximum number of flights an hour from 18 to 4.


Figure Skating Gets Rough; Fairy Tales on Ice, and Horror Stories Off It
SAY this for hockey fans.
They may throw hot pennies onto the ice, but no one ever talked about whacking Wayne Gretzky before the Stanley Cup playoffs.
And the players punch each other out during the game.
Usually they do not waylay each other in the parking lot.
Figure skating, it seems, is a much tougher arena.


Uniting the Feudal Lords at Citicorp
JOHN S. REED, chairman of Citicorp, is facing the executives who run the company's 15 operating divisions.
They barely know each other.
The 15, most of whom have flown in from posts abroad for the two-day meeting at the Citicorp Center in Manhattan, are used to running their businesses as separate empires, answerable only loosely to a multi-tiered hierarchy in New York.
But it is early 1992 and the banking giant is in trouble, drowning in bad real estate loans and runaway costs.
Mr.
Reed asks each of the 15 to put something into the hat, as part of a mired two-year rescue plan to trim expenses by more than $1 billion.


Running for Cover in Sarajevo


Ms. Bacallao, Mr. Shields
Madelene Bacallao, a daughter of Ovidio Bacallao of Miami and Xiomara Bacallao of Weehawken, N.J., was married yesterday in Lenox, Mass., to Richard C. Shields, the son of Richard and Jeanne Shields of Carmel, N.Y.
The Rev.
William F. Baughman, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, officiated at Wheatleigh, an inn.


While Back Home . . .
As the President focused on foreign policy last week in Russia, the White House struggled to limit damage from reports concerning the Clintons' Arkansas real estate dealings.
Aides say that they stemmed the bad publicity only after persuading the Clintons, their legal advisers and themselves of the need to accommodate growing demands for an independent counsel.
Article, page 20.


Photographer's Journal


Finding New Ways To Strengthen Athletes' Marketing Muscles
MENTION potato chips, and Frank Vuono thinks of quarterbacks.
Mention sneakers, and Frank Vuono thinks of three-point shooting guards.


'A Place at the Table'
To the Editor:
In an otherwise well-written and sympathetic review, Margaret O'Brien Steinfels took issue with Bruce Bawer's belief that homosexuality is a normal variant of human sexuality and, therefore, acceptance of it should include a recognition of homosexual marriages.
She did not understand Mr.
Bawer's hurt when close (heterosexual) friends stated, at their wedding ceremony, that marriage between a man and a woman was "the only valid foundation for an enduring home." Ms.
Steinfels apparently feels that accepting same-sex marriages is pushing society's tolerance level too far.


Gaza Arabs to Take Over a Health System in Crisis
Rajhah Shubair Tawfik, a 9-year-old boy, sits in the corner of a dirty room in the Nasser Hospital here waiting for men who jet between Oslo, Paris and Cairo to settle their disputes.
If Israeli and Palestinian negotiators do not agree soon on the planned Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho, doctors say, the young leukemia patient will die.
And even if the withdrawal begins now, he may still die.


Deals and Discounts
TURKEY TOUR A company called The World of Oz has a six-night trip to Istanbul through March starting at $915 a person; a tour of the same length that spends four nights in Istanbul and two in Antalya, starting at $1,225, and a similar program with Izmir instead of Antalya, starting at $1,235.
All include round-trip trans-Atlantic air fare on Delta Air Lines, hotel with service charge, value added tax and daily breakfast, and other features.
The company may be contacted at (212) 661-0580 in New York or (800) 248-0234 outside New York.
DRIVING IN FRANCE New Frontiers offers discounted car rentals in France until March 31, starting at $159 for seven days for a Ford Fiesta with manual transmission.
Other models include a Ford Escort, $199 for seven days; Ford Sierra, $289, Ford Scorpio, $419, and a Volvo 850 automatic for $629.
Unlimited mileage and value added tax are included.
The company, the American division of the French tour operator Nouvelles Frontieres, may be reached at (800) 366-6387 or (212) 779-0600.
IRISH MANORS A three-night package is being offered during the month of March at eight Relais et Chateaux hotels in Ireland.
The package includes accommodations, daily breakfast, two dinners, value added tax and service for 220 pounds a person (about $319, at $1.45 to the Irish pound), based on double occupancy.
Participating properties include Dromoland Castle in Newmarket-on-Fergus in County Clare; Ashford Castle in Cong, County Mayo; Ballylickey Manor House in County Cork, and Sheen Falls Lodge in Kenmare, County Kerry.
More information is available from the organization at (212) 856-0115.
SENIOR SAVINGS Kiwi International Air Lines has two programs for travelers 62 and older.
The first offers a 10 percent discount on all air tickets as well as those of a travel companion of any age.
The second is a Senior Discount Pack, priced at $672 for six one-way tickets that expire a year after purchase. (The savings are $50 to $250 with each pack, depending on the destination.) Reservations for Senior Discount Packs must be made within seven days of departure, and those tickets may not be used on the airline's San Juan flights.
The two offers cannot be combined.
The airline flies between New York (Newark) and Chicago, Atlanta, Tampa, Orlando and West Palm Beach, Fla.
The airline may be reached at (800) 538-5494.
GOLF IN BERMUDA The 600-room Southampton Princess in Bermuda has a three-night Royal Tee package through April 2 with rates starting at $416 a person, double occupancy.
The price includes accommodations with private balcony, daily American breakfast, unlimited golf (shared cart) on the resort's 18-hole, par-three course; two rounds of golf (shared cart) on a choice of Port Royal or Belmont Hotel courses, tax, tip and other features.
A less intensive program, the Royal Escapade, includes room, daily breakfast, one round of golf daily on the resort's course (cart is mandatory and extra) and costs $239 a person.
Call (800) 223-1818.
JANET PIORKO


Heartbreak City
LIFE &amp; LOVE, SUCH AS THEY ARE By Anna Shapiro. 240 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.


Karen S. Frieman, Shane O'Neill
Karen S. Frieman and Shane O'Neill, lawyers in New York, were married last evening in Alpine, N.J.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club.
Ms.
Frieman, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Frieman of the Bronx.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree from Columbia University, where she was a Harlan Fiske Stone scholar.
She is a partner in the Shea &amp; Gould law firm.


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; Where Have All the Matches Gone?
In the heyday of Sam Spade, when nobody carried a digital organizer, you could always use a matchbook if you were in some fine eatery and needed to write down a telephone number.
You could also solve a crime by finding someone else's matchbook complete with the restaurant name and the scrawled number of a key witness.
Of course, you could also light your cigarette.
But since smoking is discouraged in restaurants now, some have stopped giving out free matches.


Croatia's Casualties, Bosnia's -- and Ours
For about six weeks at the end of last year, eight veteran workers from Children's Village, a large residential treatment center for acutely traumatized and troubled youth, went to work in a refugee camp in Croatia to try to help kids brutalized by the war.
The International Rescue Committee, our sponsors, felt that our experience with New York's most troubled children would be relevant because there are not enough trained people in Croatia and Bosnia to cope with the escalating problem of aggressive, traumatized youth.


Teaching the Mechanics of Success
Inside the cockpit of a Cessna parked in a hangar at Aviation High School in Long Island City, Queens, Martin Sanz was serving as Elayne Vera's co-pilot.
"The master switch is on?" asked Mr.
Sanz, reading from a checklist.
"The ignition switch is on? The oil pressure -- like I said before, you're going to watch it? You're clear?"


For Portugal, a Cultural Year
The Portuguese are preparing a yearlong festival of music, dance, theater and art, as Lisbon assumes the role of Cultural Capital of Europe 1994.
This annual event, created by the European Union (then Community), began in Athens in 1985.
For several years, the Portuguese Government has feverishly built exhibition halls, restored old museums and repaired roads to receive the expected influx of visitors.
The main festival venue will be the new fortress-like Cultural Center of Belem.
Other sites include the refurbished gilt and damask 18th-century Sao Carlos Opera House and the renovated Museum of Contemporary Art, both in the Chiado, the old downtown shopping area, and the new grandiose Caixa Geral Depositos (state bank) uptown near the bullring.


Romancing a Stone
WHAT: A big bullet-shaped rock that's become a religious shrine for Hindus and New Agers in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco.
WHERE IT CAME FROM: Like that of the carved Easter Island heads, the precise origin of the stone is lost in a swirl of mystery.
Passersby first noticed it several years ago beside a path through a eucalyptus grove that's used as a dump site by park gardeners.
Some believe it grew miraculously from the earth.
But Deborah Learner, a planner in the Recreation and Parks Department, says it was moved from a maintenance yard by a worker practicing with heavy equipment.
HOW ITS MYSTIQUE GREW: The pint-size-I.C.B.M. lookalike, about four feet tall and three feet in diameter, attracted the notice of local Hindus.
They recognized its phallic shape as a classic symbol of Siva, a member of the divine Hindu trinity.
Quietly, they left offerings of sandalwood paste, flower garlands and milk (representing semen).


Ideas &amp; Trends; Does Mrs. Bobbitt Count As Another Battered Wife?
AS much as it may embody the timeless tensions between men and women, in at least two key respects the saga of John and Lorena Bobbitt could never have happened a decade or two ago.
The first respect is the reattachment of Mr.
Bobbitt's penis, which for all the slang used on the outside, is referred to in court with great delicacy.
"We were looking for an extremity," testified one of the police officers in the search party on June 23, 1993, hours after Mrs.
Bobbitt had dismembered her husband and thrown what she called "the body part" in the weeds.
Only in the last 15 years, testified Dr.
James T. Sehn of Manassas, one of those who performed the nine-and-a-half hour operation, have such surgical miracles been possible.


A Question Of Mastery
To the Editor:
I agree with Peter Watrous that European labels are doing a far superior job than domestic labels of reissuing 78 r.p.m.-era jazz recordings on CD's  [ "Ceding a Legacy to Europe," Dec. 19 ] .
Yet, he may be doing readers and listeners a disservice by singling out the Paris-based Classics label for praise.


Putting Education First
Bank Street College of Education honors Henry R. Kravis; Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Jan. 10.


Don Byron
"I'm very much into Yiddish culture, so I know a little bit," says Ann Weiss, a petite older woman.
"I'm no connoisseur, but I do know a little bit." She has come to the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity in Brooklyn for an evening of a sometimes raucous Eastern European instrumental music called klezmer, as played by a sometimes raucous clarinetist named Don Byron.
Intermission is almost over.
"I was in Florida in 1957. I went to a nightclub and I saw Mickey Katz perform," she says.
That was during Katz's heyday, the brief years in the late 50's when his wild, mischievous brand of klezmer flourished.
Katz became famous for his parodies of American popular music, transforming "Home on the Range" into "Haim Afen Range," "April in Portugal" into "Pesach in Portugal." Since then, Katz has been known mostly as the father of the Broadway actor Joel Grey.
But with the release of "Don Byron Plays the Music of Mickey Katz," his music is drawing crowds again.


Taking Steps On Safety Issue
FACED with mounting anxiety about crime against travelers, particularly in Florida, associations representing the major segments of the United States travel industry met recently in Washington to look for potential solutions.
Representative Jim Bacchus of Florida, who represents a central portion of Florida's east coast and part of Orlando, speaking to the 80 travel officials and reporters at the Jan. 5 session, defined the gravity of the problem.
In tourism, he said: "When Florida sneezes, the industry gets a cold. And Florida has pneumonia."
The safety of a destination ranks as travelers' top concern, according to a survey made in August and September for the marketing company Robinson Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine of Orlando, Fla., by the market-survey organization Yankelovich Partners of Westport, which interviewed 850 representative United States households.
More than 80 percent ranked safety concerns at the top.
This was the second survey by those two companies, but safety of destination was not listed as an important attribute the year before, so comparison is not possible.


How Family Planning Came to Bangladesh; India's Dowry Problem
To the Editor:
Re "Bangalore Journal: For Many Brides in India, a Dowry Buys Death" (news article, Dec. 30): My research on dowries in India has attempted to demonstrate that its major cause is the demographic phenomenon of too many brides looking for far fewer bridegrooms.
This should be understood in the context of a marriage market, where women have to get married by a very young age or face severe social and economic consequences, and where 99 percent of men and women get married by their early 20's, with less than 2 percent getting divorced.


Manager's Profile
Dick Weiss
Fund: Strong Opportunity Fund, $460 million in assets.
Manager since March, 1991 (Sponsor: The Strong Funds, Milwaukee)


Watters's Quickness Finally Talks: 5 Big Touchdowns Worth of Talk
Ricky Watters, wearing a black bandana under his helmet and emotions on his sleeve, scored five more touchdowns than the Giants today.
He is always the San Francisco 49er most likely to explode, but normally it happens on the sideline.
It was in last season's conference title game, a disaster against Dallas, when Watters accused quarterback Steve Young of "choking" away the season.
One of his teammates responded, "Well, takes one to know one," and that's because Watters fumbled one away that day himself.


Compromise on Health Care
Hillary Rodham Clinton has ruled out compromise with the sponsor of the only bipartisan health care bill in Congress, Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee.
Her animus is odd, because his bill is the closest cousin to the proposal she drew up on behalf of the Administration.
The Cooper bill improves upon the basic framework of the Clinton plan.
But it also contains a fatal deficiency: Mr.
Clinton would guarantee coverage to everyone; Mr.
Cooper would not.
That mistake can be fixed.
Congress's best choice is a marriage between the two bills.


Test Finds Security At 4 U.S. Airports Lax
When Federal investigators tested security at four major airports selected at random last summer, they were dismayed by the ease with which they were able to enter restricted areas and walk onto tarmacs where baggage carts and aircraft were parked.
The names of the airports checked were not revealed.
The investigators, in casual dress and without identification, talked their way past guards and walked through emergency doors that sounded alarms that were ignored by airport and airline security officers.


Plants Need a Vacation at Times, Too
HOW about a rest now?
Most of the house plants are enjoying relaxation, so why not the gardener?
This rest period is essential for many plants growing in pots.
If they do not have it, they often become sluggish and do not bloom later in the year when they are supposed to.
The easiest way to tell if a plant needs a rest is to consider when it blooms.
The amaryllis bulb, for example, may just be finishing its bloom period.
So its foliage must grow on to nourish the bulb.
But if the amaryllis bloomed last spring and was summered outdoors, then by all means the bulb should be resting now.


After 50 Years, Ducks Are More a Memory Than a Quarry
For those who began duck hunting 50 years ago, when many waterfowl species were more plentiful, today's sorties afield have become rituals in which a few token birds are shot as one seeks contact with the beloved quarry, while dawn and dusk, wild skies and marsh grass seethe in the wind.
In the late 1940's, black ducks, once the mainstay of those who hunted the coastal marshes in the Northeast, would have dominated.
Black ducks have been in trouble for decades, however, and in the Atlantic Flyway the daily limit on them is one, and the overall daily limit for all puddle ducks -- as opposed to divers -- is three.


Portrait of Decline at a City Parking Garage
The city-owned parking garage in downtown Flushing is crumbling after years of neglect and is in the worst condition of any of the city's 16 garages, a City Council investigation has determined.
The findings offer a striking and detailed portrait of the 1,100-spot garage's decline: crumbling beams and girders; leaking drainage pipes clogged with weeds and shrubs, and flaking and eroding ceilings.


A Complex Menu, Simple Decor in Cos Cob
IN Cos Cob quarters formerly occupied by a long-playing French restaurant, Le Shack, the Mill Pond Cafe has opened.
As the name cafe suggests, the decor is simple, with a wood partition separating the small dining room and bar area.
Wood tables and chairs, and all wood surfaces are rubbed with a blend of gray and teal green that matches the carpet.
Windows cover most of the wall facing Mill Pond, an inlet off the Mianus River.


CHINA PROMISES U.S. TO TRY TO IMPROVE ITS HUMAN RIGHTS
President Jiang Zemin today told a Congressional delegation led by the House majority leader that China "is going to make an effort" in coming months to meet President Clinton's concerns about the country's human rights record.
Mr.
Jiang repeated Beijing's objection to linking human rights with China's trade relationship with the United States, as Mr.
Clinton has done by making China's favorable trade status contingent on improvement in human rights.
But the delegation took the Chinese President's positive tone as an encouraging sign.


What Happened at the Country Club
DANCING ON GLASS By Susan Taylor Chehak. 246 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


Where to Go for Help With Nynex: the President
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's telephone columns certainly rang a bell for me, as indicated below.


From Jarvi, Billions and Billions of Records and Still Counting
Publicists for the volcanically prolific Neeme Jarvi might consider setting up a running digital tally of his recordings, next to those billboards showing how much money MCI saves and the Federal deficit squanders.
The Estonian-born conductor's projects are piling up in stupendous numbers; just in the last month or two, he has produced a five-disk set of Stravinsky orchestral works, the complete symphonies of Nielsen and new installments in symphonic cycles of Mahler and Shostakovich.
Before the millennium is out, he will probably be the most recorded conductor in history.
Mr.
Jarvi's reputation does not rest merely on the volume of his work.
He is, first of all, a marvelous musician who draws committed playing from a wide array of orchestras.
He also demonstrates a tireless and discriminating commitment to unknown and underrated music.
He championed his Soviet colleagues Arvo Part and Alfred Schnittke long before they became fashionable (and ceased to be Soviet).
One of his current enthusiasms is the early-20th-century Danish composer Rued Langgaard, whose Symphony No. 6 he will conduct with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday.


Fort Worth
Fort Worth became known as Cowtown in the 1870's, when it was a rest stop and watering hole for cattle drives on the Chisholm Trail.
Cows still roam around town at stock shows, rodeos and auctions, and Fort Worth still has a passion for the cowboy life -- even though some of the auctions are conducted with video linkups and most of the real cowboys have left for less urban environs.
The city relives its heritage at the annual Southwestern Exposition and Livestock Show, one of the largest stock events in the United States.
The exposition, which runs from Jan. 21 to Feb. 6, was first held in 1896.
Livestock raisers and rodeo professionals come from all over the country to compete for prizes and show off their ranching and riding skills.


It's a Blizzard to You, a Flurry to Me.
IT hardly ever snows in central Georgia.
But when it does -- even just a few flakes -- the first pieces of emergency apparatus that are rolled out are not snowplows or salt spreaders but rather supermarket shopping carts.
"You have a run on milk and bread and cereal, things that don't require cooking because of the possibility of losing power," said Gene Crowder, the manager of the Kroger supermarket in Macon.


A Campaign to Remove One-Step Barriers at Stores
To the Editor:
We were delighted to see the Dec. 18 letter by Doree Topaz describing how frustrating a single step at a store or a restaurant can be to a person in a wheelchair or scooter.
A few years ago, several of us from Disabled in Action of Metropolitan New York, a citywide civil-rights organization, noticed the large number of these one-step barriers and began a campaign to remove them.


Gamma-Ray Finding Bolsters Einstein Theory, Report Says
A new analysis of mysterious gamma-ray explosions in space has disclosed that the dimmer these short bursts of intense energy are, the longer is their duration -- a phenomenon that lends fresh evidence to a time effect predicted by Einstein's theory of relativity.
Since the dim bursts are presumed to be coming from farther away than the brighter ones, astronomers reported today that the findings were strong evidence that many of these bursts originated deep in the universe, probably far from the Milky Way galaxy.
The relativity theory predicts an effect known as time dilation, in which the duration of bursts from very distant regions will be stretched as the radiation makes its way across space, which is itself expanding.


Ideas &amp; Trends: America's Automotive Fashion Statement; Forget Sleek and Sexy. The Boxy and Bulky Look Is In.
VERY soon, the car in the average family's garage isn't going to be a car at all; it's going to be a truck.
Small trucks -- pick-ups, vans, four-by-fours -- were once a symbol of blue-collar grit, but like pre-washed blue jeans, they are now the upscale dream.
A whole new class of small trucks, for which the industry has invented a new term, the "sport-utility vehicle," has sprung up, and they threaten dominance over the car; from Impalas to Pintos, cars now seem like something to be herded away by the Rodeos, Wranglers, Explorers and Blazers.


Education Systems Offer the Most Options
The Jan. 9 article ("Groups Are Divided on Education Plan") indicated that I shared the concern by opponents that outcomes-based education "dumbed-down the curriculum."
No well-planned and well-executed outcomes-based education "system" should ever limit the progress of gifted and/or rapidly moving students.
Programs must never limit the ability of students to move ahead as quickly as possible.


Settlement Gives Group Means of Compiling Health Data
The $1.1 million settlement the city has agreed to pay to a neighborhood group in a lawsuit over sewage odors from the North River Treatment Plant will be used to document health problems in West Harlem, the group's founders say.
"Now we will have the health data to back up what we know to be true," said Vernice Miller, a co-founder of West Harlem Environmental Action.
"People are not making up that they are sick. This community has been besieged by something that is not natural."


Debating Limits on Landmark No. 1,003
ON the tax map of the Bronx, it is known as Block 5914, Lot 315.
Its history begins in Castelmezzano, Italy, in 1884, the place and year of birth of the immigrant real-estate developer who built it as his home.
It is the Anthony Campagna Estate on West 249th Street in Riverdale, with its glorious 28-room 1920's Italian-style villa; on Nov. 16 it became the 1,003d individual landmark designated by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
"The Anthony Campagna Estate is a prime example of the integration of house and setting, virtually unparalleled for its period in New York City," Sarah B. Landau, the commission's vice chairwoman, said in the official motion to designate the estate.
"In addition, it takes its place among the large estates that have distinguished the history of Riverdale over the past century and a half, competing in size and magnificence with the most lavish of its predecessors."


Mobutu Is Said to Make Overtures to Clinton
President Mobutu Sese Seko has sent a conciliatory letter to President Clinton, promising to end years of political turmoil and asking for help from the United States in organizing Zaire's first multiparty elections.
"The letter has been received and is being acted upon," said an American lobbyist in Washington who has seen the letter, which was delivered privately this week.
Washington has virtually ceased to deal with Mr.
Mobutu.


Vengeance, by Phone
Here it is: a list of some of the more common annoyances of life in New York, and whom to call in city, state and Federal government when they happen to you.
ADVERTISING  Misleading or deceptive ads Department of Consumer Affairs . . . (212) 487-4398 Federal Trade Commission (212) 264-1207 AIRLINES  Delays, overbooking, rudeness U.S.
Department of Transportation, Office of Intergovernmental Affairs  (202) 366-4000 Lost luggage  Federal Aviation Administration Public Affairs . . . (718) 553-2692
(212) 967-3002 FOOD  Rotten, unwholesome or unsavory food sold in supermarkets State Department of Agriculture and Markets . . . (718) 722-2877 In restaurants or bakeries City Department of Health  (212) 442-1999 Pricing violations Department of Consumer Affairs  (212) 487-4398 Tampering or poisoning U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, Inspector General's line (800) 368-5779 F.B.I. . . . (212) 335-2700  GARBAGE  Non-pickup and other complaints City Sanitation Department  (212) 219-8090 HOSPITALS  Complaints about municipal hospitals City Health and Hospitals Corporation . . . (212) 556-8100 Complaints about private hospitals City Department of Health, Hospital Unit . . . (212) 502-0855 HOUSING  City Department of Housing Preservation . . . (212) 960-4800
INSURANCE  State Department of Insurance  (212) 602-0203 LAWYERS  Disciplinary Committee  (212) 685-1000 MAIL  Mail fraud, obscene mail, service complaints U.S.
WATER  Water-quality problems City Department of Health  (212) 442-1999 Low pressure City Environmental Protection Communications Center . . . (718) 699-9811 For other complaint sources, refer to "Big Apple Street Smarts" (The Consultant Press: 1992)


Jan. 9-15: In a Box; In China, Not Quite a Year After a Trade Compromise, Human Rights Issues Fester
Last spring, when President Clinton signed an executive order extending preferential trade benefits to China, the move was praised by the Administration and Congress alike as a brilliant compromise.
It gave China the same trade privileges enjoyed by most other nations but also required China to make "overall, significant progress" in human rights if it wanted to keep them a year hence.
The year is more than half over, and the United States finds itself in a box.
According to the impending State Department's global human rights report, China has done little to change its behavior.


The Real Not-Ready-for-Prime-Time Players
LAST SUMMER, DAVE FOLEY WENT to what probably should have been a career-enhancing event -- his first big Hollywood party.
Buck Henry, one of his idols, was there.
So were Justine Bateman, Madonna and Rosie O'Donnell and the film director Barbet Schroeder.
So what did Mr.
Foley do?
Did he swap comedy-writing tales, try out his suave pick-up lines, join in the celebrity-to-celebrity chitchat?


Drawn


'A Place at the Table'
To the Editor:
Margaret O'Brien Steinfels believes procreative heterosexual relationships should be "privileged." If this means affordable child care and laws protecting women and children, I certainly agree, but if it means the continuance of the belief that any heterosexual relationship is superior to any homosexual relationship, I must protest.
My own parents, who between them were married nine times, loved me no less for my gayness, but in their hearts they still felt morally superior to me.
This hypocrisy has become part and parcel of the heterosexuality that Ms.
Steinfels feels should be privileged -- over and above my own unbroken 13-year relationship with a man I would be happy to spend the rest of my life with, except that he is now dying of AIDS.
WILL ROSCOE  San Francisco


Media Magician's Debits Are Weighed
As the search intensifies for a media consultant to work on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's re-election campaign, the name of David Garth keeps reappearing.
But some aides to Mr.
Cuomo are clearly concerned that hiring Mr.
Garth, who was the chief strategist for Rudolph W. Giuliani in last year's New York City mayor's race, might alienate black Democrats.


'A Place at the Table'
Many of my colleages in the motion-picture community join me in condemning the unconscionable behavior portrayed in your article about Scott Rudin.
In featuring him so prominently, you represent this sad, tortured (and torturing) individual as representative of what it takes to achieve success in the film industry.


World Markets; Buoyant Madrid Unshaken by Scandal
NOTHING can shatter investors' confidence in Madrid's stock exchange, which soared to a record Friday.
Fueled by steadily falling interest rates and an unshakeable belief that Spain's economy will begin to show signs of recovery this year, traders have been unfazed by the Bank of Spain's takeover of the failing Banco Espanol de Credito, or Banesto, last month.


Data Bank/January 16, 1994
Data Bank/January 16, 1994
Producer Price Index
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.0
-0.2
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
0.8
0.3
2.0
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.2
0.4
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.7
0.2
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.9
0.7
Business Inventories
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.3
0.2
3-Month Treasury Bills
Jan. 14
Jan. 7
Dec. 31
Rate in percent
2.96
3.00
2.99
Weekly Jobless Claims
Jan. 7
Dec. 31
Dec. 24
In thousands
354
355
293


Americana Success Story: A Buyer Turns Seller
ON LEAVE FROM FORT DIX IN New Jersey 31 years ago, Ronald S. Kane visited the Newark Museum.
There the gilding, graining and columns on American Classical furniture on display proved irresistible.
That same day, at an antiques shop nearby, he bought a handsomely carved sideboard in the style, leaving a $35 deposit.
For Mr.
Kane, it was the first of scores of purchases in collecting 19th-century objects, some with a pedigree of early New York families.
He acquired the cabinet, he says, on the advice of Berry B. Tracy, the Newark curator who had organized "Classical America, 1815-1845," the landmark exhibition Mr.
Kane had seen at the museum.
The sideboard, attributed to Charles Honore Lannuier, a prominent French-born New York cabinetmaker, remained in the Kane collection until the 1980's, when it proved too large for the dining room in his apartment overlooking Central Park.
Then Mr.
Kane sold it.


Gucci Receiver Gets O.K. to Sell Horses
TWO months ago, 92 starving Arabian horses at Millfield Stables here were given a new lease on life when the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals of Westchester arrived with a truckload of hay, grain and bedding.
But now -- at a cost of $300 a day since Thanksgiving -- the society is running out of emergency funds and wondering where to turn next to keep the animals alive.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Ortlieb Follows the Script and Wins  His coaches told him about the snow.
The weathermen predicted the conditions.
His team let him pick the best starting number.
After all the strategic planning, all Patrick Ortlieb had to do was win.
Ortlieb lived up to the expectations, conquering the fog-shrouded Streif course yesterday in Kitzbuhel, Austria, before jubilant home fans.
"Kitzbuhel is always something special," said Ortlieb, the 1992 Olympic downhill champion who sped down the 3,351-meter-long courts in 2 minutes 0.12 seconds. (AP) Seizinger Dominates: Katja Seizinger of Germany, showing impressive form in speed races one month before the Olympics, dominated the super-giant slalom in Cortina D'Ampezzo, Italy, for her second World Cup triumph in two days.
Seizinger, winner of Friday's downhill on the same Olimpia Tofane course, beat an Austrian, Ulrike Maier, by .59 seconds. (AP)


Mary Beth Bierut, Andrew Rosenthal
Mary Beth Bierut, a lawyer, and Andrew Mark Rosenthal, the Washington editor of The New York Times, were married yesterday in Washington.
The Rev.
Joseph Lacey performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Rosenthal, 35, is the director of Federal Government relations for the Biotechnology Industry Organization in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from West Virginia Wesleyan College and received a J.D. degree from Georgetown University.


POSTINGS: Lincoln Towers Co-op;
In the world of co-op refinancings, a $10 million deal is significant.
But $112.5 million?


Cynthia Iavarone, James J. Lola
Cynthia Rose Iavarone, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent M. Iavarone of New York, was married yesterday to James Joseph Lola, the son of Laura Lola of Hendersonville, N.C., and the late Dr.
Emigdio Lola.
The Rev.
H.
Scott Matheney, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University.
Ms.
Iavarone, who is keeping her name, graduated from Temple University and received a master's degree in fine art from Columbia.
She builds and installs exhibitions for the 20th-century department of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Her father is a senior partner in VMI-Maris Traffic Consultants, a planning concern in Hackensack, N.J.


Corrections
A graph last Sunday showing New York's weather in 1993 misstated the number of days the temperature reached 90 degrees or higher.
There were 39 such days in 1991 and 1993, and 11 in 1992.


How Life With Father Can Change
IT is not necessary to be Jewish to understand the vast historical and humanistic panorama in "Fiddler on the Roof." Nor is it necessary to be homosexual to grasp the anguish, fear and hope in "Angels in America."
And, without question, there is no requirement that a person has to be a Jewish homosexual to become involved in the lives of the characters bouncing around in "Falsettos," the musical by William Finn and James Lapine now in its Long Island premiere at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, through Feb. 5.


Mukluks, Anyone?
Last week, fashion had to cope with a capricious weather pattern.
Early on, the ground was thickly coated with ice, making walking perilous.
For some, the inch-thick glaze afforded an opportunity for skating over the lawns and walkways of Central Park (top left).
Pedestrians, unable to walk down ice-caked steps, often sat down and took a bumpy slide to their destination.
By midweek, when new snow covered the ice, those heavy combat boots with tread on the soles finally proved their worth.
Leggings and short coats were perfect for jumping over flooded crosswalks; the fashionable long coats and skirts were no match for the ankle-deep slush and had to be hiked up.
An elegant, French-speaking woman (bottom right), in a long mink coat and delicate footwear, seemed unprepared and perplexed by the inhospitable moats that had formed at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street.


Changing the Nature of Retiree Homes
SOLOMON EISENROD has seen a lot of changes in his long career as a real estate developer, but none so striking as the way older Americans are turning the once sedentary retirement years into a period of vigorous activity.
Mr.
Eisenrod knows what he is talking about.
At age 85, he has followed the shift of living patterns for older people for more than three decades as the developer of two of New Jersey's largest communities for people 55 and over -- Rossmoor and Clearbrook, both in Monroe Township.


The Whitewater Case: Finding the Connections
On Wednesday, President Clinton asked Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special counsel to review his role as an investor in Whitewater Development Company, an Arkansas real estate development company, and Whitewater's links to a failed savings and loan, Madison Guaranty.
Mr.
Clinton has maintained that he and his wife did nothing except lose almost $70,000 in real estate venture; nothing that is known publicly about the investment indicates that the Clintons or anyone else in the Administration did anything illegal.


Seton Hall Covers Pitt Baskets for 13:07
Seton Hall 76, Pitt 67
Seton Hall limited Pitt to just six free throws through the first 9 minutes 58 seconds of the second half in a 76-67 victory yesterday.
These Pirates won in Pittsburgh for the first time in six seasons.
The few open shots Pitt had during that stretch were from the free-throw line.
Pitt's field-goal drought carried over from the first half, during which Pitt was scoreless for the final 3:09.
The drought totaled 13:07.
The Pirates were led by Arturas Karnishovas, who finished with 24 points, including 16 of 17 free throws.
The Pirates (9-4, 2-3 in the Big East) won their second straight conference game, having upset Boston College, 61-53, on Wednesday.
The Panthers (8-4, 3-2) entered the game having won three of their past four and were tied for second place.
Syracuse 88, Villanova 85
In Philadelphia, Lucious Jackson scored 20 of his career-high 24 points in the second half as No. 16 Syracuse rallied from an 18-point deficit.
Jackson hit on six 3-point shots in the second half and teamed with John Wallace, who also had 24 points to fuel the Syracuse comeback.
Villanova (6-6, 2-3 in the Big East) led 70-52 with 11:04 to go, but Syracuse (10-2, 3-2) rallied to 76-67 on a 3-pointer by Jackson at the 7:40 mark.
Georgetown 77, Providence 70
George Butler scored 23 points and Joey Brown had 16, and Georgetown withstood a late Providence rally in Landover, Md.
The Hoyas (9-3, 3-2 in the Big East) led Providence (9-3, 3-2) by 43-28 at intermission.
Providence shot just 40 percent.
Boston College 69, Miami 49
Bill Curley scored 8 of his 25 points during a 19-6 run to open the second half for No. 20 Boston College at home.
Boston College (11-4, 3-2 in the Big East) was held to a 33-33 halftime tie by Miami (7-6, 0-5), which has lost 22 consecutive league games.
Penn St. 78, Minnesota 67
John Amaechi dominated inside, drawing fouls and scoring 26 points, as Penn State upset No. 18 Minnesota (11-4, 2-1 in the Big Ten) for its first victory ever over a ranked Big Ten school, at State College, Pa.
Penn State had not defeated a ranked team since beating U.C.L.A. in the 1991 N.C.A.A. tournament and was 2-39 against ranked teams since 1975.
It hadn't beaten a ranked Big Ten team since joining the league last year, and the victory was just its third in league play.
Penn State (8-4, 1-2) forced the Golden Gophers into foul trouble early.
In the last 5:03 of the game, the Lions sank 16 of 20 free throws, including 7 by Dan Earl and 6 by Matt Gaudio.
Three Golden Gophers fouled out.
U.C.L.A. 82, Washington 62
Ed O'Bannon scored 22 points and George Zidek had a career-high 21 points for unbeaten U.C.L.A. in the Pac-10 game.
The Bruins (11-0, 4-0) are off to their best start since they opened the 1991-92 season with 14 victories.
Washington (2-11, 0-4) is off to its worst start since 1953-54 when it started 1-14.
Arizona State 63, California 60
Stevin Smith hit a 42-foot shot at the buzzer, giving Arizona State the upset of No. 19 California.
The Sun Devils rallied from 12 points down in the second half.
The tie-breaking shot, which came after Cal starters Jason Kidd, Ryan Jamison and Monty Buckley fouled out, ended an eight-game winning streak by Cal (10-3, 3-1 Pac-10).
Ron Riley scored 21 points for Arizona State (7-5, 2-1).
Massachusetts 87, St.
Bonaventure 60
Lou Roe scored 27 points, including the 1,000th of his career, to carry No. 7 Massachusetts at home.
For Massachusetts (13-1, 5-0 Atlantic 10), freshman center Marcus Camby had 15 points and dominated the middle during his 21 minutes, making three stuffs and blocking six shots.
Harry Moore led St.
Bonaventure (5-7, 1-4) with 16 points.
Louisville 88, Georgia Tech 68
Clifford Rozier scored 22 points and Jason Osborne hit three 3-pointers during a pair of 15-0 first-half runs and No. 15 Louisville beat No. 17 Georgia Tech.
Louisville (12-2) hit 10 of 16 3-point shots in the first half, then ended any Georgia Tech comeback hopes by hitting three straight 3-pointers to open the second half.
Wisconsin 75, Purdue 69
In Madison, Wis., Michael Finley scored 25 points and helped limit Purdue star Glenn Robinson to a season-low 15 points, helping No. 12 Wisconsin hand the No. 9 Boilermakers (14-1, 2-1 in the Big Ten) their first loss.
Rashard Griffith added 18 points and 16 rebounds for the Badgers (12-1, 3-1 Big Ten).
Robinson was averaging 29.1 points in the Boilermakers' 14-0 start, the best in school history.
But he missed 21 of 26 shots and turned the ball over 8 times.
Cincinnati 79, Dayton 63
Freshman Darnell Burton scored 14 of his 24 points in the first half for No. 21 Cincinnati.
Burton scored 11 points as Cincinnati (12-3, 1-1 Great Midwest Conference) closed the half with a 14-2 run.
Burton had three consecutive 3-pointers to help the Bearcats to a 29-16 halftime lead.
Dayton (4-9, 0-2) missed 11 of 14 3-pointers in the half and shot only 21 percent over all.
Columbia 53, Cornell 49
Jamal Adams and Boris Piskun sank two free throws each in the final 8 seconds, giving Columbia (3-8) the Ivy league opener.
Fred Johnson led the Lions with 16 points.
Leading for Cornell (5-7) was Justin Treadwell with 13 points.


Alarm Over Rooftop Gunfire
Young people are firing automatic guns into the air from the roofs of high-rise buildings in Bedford-Stuyvesant, stirring deep fears among residents and community leaders.
"It's traumatizing to hear the firing because it sounds like it's in the room with you," said Charles Ballard, a resident and director of the tenant's association at Sumner Housing at Throop and Park Avenues, where the gunfire is most prevalent.
"These youths are firing big weapons. They let go of 12, 13 or 14 rounds, and moments later from somewhere in the distance you hear the same number of shots, plus a couple more."


A Landmark for Landmarks


Service On 5 Miles Of Q Line Is Suspended
The Transit Authority has suspended service on a five-mile stretch of the Q train for about two years as it embarks on a $33.5 million project to repair overpasses from Newkirk Avenue in Flatbush to Coney Island.
The bridges on that line, which are about 30 years old, have shown signs of corrosion and need to be repaired, said Termaine Garden, a Transit Authority spokesman.


Husband of Slain Heiress Is Seen as Uneasy Traveler in the Land of Wealth
The working world that Scott Douglas inhabited by day felt congenial to him, as right as the white painter's slacks he wore to paint other people's houses.
Most mornings, the tall, rangy Mr.
Douglas would saunter into the McDermott paint store in Greenwich, Conn., chomping on a bacon and egg sandwich and laughing as the clerks who sold him paint greeted him with "Great Scott, it's Douglas." Or he would trade yarns about catching bluefish off local piers.


Bud of Contention
Consider the cabbage, a primitive plant with distinct personality problems.
According to Harold McGee's "On Food and Cooking" (Collier/Macmillan), the earliest wild cabbage developed its tough, waxy cuticle and thick, water-storing leaves, which are characteristic of desert succulents, in reaction to a hot Mediterranean sun.
Other vegetables and fruits of the same region -- peas, cherries, dates and figs -- sweeten and mellow as they mature, capitulating to the warmth, smiling back at the sun.
Cabbages -- Napa, Savoy and red and white, all varieties of Brassica oleracea, an ancient and obstinate tribe of vegetables -- remain bitter.


Harry Nilsson, Singer, Dies at 52
Harry Nilsson, a popular singer and composer in the 1960's and 1970's who won two Grammy awards for his literate, almost intimate songs, died yesterday at his home in Agoura Hills, Calif.
He was 52.
The cause was heart disease, said his agent, David Spero, who added that Mr.
Nilsson suffered a heart attack a year ago and had only recently begun to record again, finishing work on an album last Wednesday.


Growers Pushed to Help Everglades
The Clinton Administration and the State of Florida are increasing the pressure on Florida's sugar cane growers in a dispute over cleaning up water runoff from farms and restoring the Everglades.
The new strategy, following a deadlock last month in negotiations with the industry, was tersely described at an Everglades conservation conference here by Lieut.
Gov.
Buddy McKay: "litigate, legislate, regulate and mediate."


Kosher Mideast
LA KASBAH ++ (212) 769-1690; 70 West 71st Street; $$; all major credit cards
This glatt kosher restaurant features engaging Middle Eastern specialties.
To begin, a good option is the combination platter, which includes the smoky roasted eggplant puree called baba gannouj, falafel, lemony tabbouleh, Tunisian-style eggplant salad and mixed Moroccan salad.
For main courses there are three varieties of well-seasoned couscous: vegetable, chicken and lamb.
Another recommended dish is tagine, the slow-simmered flavorful lamb and vegetable stew made with prunes, celery, walnuts, raisins and rice. (Article: 11/3/89; revisited: 3/26/93)


Sex Educators for Young See New Virtue in Chastity
Lori Brown, 14, is practicing how to say no to sex, learning strategies to save her virginity.
Her instructor is Dajahn Blevins, a health educator from the Urban League here, who plays the role of the girl's would-be seducer and tests her with the crude patois of the street and the sweet promises of a fairy tale.


F.Y.I.
Stories in Flags Q.  On Inauguration Day, there were flags draped above the podium where Mayor Giuliani took his oath.
What did they represent?


An Identity Crisis Lasting Centuries


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE SORCERER'S APPRENTICE By Nancy Willard.
Illustrated by Leo Dillon and Diane Dillon.
Unpaged.
New York: The Blue Sky Press/Scholastic Inc.


More Reasons for Concern About Rail Yard Plan
To the Editor:
The Regional Plan Association's concerns about a private developer's plans for the Harlem River Rail Yard go beyond the environmental issues cited in a chart in the Dec. 9 Neighborhood Report.
The association has long supported the state's efforts to improve rail freight access in the region, including the revitalization of the Harlem yard.
We are concerned that the developer's plans for the site may not take full advantage of its potential as a regional freight center.
If properly used, it would help attract industry to the region, revive the economy and reduce traffic congestion.


Everything Was Purpler Then
OUT WITH THE STARS By James Purdy. 192 pp.
San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Cloth, $19.95.
Paper, $9.95.


Fixing America
FACING UP How to Rescue the Economy From Crushing Debt and Restore the American Dream.
By Peter G. Peterson.
Foreword by Warren B. Rudman and Paul E. Tsongas.
Illustrated. 411 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


The Hills Were Alive . . .
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay on WNCN-FM changing its classical music programming to a "pure rock" format underlines the shift away from classical music in general  [ "WNCN Met the Enemy. Guess Who?" Jan. 2 ] .
This trend has been amply evident in recent years to anyone who loves classical music, whether a professional musician or an avid concert goer.
There are many reasons for this development in the complicated world we live in.
There is one simple solution that could reverse this decline: a resurgence in music lessons.


SURFACING
STATEMENTS  Prozac caps: Feeling a little better?
Ready for some self-mockery?
A hot seller at Charivari is a baseball-style cap embossed with the word "Lithium" or "Valium" or the drug-of-the-moment, "Prozac."  RESTAURANTS  Soul city: The soul-food restaurant, a staple of New York's ethnic food scene, is having a renaissance.
The newcomers include Kwanzaa, at 19 Cleveland Street in SoHo; Soul Fixins', at 371 West 34th Street, and Cafe Beulah, which opens tomorrow at 39 East 19th Street.
STATUS  Laptop luggage: For the hacker of distinction, Louis Vuitton is offering a carry-on case for small computers.
Only $1,660.


'Animal' Term Is Not Racist
The debate over the use of the word "animal" to describe Colin Ferguson takes political correctness to an asinine level  [ "Shooting Overshadows Budget Crisis," Dec. 19 ] .
In light of the fact that Mr.
Ferguson made his motives for the shootings quite clear, the argument over whether "animal" is a racist term becomes irrelevant.


Correction
Because of a computer processing error, a letter to the editor on Jan. 2, about lawyers' reactions to an article of Dec. 19 on lawsuits brought on behalf of investors, omitted part of the new name of a law firm involved in such suits.
It is Beigel Schy Lasky Cohen Rifkind &amp; Hennessey.


Climate of Confrontation on Abortion
OVER the years, Dr.
Steven G. Kaali has become inured to protesters standing outside his abortion and fertility clinic here with signs reading, "Babies are being murdered in there." He has also become used to criticism from abortion foes who follow him to the supermarket, his home in Greenwich and the playground at his children's school.
Last Saturday was no exception outside the Women's Medical Pavilion on Ashford Avenue, where Dr.
Kaali is the medical director, although he said that he was surprised the picketers came out in the sleet and freezing rain.
On that day, 4 people braved the weather to oppose the 2,000 abortions performed at the clinic each year.
More often Saturday mornings will find up to 25 protesters.


Conversations: Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri N. Koptev; Two Professional Cold Warriors Share a Vision of Life in Space
FOR years, Daniel S. Goldin, who now heads NASA, and Yuri N. Koptev, director general of the Russian Space Agency, were on opposite sides of the cold war, creating space-age technology to keep the other at bay.
Now they have become the odd couple of space planning.
Flying around the globe, increasingly visible and assertive, they have successfully negotiated one political mine field after another to push their pet project -- an international outpost in space for astronauts of all nationalities.
If successful, the $30 billion venture, to be completed by the year 2001, will be the biggest science collaboration of all time.
In many regards the two men couldn't be more different.
Mr.
Goldin is trim, energetic, a drinker of Coca-Cola.
The portly Mr.
Koptev is philosophical and has a fondness for gin.
Yet similarities far outweigh the differences.
Both are 53 years old.
Both have been married about 30 years.
Both have two children.
Before directing the sprawling civil space programs of their two Governments, both were cold warriors who led technical groups with deadly military aims.
Mr.
Goldin was a director of top-secret space projects at T.R.W.
Inc., a defense contractor in California.
Mr.
Koptev was a high official in the Soviet Ministry of General Machine Building, which ran Moscow's military space program.


Threat of a Bloc Veto Hangs Over Meetings
In what could develop into one of the most momentous of their many meetings or deteriorate into another dud, major league club owners will gather in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., this week amid threats that some of them will hold the election of a commissioner hostage to revenue sharing.
The meetings have been preceded by a series of intriguing developments in the past week.


Hannah Storen and Dan Hicks
DAN HICKS, 31, a television broadcaster with NBC Sports in New York, does play-by-play coverage of National Football League games, something he has been practicing, along with his Frank Sinatra imitation, since he was a young boy with a tape recorder.
Hannah Storen, who is known as Hannah Storm professionally, is also a 31-year-old broadcaster for NBC Sports.
Wholesome, gung-ho and superknowledgeable about athletics, she has covered everything from the National Basketball Association to the All-England Tennis Championships at Wimbledon.


Fire-Damaged Windsor Reopens As It Rebuilds
WINDSOR CASTLE is said to be Queen Elizabeth's favorite.
It is the only royal residence in continuous use since William the Conqueror chose the site 30 miles west of London for a fortress in the mid-11th century.
Centered on the great Round Tower, its 13 acres of crenelated walls, terraces and gateways, courtyards and gardens constitute what Samuel Pepys, the 17th-century diarist, called "the most romantic castle in the world."
So it's probably fair to say that most Britons felt a catch in the heart 14 months ago with the news that a raging fire had devastated the castle's northeast corner.
The castle was reopened to visitors earlier this month, but restoration of the interiors is not set for completion until 1998.


FUTURE NON-SHOCK
Somehow the technology that's due tomorrow always seems far more profound and revolutionary than the high-tech products that arrived today.
Any moment now, the information highway will link computers and their owners in a worldwide network.
Genetic engineers, made wise with the fruits of the Human Genome Project, will repair the body's frailties and enhance its better qualities.
Nanotechnologists, the masters of the subminiature, will craft microscopic machines to navigate the bloodstream, plumb leaks and remove plaque.


Taken


Sound Bytes; Seeking the Next Xerox PARC
DAVID E. LIDDLE is president of Interval Research, which he co-founded in March 1992 with Paul G. Allen, a co-founder of Microsoft.
Interval's lofty but somewhat vaguely defined goal is to be for the 90's what Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) was to the 70's and 80's -- a wellspring of innovative technology.
PARC is legendary for having pioneered technologies ranging from the laser printer to the Ethernet office network and the graphical user interface for personal computers.
Like PARC, Interval is based in Palo Alto, Calif.
Mr.
Liddle was an important player at Xerox in the first go-around, and is credited with key roles in the development of the technology that led to the friendly face of Apple's Macintosh.
He was also the founder of Metaphor Computer Systems, now a unit of International Business Machines.


Ellen van Buskirk, Robert E. Knapp
Ellen Beth van Buskirk, a daughter of the late Andrew J. van Buskirk of Riverdale, N.J., and the late Elma Adell Monks van Buskirk, was married yesterday in San Francisco to Robert Edward Knapp, a son of George Knapp of Southbury, Conn., and the late Carmela H. Knapp.
The Rev.
Robert Kley performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Cathedral.
Ms. van Buskirk, 33, is keeping her name.
She is the director of corporate communications for the Sega Channel, an interactive cable television channel now in development, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.


Plants Need a Vacation at Times, Too
HOW about a rest now?
Most of the house plants are enjoying relaxation, so why not the gardener?
This rest period is essential for many plants growing in pots.
If they do not have it, they often become sluggish and do not bloom later in the year when they are supposed to.
The easiest way to tell if a plant needs a rest is to consider when it blooms.
The amaryllis bulb, for example, may just be finishing its bloom period.
So its foliage must grow on to nourish the bulb.
But if the amaryllis bloomed last spring and was summered outdoors, then by all means the bulb should be resting now.


Bills Come Out of the Cold in Second Half and Triumph
On some level, there was a matter of pride involved for the Bills today.
Rich Stadium is their domain, the frigid weather their balm.
But here were the Raiders of Los Angeles -- the fun, sun and surf capital of America -- frolicking around Rich Stadium in zero-degree temperatures as if it were a sunny California afternoon.
By the time the Raiders went up by 17-6 late in the second quarter, the Bills looked completely out of their element.


After 13 Seasons, Who Could Be Taylor's Next Target?
Lawrence Taylor, one of the best defensive players ever, did what everyone expected him to do: he retired today after 13 years of pro football.
In an eloquent but unemotional announcement in a cramped room below Candlestick Park, Taylor, who is a shoe-in for the Hall of Fame, announced his retirement after the Giants' humiliating 44-3 loss to San Francisco.
His reason was simple: he said he just couldn't do it anymore.


An Ailing Coleman to Miss the Mailman
Make sure you come early to the Nets game against the Utah Jazz in Byrne Meadowlands Arena Sunday night because Karl (the Mailman) Malone is only going to ring this once in the Meadowlands this season.
Don't, however, expect Derrick Coleman to be able to answer the doorbell.
"Derrick was here and he got treatment by the trainer, but he didn't participate in the shoot-around," said the Nets' coach, Chuck Daly, coming off a 103-96 home victory over Denver Friday night.
It was a victory without Coleman, who sat it out with back spasms.
"He's questionable," added Daly.
"So I guess we won't see that big confrontation everybody has been looking forward to."


The Littlest Prostitutes
IT IS BARELY MIDDAY AND THE THEATER OF THE flesh is well under way in one of Thailand's notorious red-light districts.
The massage parlor is already swallowing clients through its dark doorway; cheap perfume hangs in the air.
The Home of Body Building exudes a sour sweat from the hall where older men are eyeing prancing young boys.
But in a nearby shelter for former prostitutes the scene is demure, as girls settle down for group therapy.
This day, a visitor is taking Polaroid pictures and passing them around.
The pictures make the girls look like small, spindly birds, rather than sex objects.
It is hard to imagine that not long ago these children, aged 11 to 14, worked as prostitutes, used by men three and four times their age.
As soon as Lek sees her photograph, the quiet 12-year-old girl is transformed.
She jumps up and pokes wildly at her image.
She has never told her life story, but now she belts it out.
"This girl was sold by her mother," Lek shouts.
"This girl was 10 and she was sold to a woman called Auntie. Auntie put her in a brothel. Auntie beat her and made her work."


As to Maude's Whereabouts
To the Editor:
In her article about the flowering of the Irish film industry, "Ireland Finds the Green and Weaves a Spell"  [ Jan. 2 ] , Janet Roach made a misleading statement.
Describing the film Anjelica Huston will make from Nancy Cardozo's biography "Maude Gonne," Ms.
Roach said the Irish patriot participated in the Easter Rising of 1916.
While her divorced husband, John MacBride, was one of the 16 men executed by the British as a leader of the rebellion and she was friendly with many of those who participated (including Countess Markievicz, who was the most prominent woman involved), Maude herself was in Paris at the time.


Bike Lanes on the Verrazano?
The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge commands a breathtaking view of New York Harbor and beyond.
Now, there is renewed interest in making that view available to bicyclists and pedestrians.
After years of prodding from advocacy groups, city planning officials said last week that they were seeking a $100,000 Federal grant to study the feasibility of installing bicycle and pedestrian lanes on the bridge.


Lisa Montanese, Adam L. Gray
Lisa A. Montanese, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Montanese Jr. of Marblehead, Mass., was married yesterday to Adam L. Gray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter D. Gray of Penn Valley, Pa.
Craig Barshinger, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at a private home on St.
John, V.I.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Literary Rollers
ALENE PAONE of Oceanside lives two lives.
By day she is a teacher in Lawrence Middle School.
By night, and just about every day off, Ms.
Paone is the queen of the gambling press.


Putting Education First
Bank Street College of Education honors Henry R. Kravis; Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Jan. 10.


INSIDE
Finale for Giants and Taylor
The 49ers trounced the Giants, 44-3, and then Lawrence Taylor announced his retirement.
The Buffalo Bills beat the Los Angeles Raiders.
SportsSunday, section 8. (Some copies went to press before the games ended.)  Giuliani on Mosque Brawl
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sought to move past a brawl between the police and Muslims, and said progress is being made in the case.
Page 23.
Aspin Eyes Commission Job
Departing Defense Secretary Les Aspin said he would like to serve on a panel studying ways to cut duplication in the armed forces.
Page 20.


Sally Theakstone, Peter McGleughlin
Sally Emma Louise Theakstone, the daughter of George Peter Theakstone of East Sussex, Sussex, England, and Sheelagh M. E. Theakstone of Tadworth, Surrey, England, was married yesterday to Peter Thornton McGleughlin, a son of Diane Austin of New York and the late William McGleughlin Jr.
The Rev.
Robert McLean performed the ceremony at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Tadworth.
Mrs.
McGleughlin, 30, is a special-events organizer in London for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bank.
Her father retired as an assistant general manager at Lloyds Bank in London.


Jan. 9-15: A Bombshell in Virginia; Exit Wilder (Dramatically) From Political Battlefield
If L. Douglas Wilder is not remembered for his tenure as governor of Virginia, or for being the nation's first elected black governor, he will certainly be remembered for his dramatic exit.
Waiting almost until the end of his State of the Commonwealth speech Wednesday, Mr.
Wilder dropped a bombshell: He will not run in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate in June.
More to the point, he will not take on his archrival, Senator Charles S. Robb.


Streetscapes/Bronx Botanical Conservatory; When Is a Restoration Not a Restoration?
HOW long is a full-scale restoration good for?
Forty years?
Seventy-five?
One hundred?
The giant Conservatory at the New York Botanical Garden is getting its second restoration in 15 years.
Saved from demolition and renovated for $5 million by the architect Edward L. Barnes in 1978, the 512-foot-long complex of greenhouses closed last summer so Beyer Blinder Belle could begin a $21 million re-restoration.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Harrison; Luxurious Landlocked Corporate Haven
ITS borders stretch from White Plains to Mamaroneck and from Rye to Scarsdale.
Within it are five private country clubs, a dozen international corporate headquarters, almost that many Italian restaurants, a college and one university, a Japanese high school, an airport and three major roadways.
Tucked in between are some of the most expensive residential neighborhoods in Westchester.
Spacious $1 million homes on two acres are common; there are 38 estates on 10 or more acres plus three gatehouse communities and several more modest but well-defined residential areas.


Q and A
Tax Credit for Loss On a Sublet Co-op  Q. Two years ago, my wife and I moved out of our co-op apartment and began subletting it.
We hope that we will soon be able to sell the apartment, albeit at a substantial loss.
I am curious, though: If we sell it would we be able to use the loss to offset personal income only in the year of the sale, or is it possible to carry the loss over to the following years?
If so, how? . . .
Mark J. Ingber, Millburn, N.J.


At Work; A Firing for Cause, or for Abortion?
WHEN Robin Flanigan found out she was pregnant, late in 1990, she was 21, unmarried -- though engaged -- and new at her hairdresser's job at the Revelations in Hair Design salon in Columbia, Md.
She was not ready to have a baby.
Ms.
Flanigan comes from a devout Christian background.
"Abortion is against our religion," she said, so she contemplated that path with intense ambivalence.
"It's something I thought I would never do," she said.
"But I knew basically I was going to do it."
For making that decision -- and following through in early December of 1990 -- Ms.
Flanigan contends she was harassed and fired from her job.
Late last year, she filed a civil suit alleging wrongful dismissal against her former employers, Robin and Patrice Davidson, the salon's owners.
The crux of the complaint, which is to be served shortly, contends the Davidsons tried to interfere with a statutorily protected activity.


Disembarking
To the Editor: Why don't airplane passengers disembark the same way they embark?
What I mean is that the call goes out for those with physical ailments and children needing attention to get on first.
Then specific row numbers are called: rows 15 to 20, then 5 to 14, etc.


Schools That Level The Playing Field For New Yorkers
THE INFORMATION AGE HAS made us all experts at collapsing the world into points, lines and planes.
With the click of a button or the flip of a page, we can compress a city into a dot, a neighborhood into a caption, a building into a slide.
Ever more efficient media techniques help us to filter out life's cumbersome dimensions.
The nightly news can flatten California faster than an earthquake.
But architecture deals with space, with people, and with the lives they drag in through the door.
And a walk through a building, particularly one that lies off your usual path, can be a powerful way to rid yourself of flatland's deadening filters.
For instance, if you can arrange to visit one of the three new New York City elementary schools designed by Peter Samton and Jorge Luaces of the firm Gruzen Samton, your view of the inner city will be unimaginably enlarged.
When you hear the words "New York City public school," you will not automatically think "asbestos." You will not withdraw into nostalgic reveries of a time when the city was a beacon of opportunity.
Instead, you will see a democratic hothouse where New York's egalitarian tradition is sending forth young shoots.


Removal of Interior Walls Can Prove a Tricky Piece of Work
IF cabin fever has you yearning for open spaces, maybe it is time to consider enlarging a living area by removing a wall.
Planning is the key to success.
Call the building inspector to learn whether a permit is required.
Unless you are experienced or the job is very simple, it is usually best to have these systems relocated by professionals.
Also find out from the garbage carter about disposing the old material.
Building rubble generally has to be handled separately from ordinary trash.


COMPANIES ARE CUTTING THEIR HEARTS OUT
In "Companies Are Cutting Their Hearts Out" (Dec. 19), Secretary of Labor Robert B. Reich's advice to the pension funds to urge firms to invest more in their workers instead of cutting payrolls does not acknowledge the circularity of the problem.
Pension-fund investment managers must try for above-average, short-term investment performance.
They fear, and with good reason, that below-average or average short-term performance may lead to their replacement.
Thus, they favor the quick-fix strategy.


How Family Planning Came to Bangladesh
To the Editor:
No doubt, "contraceptives are the best contraceptive," as the three demographers you quote say in "Poor Lands' Success in Cutting Birth Rate Upsets Old Theories" (front page, Jan. 2), but getting people to use them is another matter.


Aiming High


Jan. 9-15: Vindication in New Jersey; It's True: Ed Rollins's Boast Was, in Fact, a Lie
Edward J. Rollins Jr. was vindicated last week. He was lying, after all.
It took three dozen Federal agents and state troopers two months to confirm that the campaign manager for Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey made up those tales of spreading $500,000 in "walking-around money" among the black clergy and Democratic party workers to insure a low turnout in Democratic city strongholds on Nov. 2.


'A Place at the Table'
To the Editor:
I am the bride who wrote the wedding vows that Bruce Bawer reports included the statement that "marriage between a man and a woman was 'the only valid foundation for an enduring home.' " In fact, the reference is to a quotation from Elizabeth Cady Stanton that I included in my wedding ceremony:
Two pure souls fused into one by an
impassioned love -- friends and
counselors -- a mutual support and
inspiration to each other amid
life's struggles, must know the
highest human happiness; this is
marriage, and this is the only
cornerstone of an enduring home.
The words were neither a "challenge" to Mr.
Bawer's relationship nor a "telling slip" showing subconscious disrespect.
Nor were they a statement that our ability to procreate makes my husband and me qualitatively different from those involved in single-sex relationships.
The words were a statement of the ardent love that my husband and I share, and a celebration of every other relationship founded on passion, friendship and honor.
BONNIE G. KLEIN  Falls Church, Va.
Margaret O'Brien Steinfels replies:
The letters address my proposition that "society has a legitimate interest in privileging those heterosexual unions that are oriented toward the generation and rearing of children," but do not directly attack it.
Instead, they emphasize the ways in which legal marriage departs from this role, embracing not only the infertile and adoptive, but increasingly the intentionally childless.
If we've gone this far, the letter writers ask, why stop here?
Why exclude gay people?
I agree that American society seems to be moving from an understanding of marriage largely in terms of family and intergenerational ties to one that emphasizes intimacy and the fulfillment of two individuals.
Appealing to this movement as a precedent is not convincing to those who believe that it has already gone too far.
None of the letters mention the most dramatic example of the way in which family life has changed -- namely, the rapid rise in out-of-wedlock births and children living in single-parent or no-parent households.
There are people who argue that to avoid stigmatization, we should regard these nontraditional forms as normal.
But this social experiment of only some 25 years' duration is failing large numbers of children and women.
This underlines the enormous social benefit that comes when two people vow not only to care for each other but to sustain the kind of relationship commonly involving several decades of caring for the next generation.
That is why I suspect society will want marriages recognized as qualitatively different from other relationships.
I suggested that this widespread concern remains high on the agenda for the dialogue that I believed Mr.
Bawer was advancing.
His letter implies that dialogue is conditional on prior agreement.
He believes that warning of the psychological consequences to gay people and their families of rejection resolves the "family" issue.
But nowhere does he address the social and political concerns I raise.
It is here that his metaphor, "a place at the table," misleads.
No nation is one big happy family, least of all our own.
Our genius has been to transcend family limitations to create a public space where all of us may interact, if only to agree to disagree.
The entrance ticket is tolerance, not approval.


Cabdriver's Slaying Touches Neighbors
HIS life came to an end on a drab street in East Harlem.
To those who investigate his murder, he is a number in an increasingly dangerous profession: the 42d cabdriver to have been killed on the streets of New York since New Year's Day 1993.
But to those here who knew him, who worked with him and shared his dreams and ambitions for a better life in a new world with an alien culture, Tarek Abdel Hamid is remembered as a caring soul who lived in fear.
Driving had become too dangerous for him and Christmas would have been his last day at the wheel, he had told friends.


Lillehammer's Moment in the Twilight
IN the winter the sun hangs dully just above the southern horizon, casting a strangely oblique light over Lillehammer and the frozen surface of Lake Mjosa.
At first glance it is a landscape of almost picture-book alpine familiarity, the neat terraces of pastel wooden buildings prettily cupped by a bowl of snow-covered hills rising steeply from the shore.
But it is the brittle, daylong twilight that lends such a different quality to the scene, giving queer angles to the shadows and washing the south-facing mountain slopes with a kind of bluish luminescence that reminds you, after all, that this is not Switzerland, but central Norway, just 380 miles short of the Arctic Circle.
The special attraction of Lillehammer's sub-Arctic twilight has not escaped the organizers of the XXVII Winter Olympiad, which opens here next month; they have timed the opening ceremonies -- at 4 P.M. local time on Feb. 12 -- to coincide with the peak moments of the sub-Arctic sunset, as viewed from the new Lysgardsbakkene ski jumping arena, in the hills nearly 1,000 feet above the town.
From there, television cameras at the event will sweep south, over Lillehammer and the lake and the southern horizon, which, if the day is cold and clear, should be aglow in its peculiar gauzy light.


Thea A. Diserio, Robert B. Ross
Thea Ann Diserio, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Diserio of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Robert Briesenick Ross Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Ross of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
John Rich officiated at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Ross is the senior vice president in charge of international distribution at New World Entertainment, a television production and distribution company in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a founding partner of Diserio Martin O'Connor &amp; Castiglioni, a law firm in Stamford, Conn.


More Security For Jewish Group
After recent threats, the American Jewish Committee has moved to improve security at its national headquarters, an eight-story building on 56th Street near Third Avenue.
The group's plan, approved by Community Board 6 last week, calls for four trees and six reinforced concrete pillars five feet apart in front of the building.
The pillars, 30 inches high and 12 inches in diameter, would be two feet from the curb.
They would keep vehicles off sidewalks and prevent cars with explosives from crashing into the building.


Giuliani Tries To Move Past Mosque Melee
A day after his Police Commissioner met with Muslim officials to discuss a brawl with police officers at a Harlem mosque, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sought yesterday to put the mosque incident behind him, saying that he believed "misunderstandings" had been resolved.
Reiterating his contention that the only real issue was the assault on police officers, Mr.
Giuliani also indicated that the police had made some progress in the investigation of the melee last Sunday, which grew out of a false report of a robbery.


Gozo Lacemaking
To the Editor: Your Malta article featuring lacemaking on Gozo (Nov. 21) brought back happy memories of my recent trip to that Mediterranean island this past summer.
Malta is perfect for vacationers.
Europeans make up the bulk of the in-season tourist traffic to its reasonable hotels and restaurants.
Petty crime is virtually nonexistent and language is no problem since most people there speak English fluently.


BENEFITS
Portrait of Edith Wharton  TUESDAY -- The actress Irene Worth will perform at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, in a special preview of her one-woman show, "Irene Worth's Portrait of Edith Wharton," which opens there on Thursday.
The program, which begins at 8 P.M. and is to be followed by a dessert reception, will raise money for the New York Shakespeare Festival's free performances in Central Park.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 598-7146.
For Family Planning  TUESDAY -- The Community Family Planning Council, a reproductive health agency in New York, benefits from a dinner-dance at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street.
The evening, which honors Margaret E. Mahoney, the president of the Commonwealth Fund, a foundation that supports health-care programs, begins with cocktails at 6:30.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 838-2660.


Jan. 9-15; Fighting Drugs With Retrotech
Rotary dials, which began to be phased out three decades ago, have reappeared on some 250 New York City pay phones.
This blossoming of retrotech is prompted by a pernicious aspect of urban life: the street drug dealer.
The old-fashioned dials can't be used to communicate with beepers, a staple of drug trafficking, for contacting customers and runners.
They also can't be used for the direct dialing of credit card calls -- the favored method for scams involving stolen cards.
"It's a step backward technologically, but it prevents a drug dealer from paging a customer," said Steven Marcus, a spokesman for Nynex, the successor to the New York Telephone.


Tipping in the Air? No, Thank You
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Call for In-Flight Tipping" (Letters, Dec. 26), in which Norma Sachs suggested that we tip airline flight attendants: Will this be each time the cart rolls through the cabin (five or six times on a transcontinental flight)?
Or will they pass a basket, as in church, just before the end of the trip when we pray for a safe landing?
My reaction is the same as that of Gen.
Anthony Clement McAuliffe just over 49 years ago: "Nuts!" ROBERT KAHN  Layfayette, Calif., Dec. 27


Programs for Organ and Jazz Piano
AMONG this week's keyboard programs, Gwendolyn Toth, founder-director of the period instrument ensemble Artek, gives a recital of Italian organ music at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains on Wednesday afternoon at 12:35.
Along with pieces by Gabrieli and Frescobaldi, her program highlights works by forgotten composers like Girolamo Cavazzoni and Bernardo Storace.
More details are available from the Downtown Music office at 949-0384.
Keith Robellard, director of music at the First Congregational Church and organist at Temple Beth El, both in Chappaqua, began his career as a prize-winning pianist, but in more recent years he has devoted most of his performing attention to music for harpsichord and organ.
For the Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra's second concert of the season, at 8 P.M. on Saturday at the First Congregational Church, Mr.
Robellard will be the soloist for Handel's Organ Concerto No. 4, then he will move to the harpsichord for Bach's "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 5.
The music director, James Sadewhite, conducts the all-Baroque program, which also features the Third "Brandenburg" Concerto and Corelli's Concerto Grosso in D. The information numbers are 769-4890 or 666-2693.


A Down-Home Conservative Becomes Virginia Governor
George Felix Allen, a conservative Republican who used his trademark cowboy boots to craft a folksy image, promised today to lift "the heavy, grimy boot of excessive taxation and spending and regulation" as he was inaugurated as Virginia's 67th Governor.
"At the outset of our journey, there was only a handful of insurgents who came forward to join our cause for a new direction in Virginia's government," said Mr.
Allen, the state's first Republican Governor in 12 years.
"By Election Day, the insurgency had become a revolutionary army. It was taking it back for you, the people of Virginia, not for the stolid, status-quo, monarchical elitist."


Where Those Deer Come From
While the Watchung Reservation's deer certainly browse in neighboring yards ("Rising Deer Herds Stir Hunting Debate," Dec. 19), they are mistakenly accused of grazing at Dryer's Farm.
The farm, in Cranford, is a small agricultural island surrounded by suburbia.
This parcel is about three miles southwest of the reservation.
Several major roads, including State Highway 22, occur between the Watchung Reservation and the farm.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
111.00
111.80
126.10
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7500
1.7283
1.6475
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3244
1.3183
1.2813
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4930
1.4930
1.5315
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$389.50
$386.25
$327.40
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Editorial Notebook; The Mammogram Controversy
The woman, a friend, is a bright, well-read feminist in her 50's, but she refuses to get mammograms.
She revealed this one day as we discussed the controversy stirred by the National Cancer Institute when it dropped its recommendation that women in their 40's get regular mammograms.
With a triumphant I-told-you-so look, my friend points to the N.C.I.'s decision as proof she was right all along.
"See what they're saying now?" she asks.
"That the radiation from mammograms is dangerous."
Huh?
Where did that come from?
Despite the controversy, scientists emphasize that radiation risk is minimal.
"No one is saying there's anything dangerous about mammograms," says Dr.
Peter Pressman, a breast cancer surgeon.
"Radiation hazard hasn't even come up."


Olympic Committee Reviews the Status Of Tonya Harding
The Olympic status of figure skater Tonya Harding, whose bodyguard is one of three men charged with conspiracy in the attack on Nancy Kerrigan, is being reexamined by the United States Olympic Committee.
U.S.O.C. leaders began meeting last night in Durham, N.C., to explore removing Harding from the United States team that will compete in next month's Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
Kerrigan was put on that team, along with Harding, despite being attacked on Jan. 6.


The Bluegrass Is Greener
Monday.
Perhaps, as it's a new year, I should start a new life.
I think I'll move to Nashville.
I read in the paper that Nashville is wholesome and booming.
People are leaving New York City in droves to find a better, simpler life there.
Perhaps I can buy a plantation in Nashville and let it go picturesquely to seed, as Scarlett O'Hara did, while I dance wearing drapes.
I could call it Minsk, after the old country.
Do they have plantations in Nashville?
Where is Nashville?
I must get a map, for the home of country-and-western music is now the home of urban exiles seeking a saner way of life as well.
I'm urban and I have nothing against the saner way of life, as long as it doesn't get out of hand.
I did consider moving to Paris, but then I read in The Wall Street Journal that French sales of offal are down by almost one-fifth in the past three years.
Tuesday.
"You hear a lot about people going back to churches, people having kids," one music publicist who moved to Nashville told a reporter.
"Country music reflects their life." To prepare myself for the move, I listen seriously to country music.
Sounds a lot like early 60's rock-and-roll.
I watch TNN.
The singers all have beautiful white teeth.
Nashville, blessed in its dental community as in so much else, beckons.
Wednesday.
Still -- should I reconsider Paris?
Their dentistry is not what it might be.
Neither is their country-and-western music, though surely that's just because they had such bad 60's rock-and-roll.
The French, at least, are trying to deal with the offal crisis: the French Tripe Confederation has instituted a $400,000 advertising campaign to attract young women and schoolchildren to eat more brains, stomachs, kidneys and testicles.
New York City, rich in dentists, nevertheless has no Tripe Confederation.
No wonder people are leaving the city and moving to Nashville and listening to 60's rock-and-roll.
and-western songs, trying to get into the spirit of family values.
Those people with white teeth slam a lot of doors and spend a lot of time in bars.
"I've got friends in low places where the . . . beer chases my blues away . . . not big on social graces, think I'll slip down to the Oasis. . . ." I like country-and-western music.
"Buyin' all his alibis . . . floating down a river of lies. . . . Just call me Cleopatra, everybody, 'cause I'm the queen of denial. . . ." It's the only pop music for grown-ups.
It's about failure.
"She got the gold mine and I got the shaft. . . ." I guess cheating and lying and drinking are family values.
I mustn't be judgmental.
Dysfunctional families are families, too.
Friday.
Will I have to join a 12-step program if I move to Nashville?
I don't really want to join a 12-step program.
I think I might try Kenya instead.
A fascinating letter to the editor today is much on my mind.
The author suggests that criticizing the clitoridectomy is an act of ethnocentrism and that if we only look at it from the correct point of view, female circumcision will appear as "an affirmation of the value of woman in traditional society." I'm certainly in favor of the affirmation of the value of women!
And the letter's description of a clitoridectomy has poetic force: "The dancing began and continued until after the sunlight failed. In the morning, the candidates bathed in a nearby stream, to be symbolically purified. The females were then privately circumcised by an elder woman." Deliciously Victorian sense of decorum and so much less pretentious than a bat mitzvah!
Saturday.
I hope I'm not too old to be a candidate for a clitoridectomy.
The letter says that sometimes a labiadectomy is also performed.
"Yet, whatever the degree of tissue removed, there is little doubt that for the girls it was a joyous occasion," writes Mr.
Maynard H. Merwine, history instructor at Lehigh Carbon Community College.
While I'm in Kenya, I could visit a wildlife preserve.
Sunday.
A.M.
Meant to visit friends in Park Slope today, but didn't.
Brooklyn is too far.
It occurs to me that Mr.
Maynard H. Merwine has probably not experienced the joy of clitoridectomy himself.
Perhaps, before moving to Kenya, I should await a more direct account of this important ritual.
Disappointed, I try to cheer myself with the many other tempting possibilities in other places.
In "W," I noticed that a couple have asked Mario Buatta to build an exact replica of the house in the movie "Howards End" -- right there in Oklahoma!
I wonder if they'd like to sublet.
And I recently read in The New Republic that there are newsletters sold in Los Angeles that help you move out of that city to innocent small towns or a patch of rural paradise.
Perhaps I should move to L. A. and subscribe.
Maybe they'd recommend a nice house in Park Slope with a garden.
That would be convenient.
So many of my friends have moved there.
I wonder what the dental situation is in Park Slope.
I wonder if there's a Park Slope Tripe Confederation.
But then everyone will promise to visit and won't.
P.M.
Took a walk to the 79th Street boat basin.
Looked at New Jersey.
If I moved to New Jersey, I could look at Manhattan.
And wish I lived here.
But I do live here!
What luck!


Bittersweet Homecoming for Keenan in Chicago
It used to be his favorite National Hockey League city, a place filled with friends and family, the place he called home.
Mike Keenan does not want to return.
Tonight, Keenan leads his Rangers into Chicago Stadium for what will most likely be New York's final game in the legendary arena, which will be replaced after this season.
Dismissed by the Blackhawks in November 1992, Keenan is not the typical coach returning to the site of his previous job.
There is a lot more to this.


Russian Truck Maker Becomes a Lab for U.S. Deals
BY the late 1980's, Nikolai I. Bekh was fed up.
As head of the vast Kamaz truck factory here, Mr.
Bekh felt shackled by the Soviet Union's central planners, who cared little about his efforts to develop new products, improve quality and increase exports.
So, in an almost unheard-of step, Mr.
Bekh went to Moscow with a request that Kamaz, the world's largest maker of heavy-duty trucks and one of the nation's largest industrial enterprises, be freed from state control.
Even more remarkably, the Government agreed.
In 1990, Kamaz became Russia's first big company to become private.


Hollywood on the Hudson
John Griffith had always planned to tear down the rusted, mildew-green Quonset hut that serves as a garage for his fuel oil company.
But that was before he, and his garage, went Hollywood.
On a chilly, gray morning this week, Mr.
Griffith watched as Paul Newman shuffled across the company's driveway and ducked under the garage's big door in a scene for a comedy called "Nobody's Fool." The movie, which stars Mr.
Newman, Bruce Willis, Melanie Griffith and Jessica Tandy, has been filming in and around this small Hudson Valley city since mid-November, and little has been the same since.


In the Region/Westchester; A Rush to Build for the County's Aging Population
IN recent years, the 27-year-old White Plains Hotel attracted few guests.
But a developer now hopes it will appeal to a growing market as a residence for the elderly who need some help with daily chores.
In Rye, a nursing home built in 1908 is about to be transformed into an apartment building for the aged who wish to live independently, but in a structured environment.


Images of Bodyguard Textured by Shadows
As Portland television stations repeatedly played the images of Nancy Kerrigan, crumpled and crying after she was attacked at the national figure skating championships last week, Shawn Eric Eckardt began to realize the gravity of his role in the crime.
Seized by feelings of anguish and a need to tell his story, he sought out a minister friend and revealed what he and others had done.
With a past that includes an arrest for soliciting a prostitute, extensive interest in espionage and brief service as the bodyguard for Kerrigan's rival, Tonya Harding, Eckardt hardly seems the type to be swayed by sentiment or emotion.


Skating News Crosses the Atlantic, Too
The Nancy Kerrigan-Tonya Harding saga is making waves on this side of the Atlantic, too.
From network news in Frankfurt to radio broadcasts in Paris to tabloids (and broadsheets) in London, Europeans are being updated regularly on the plot twists and legal turns in the sports world's latest example of fact triumphing over fiction.
Members of the continent's figure-skating establishment are having difficulty believing their ears and eyes as they prepare for this week's European championships in Copenhagen.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
For Brooklyn Credit Union, New Site Has Built-In Bonus
Once a bank, always a bank.
At least that's the prospect for the three-story Chemical Bank branch at 1205 Fulton Street near Bedford Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Ms. Forrester, Mr. Gaffney
Margretta Van Evera Forrester, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Macquorn R. Forrester of St.
Louis, was married there yesterday to Walker Laird Gaffney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Gaffney of Brooklyn.
Msgr.
Jerome Wilkerson officiated at Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church.
The Rev.
F.
Goldthwaite Sherrill 2d, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 29, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is the director of communications at Intoximeter, a manufacturer of devices that measure alcohol intake.
Her father is the company's chairman.
Her mother, Gretta Forrester, is the president in St.
Louis of the Crosby Corporation, a holding company with mining interests, based in Salt Lake City.


Empire State, a Work in Progress
Despite the inconveniences of its most ambitious renovation project ever, the Empire State Building drew a record 2.8 million visitors in 1993, up 12 percent from the previous year, officials said.
The record numbers were a result of a slight increase in tourism in the city thanks to the weak dollar overseas, the closing of the World Trade Center observatory for nearly two months after the building was bombed on Feb. 26 and the Empire State's starring role as a romantic meeting place in the film "Sleepless in Seattle," said Laura Fries, director of the building's observatories.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 16, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
48
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
2
3
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
3
4
THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her Colorado hometown.
4
7
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
5
2
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
6
8
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
7*
92
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
8
9
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
9
96
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
5
DESIRE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) The medieval romance of a lady and a knight.
11
1
THE REBEL BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Topaz, $4.99.) A revised version of a 1979 novel about a tempestuous romance in Regency England.
12
55
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
13
8
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
14
19
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
15
13
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
532
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
2
18
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
5
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
4
11
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
5
1
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
6
48
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
7
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The case of a Southern woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
8*
118
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9
7
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
10
7
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
11
11
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
12
12
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
13*
26
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
14*
15
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
15*
22
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
5
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
2
3
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
3
16
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
4
148
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Lung Rehabilitation for Emphysema
A FEW weeks ago Gus Politano, 63, of Levittown, could not climb more than a few steps.
He was too out of breath to play with his 2 1/2-year-old grandson or lift his infant granddaughter.
Three years ago Mr.
Politano, 63 was given a diagnosis of emphysema, a chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, that caused increasing shortness of breath and fatigue and left him barely able to function.
Last month he entered the inpatient pulmonary-rehabilitation program at the Brunswick Hospital Center in Amityville, the first such program on the Island.


Four Sisters, One Secret
OUR FATHER By Marilyn French. 450 pp. Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


Neediest Cases Helps Mother Make a Home for Her Son
In November 1990, Lisa Smith's goals in life were modest: to get away from her mother and to find a home for herself and her 2-week-old son, Anthony.
"My mother and I were just not getting along," said Ms.
Smith, who was 28 at the time.
"And it got worse and worse. It got to the point where I would go anywhere or do anything to get out."


Aristide Opens Conference With Plea for Help
Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, opened a conference here today on his country's political impasse by calling on foreign governments to help him return to office by Feb. 7.
In a speech laced with implicit criticism of recent diplomatic pressure on him to renew talks with his political enemies, Father Aristide told a crowd of more than 200 people at the two-day conference: "Our challenge is not to devise a strategy to manage the crisis in Haiti. Our challenge is ending the crisis in Haiti."


A Bibliophile's Baedeker
THERE'S a scene in Bernard Malamud's novel "The Assistant" when the owner of the corner grocery first visits the larger, more modern competitor down the street, all gleaming shelves and modern technology, and is filled with foreboding.
A somewhat similar feeling has settled over some of the people who still make "The Assistant" available to the public, the bookstore owners who have watched with a certain apprehension as the new Barnes &amp; Noble superstore at 82d Street and Broadway in Manhattan has turned into the biggest thing in the New York bookselling business since Scribner's on Fifth Avenue, threatened with extinction, was transformed into Brentano's.


Clinton Promises Help for Belarus Before Changing Focus to Mideast
Switching his focus from Russia to the Middle East, President Clinton flew from Moscow to Geneva today for meetings on Sunday with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria aimed at getting the stalled Mideast peace talks started again.
On his way to Geneva, Mr.
Clinton stopped in Belarus, where he pledged at least $50 million in additional aid, including $25 million to help the Government carry out its pledge to surrender all 81 of the old Soviet SS-25 nuclear missiles left on its soil.


No Sweat
JAKE STEINFELD admits he was the proverbial doughnut-loving fat boy.
When his father bought him a weight-lifting set in the early 1970's, the teen-ager with a couch potato's belly let it rust unused in the backyard.
But in a metamorphosis that rivals anything touted by Charles Atlas, or perhaps even Franz Kafka, the New York City youth retooled his body and became the high priest of the Hollywood set that sees looking good as a secular religion.


Horrors!? It's Another Restaurant
First came the Hard Rock Cafe, with its signature taillights stuck in the facade.
Then, in 1991, Planet Hollywood opened as a mini-movie museum on West 57th Street.
Motorcycles are the prop du jour at the Harley-Davidson Cafe, which made its debut in October at 56th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
This cluster of theme establishments around 57th Street is beginning to turn the heart of midtown into something of an amusement park.


Commercial Property/Splitting Fees; When the Tenant With Clout Shares a Commission
LAST year, the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company formed a subsidiary licensed to do real estate transactions in New Jersey.
The company had as much intention of brokering deals as it did of building cars.
So why the license?
Because A.T.&amp; T. had named 222 Realty, a brokerage firm in Basking Ridge, as its agent for all New Jersey space searches of 75,000 square feet or less.
In exchange for a lock on that business, the brokerage agreed to share its commissions with A.T.&amp; T. And since under New Jersey and New York laws only licensed brokers can share in commissions, it was worth it to the telephone company to get certified.


A Tested Chemotherapy
To the Editor:
You incorrectly term high-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow transplant treatment (high-dose chemotherapy with blood product support) for advanced breast cancer patients as "experimental" and unproved in "$89 Million Awarded Family Who Sued H.M.O." (front page, Dec. 30).
High-dose chemotherapy treatment for advanced breast cancer has substantial support in the medical literature and is in use in leading hospitals.


Best of Gibes, Wurst of . . .
WHAT does the leader of the free world say to the German Chancellor when they meet at a crucial international summit?
If the leader is Bill Clinton and the Chancellor is Helmut Kohl, the topic is not throw-weights, as in missiles, but plain old weight, as in pounds.
Both men have fought long battles against avoirdupois, but while the Arkansan has won at least a standoff, Mr.
Kohl long ago conceded defeat.


THEIR IRONY, HUMOR (AND ART) CAN SAVE CHINA
In Andrew Solomon's article "Their Irony, Humor (and Art) Can Save China" (Dec. 19), the cultural underground appears to be as misogynistic now as the Students for a Democratic Society and the Black Panthers were in this country in the 1960's.
The only woman mentioned by name is Lao Li's girfriend, Liao Wen.
The only other women are derided as "our next big export . . . the ugliest women in China." LISA HEIN New York, N.Y.


Bill Seeks Hard-Labor Terms In Some Crimes
AN influential Republican state senator who says inmates are being coddled at taxpayer expense is introduceding legislation that would create a prison whose primary purpose would be to punish criminals through a regimen of intense physical labor.
That plan by the Senator, Gerald Cardinale of Demarest, calls for a "hard time facility" for violent felons that would combine backbreaking work, unbending discipline and the absence of such amenities as basketball courts, televisions and library privileges.
The aim, he said, would be to make prison life so unpleasant that even the most hardened criminals would shun future illegal endeavors to avoid returning there.


Miracle on 35th Street: A Last Wish Is Granted
To the Editor:
Last month I attended a benefit for the Manhattan Center for Living at the Church of the Incarnation on East 35th Street.
It was called "Miracle on 35th Street," and more than 20 stars, including Liza Minnelli and Susan Sarandon, performed to help an organization whose volunteers visit and provide services for 1,700 homebound people with terminal illnesses like AIDS and cancer.


Jan. 9-15; Off the Ground, for a While at Least
Ever since 1783, when Jean Pilatre de Rozier became the first person to go aloft in a balloon, adventurers have sought to float around the earth.
For more than four years, hundreds of donors, salaried experts and devoted volunteers have given their skills, labor and some $7 million to build and fly Earthwinds, the most complex, ambitious and expensive balloon project in history.
Despite a promising launch last week, Earthwind's fourth attempt to circumnavigate the globe failed, and the project's future was uncertain.


It Takes 2 To Paint
The opening of an exhibition by Gilbert &amp; George, Jan. 11 at the Robert Miller Gallery.


The Old West
To the Editor: Your article "Arizona's Corner of the Old West" (Dec. 12) makes only scant reference to "a couple of museums" in Tombstone.
If tourists were to visit only one thing, they should forget Boot Hill, the O.K.
Corral and all the dude bars and go to the Tombstone Courthouse State Historic Park, 219 East Toughnut Street..
It is a delightful building with excellent displays on the history of the town and region where one will learn more about the "shoot-out" than is possible watching any of the re-enactments.
ANDREW J. FORESTER  Toronto


Lincoln Center and Its Critics Swing Away
JAZZ CRITICS HAVE ALWAYS BEEN an argumentative bunch, but the current critical uproar over the jazz program at Lincoln Center is something new.
As the program has moved into its third season, reviewers, writing in The New York Post, The Daily News, the Nation and a number of other journals have attacked, with increasing frequency and stridency, Lincoln Center's attempt to establish a sort of canon for jazz -- a body of work by musicians as different as Louis Armstrong and Thelonious Monk that might define certain stylistic tendencies in the music.
The controversy reached a fever pitch in November when The Village Voice published a full-page broadside by the reviewer Kevin Whitehead that questioned the program's motives and philosophy in extremely combative terms.
The program's artistic director, Wynton Marsalis, was so infuriated by the Whitehead piece, which came on the heels of another full-page critique only a month earlier by The Voice's regular jazz reviewer, Gary Giddins, that he wrote a 2,500-word response challenging Mr.
Whitehead's premises and conclusions.
The Voice declined to publish Mr.
Marsalis's letter.


Plants Need a Vacation at Times, Too
HOW about a rest now?
Most of the house plants are enjoying relaxation, so why not the gardener?
This rest period is essential for many plants growing in pots.
If they do not have it, they often become sluggish and do not bloom later in the year when they are supposed to.
The easiest way to tell if a plant needs a rest is to consider when it blooms.
The amaryllis bulb, for example, may just be finishing its bloom period.
So its foliage must grow on to nourish the bulb.
But if the amaryllis bloomed last spring and was summered outdoors, then by all means the bulb should be resting now.


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; How to Cook a Burger
"Make sure the cooked meat is gray or brown throughout (not pink), that any juices run clear and that it is hot on the inside."
Hot is good.
But gray or brown?
Do we have to?
Is steak tartare the fugu fish of the 90's?
Yes, according to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, from which this advisory comes.
And also according to the Agriculture Department.
It proposes to require that meat and poultry, like stepladders, hair dryers and decongestants, be packaged with instructions on proper usage.


A Mind Is A Funny Thing
CASE FILE: Glenn C. Ellenbogen. Birthdate: Oct. 4, 1951.
PROFESSION: Editor and publisher of The Journal of Polymorphous Perversity (also works part time as a forensic psychologist for City of New York).


Police and the Mosque: Aftermath of a Hoax
As worshipers gathered a week ago for services in Muhammad's Mosque No. 7 in west Harlem, someone placed a 911 call and reported an armed robbery at the building.
"He's sticking up the Muhammad's Mosque," the caller said.
After describing the robber's clothing, the caller said, "He's also selling crack." He then added that the gunman had an accomplice who "has a gun, too."


Disney Tickets
To the Editor: Two weeks or so before Christmas, Disney World changed its admission policy so that any tickets, including four- and five-day passes, are limited to one park each day.
Our family likes to spend the day at Magic Kingdom or MGM Studios Theme Park and then have dinner at one of the Epcot Center restaurants and see the laser show.


'A Holocaust Of the Fine Arts'
To the Editor:
I was shocked at the personal attack Michael Kimmelman saw fit to level against me in his essay "Cleanliness Isn't Always Next to Godliness"  [ Dec. 12 ] , wherein he commented on my book "Art Restoration," which was published in September in London by John Murray.


How the East Was Won
THE CONQUEST OF A CONTINENT Siberia and the Russians.
By W. Bruce Lincoln.
Illustrated. 500 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


He Is the Very Model Of a Modern Machiavellian
Malicious, manipulative, unscrupulous yet irresistible, Francis Urquhart, the conservative politician who schemed and murdered his way to the post of prime minister of Great Britain in the widely praised BBC series "House of Cards," is back.
In "To Play the King," the four-part sequel that starts tonight on PBS, no one is safe from Urquhart's cruel ambition -- not even His Majesty.
Urquhart (pronounced UR-cut and played again by Ian Richardson, above) finds himself locked in a battle with the newly enthroned King, who yearns and agitates for more humane social policies ("dismal egalitarianism," sniffs the Prime Minister).
As the royal message begins to win public support, Urquhart realizes that he will have to stand for re-election quickly, using his full stockpile of dirty tricks.
"If you will the end," he says, summing up his political philosophy, "you must will the means."


SUNDAY, January 16, 1994; Listening to Plastic
No one speaks of the fine patina of old plastic.
It has always been considered cheap, nasty and artificial, while other man-made materials like glass and steel get respectful, sometimes even reverent, attention.
Well, finally some authority is willing to give plastic its due.
A new anthology, "The Plastics Age: From Bakelite to Beanbags and Beyond," from the Overlook Press, seeks to reinterpret, if not rehabilitate, what a contributor, Roland Barthes, calls that "disgraced material." Plastic was developed as a substitute for more luxurious materials, but is now, says Barthes, "the first magical substance which consents to be prosaic."


Giving Needy Adolescents a Friend
Judge Gloria Dabiri has a photo on her desk in her chambers at the Brooklyn Family Court.
It shows two rows of people.
In the back is a line of smiling men.
Seated in front, in the characteristic slouches and sprawls of male adolescence, is a row of teen-agers.
Judge Dabiri and some of her colleagues call these kids their "drop in the ocean." But, they say, you've got to start somewhere.
For three years Judge Dabiri shared chambers with Judge Myrna Martinez Perez.
Both of them were becoming concerned with the number of young minority men coming before the court on what's known as a PINS petition.
The acronym stands for Persons in Need of Supervision.


Susan Pitman, Joseph Kinney 3d
Susan Pitman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Pitman of Livingston, N.J., was married last evening to Joseph A. Kinney 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kinney Jr. of Maplewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter Funesti, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Madison Hotel in Convent Station, N.J.
Rabbi Alfred Landsberg took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Kinney, 27, is a social studies teacher at Meade Junior High School in Fort Meade, Md.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University and received a master's degree in education from Montclair State College.
Her father is a partner in Pitman, Pitman &amp; Mindas, a law firm in Springfield, N.J.
Her mother, Wilma Pitman, is a special education teacher at Columbia High School in Maplewood, N.J.


From Jarvi, Billions and Billions of Records and Still Counting
Publicists for the volcanically prolific Neeme Jarvi might consider setting up a running digital tally of his recordings, next to those billboards showing how much money MCI saves and the Federal deficit squanders.
The Estonian-born conductor's projects are piling up in stupendous numbers; just in the last month or two, he has produced a five-disk set of Stravinsky orchestral works, the complete symphonies of Nielsen and new installments in symphonic cycles of Mahler and Shostakovich.
Before the millennium is out, he will probably be the most recorded conductor in history.
Mr.
Jarvi's reputation does not rest merely on the volume of his work.
He is, first of all, a marvelous musician who draws committed playing from a wide array of orchestras.
He also demonstrates a tireless and discriminating commitment to unknown and underrated music.
He championed his Soviet colleagues Arvo Part and Alfred Schnittke long before they became fashionable (and ceased to be Soviet).
One of his current enthusiasms is the early-20th-century Danish composer Rued Langgaard, whose Symphony No. 6 he will conduct with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday.


COMPANIES ARE CUTTING THEIR HEARTS OUT
Reich raises Japan as a paradigm of virtue for its lifetime employment policies.
In reality, Japan is aggressively forcing workers from its payrolls through attrition, retirement and layoffs.
Yes, layoffs!
In Europe, rules that encourage bloated payrolls hamper Germany's ability to respond to competitive pressures.
Watch Daimler-Benz and VW to see what comes next.
So much for lifetime employment!


Stretch of Piers Awaits Its Turn To Be Cinderella
The four city-owned piers along the East River at Manhattan's southern tip have long been overshadowed by their waterfront neighbors: the South Street Seaport Historic District and Fulton Fish Market.
Over the years the piers have had a number of uses, including as a parking lot and as tennis courts run by the New York Health and Racquet Club beneath enormous plastic "bubbles."
Now city officials and local leaders are seeking to open up the waterfront to the public, provide recreation and attract more maritime businesses.
The city's Economic Development Corporation is spending $10 million to restore the deteriorated pilings at Piers 13 and 14 and plans a parallel renovation of Piers 9 and 11. (There is no Pier 10 or 12.) The agency is also seeking $6 million in Federal aid for a pedestrian esplanade connecting Battery Park to the South Street Seaport.


Looking


Review/Fashion; Couture Is Dead? 3 Masterly Shows Prove It's Not So
What could easily have been a fashion disaster turned into an act of renewal.
Against all odds, Karl Lagerfeld of Chanel, Gianni Versace and Christian Lacroix breathed life into the haute couture spring shows, which opened this weekend.
For years the concept of made-to-order clothes, painstakingly fitted to individual customers, has been considered an anachronism.
The styles were hopelessly old-fashioned.
The price tags, starting at five figures, had reduced the client pool to an estimated 2,000 women throughout the world.
And plans to broadcast the shows over closed-circuit television had fallen through: the $1,600 charge for a single ticket was considered too steep.


Capriati, Only 17, Puts Racquet in Mothballs
In a twist on early retirement that's unprecedented in tennis, 17-year-old Jennifer Capriati has decided to temporarily walk away from the sport that anointed her its brightest superstar yet at 13 but has since brought her as much stress as success.
No other teen-ager at the top has ever elected to voluntarily leave tennis and, not so coincidentally, no other teen-ager has ever been burdened with such massive expectations.
Let other kids fantasize about being rich, famous and No. 1 while taking a long limousine ride to posterity.
Capriati wants out.


At Memorial, Friends Remember, William Shirer as Acute Observer
At a memorial service today for William L. Shirer, the foreign correspondent and author who shaped Americans' views of Hitler, Gandhi and other people who changed the world, the historian James MacGregor Burns remembered his friend as a man "who chronicled some of the most splendid and the most terrifying events of the century."
But Mr.
Burns, professor emeritus at Williams College and author of "Roosevelt: The Lion and the Fox," said he remembered Mr.
Shirer best as "a wonderful conversationalist, a proud gardener, a skillful sailor and an acute observer to all that goes on around him."


Student Loan Marketing Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance In Review
'To the Pointe'  Church of the Holy Trinity  316 East 88th Street Manhattan


The Wolverines' Five: Hardly Fab in Indiana
Their hearts tell them that they're better.
But when it came time to pack their troubles in their gym bags, the Michigan Wolverines -- the Fab Five Minus One -- left Assembly Hall today with the same emptiness they took home last year and the year before that.
An early, imposing 15-point lead had vanished, and a late comeback was unsuccessful in a 82-72 loss to Indiana.
Another nationally televised, high-profile disappointment brought this gifted, charismatic group one step closer to a final assessment that may be as inevitable as it is cruel.
For all the expectations these Wolverines have exceeded in their freshman and sophomore seasons, and all the work that remains to be done to compensate for the talent, leadership and perspective Chris Webber took to the professional level, they are now running the risk of becoming known more for what they have not accomplished than for what they have.


Leading Russian Reformer Quits, Questioning the Cabinet's Policies
A day after President Clinton left Moscow, carrying assurances of continued Russian market reforms, their architect, Yegor T. Gaidar, announced today that he was quitting the Government because he did not think that it would pursue a sensible economic policy.
"I cannot serve in the Government and at the same time be in opposition to it," Mr.
Gaidar said, citing recent decisions made without Cabinet approval that he said contradicted his efforts to stabilize the economy and bring the budget deficit under control.


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Wanted: anything with JIMMY CARTER'S name or face on it.
The National Park Service is looking for photographs, letters, newspaper articles, scrapbooks, campaign paraphernalia or similar memorabilia for a museum being set up at the Jimmy Carter National Historic Site.
"We are talking about anything pertaining to someone becoming President from a small, southern rural community," Park Ranger Lloyd Hoffman told The Associated Press.


RPM Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


D.M.B.&amp; B. Chosen By Kraft Bakery Unit
The GF Bakery Companies, a unit of Kraft General Foods in Bay Shore, L.I., has named D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York to handle its Freihofer's baked goods account, which had been at Partners Meany in Albany for the last eight years.
Billings were estimated at less than $5 million.
Nancy Daigler, a spokeswoman for GF Bakery, said on Friday that the shift consolidated the unit's accounts, with combined billings estimated at $40 million, at D.M.B.&amp; B., which also handles brands including Entenmann's and Lender's.


Octel Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Most Markets Open Today
The Government securities market will be closed today for the observation of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., but other financial markets will be open.
Many businesses will be open, but banks have the option to close.


ICF Kaiser International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CHRONICLE
Another Presidential site is expanding, also.
The Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace plans to unveil the Center for Peace and Freedom on Thursday.
The research center is intended to be a public policy center unlike any other in the country.
A library board member and former aide in the Nixon Administration, Ken Khachigian, said the center would focus on philosophical and strategic discussions over America's world role very much in the pattern of RICHARD NIXON .


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The architect of Russia's free-market changes said he was quitting the Government because he did not think it would pursue a sensible economic policy.
Yegor T. Gaidar's announcement came a day after President Clinton left Moscow, carrying assurances that economic changes would continue.  [ Page A1. ]


Expanding the Meaning of 'Choice'
Every year approximately three million American women get pregnant unintentionally.
Half give birth; half choose abortion; most would probably choose not to have gotten pregnant in the first place.
But their contraceptives failed or they were careless or, especially if they were teen-agers, they were plain ignorant.
Preserving a woman's right to end a pregnancy has engaged groups like the National Abortion Rights Action League for years.
Now Naral has changed its name to the National Abortion Rights and Reproductive Action League (Narral) and is broadening its battleground.
The group proposes to insure a woman's right not to start a pregnancy.


Sermon of Appeal From Father of Girl In Hunt for Her Body
In his first sermon since the New York State police started an intensive search for the body of his daughter, the father of Sara Anne Wood prayed yesterday for a successful end to the search.
Robert Wood told parishioners at Norwich Corners Presbyterian Church that "these are difficult days" for the family as they await word from searchers looking for his daughter's body in the Adirondack Mountains.


Father Returns To Claim Estate Of Child He Left
A 38-year-old man who left his wife and daughter more than a decade ago and owes tens of thousands of dollars in child support is asking a court for half the estate of his daughter, who died last summer at the age of 15.
The father, James E. Brindamour, is seeking half of the $350,000 an insurance company paid after his daughter, Colleen, was killed when a pickup in which she was a passenger skidded off a road and crashed into a tree.


Corrections
A listing of emergency numbers and advice for cold weather yesterday included an incorrect number for emergency shelter referrals in New York City.
The correct number, operated by the city's Department of Homeless Services, is (800) 994-6494.


Oracle to Disclose Deals For Interactive Services
In a push into new multimedia and interactive-television markets, the Oracle Corporation plans to announce on Monday a new version of its data base management software that will provide multimedia services like movies on demand and electronic versions of newspapers.
The software developer is also expected to describe joint development deals with The Washington Post Company and Capital Cities/ABC.
Oracle, based in Redwood City, Calif., is staking out its ground early in the emerging business of sending video and electronic data and providing interactive services like home shopping.
It announced a similar agreement last week with Bell Atlantic to establish a commercial interactive television and home shopping service in the Washington area.


Lemieux Returns to Devils
Claude Lemieux, the Devils' feisty right wing, rejoined the team yesterday after a one-week leave of absence to rest his body and also his mind from a strenuous, ongoing divorce.
Lemieux spent most of the time in Florida.
According to team policy, Lemieux lost a week's pay from the $860,000 salary he earns during the eight-month regular season.
Because hockey players get paid only during the season, the week off cost Lemieux more than $30,000.


Toying With Violence in Albany
At a time when New Yorkers are more fearful of violence in the streets than ever, Republicans in the State Senate are playing games with gun control -- and with public safety.
That's the clearest way to describe their politically motivated plan that would scuttle an assault weapon ban by tacking on a provision to install the death penalty in New York State.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo has vetoed the death penalty 11 consecutive times; he would be right to do it again.
The death penalty takes lives, sometimes in error, but statistics show it does not deter crime.
Placing the death penalty and the assault weapon ban together in a single bill virtually assures a veto by the Governor -- and thus assault weapons would remain legal.


Internet Users Get Access To S.E.C. Filings Fee-Free
In a two-year experiment that begins today, documents filed electronically to the Securities and Exchange Commission from public companies will be available to users of Internet, a global network of computer networks.
Documents obtainable on the service include annual reports, 10-K filings, proxy statements and other information valued by traders and investors.
These documents are already available electronically through commercial data suppliers, including Mead Data Central Inc. of Dayton, Ohio, but the new Internet service is the first to make them available without additional charges.


World Economies


Dallas Casts New Image, In Bronze, as a Cow Town
People in Fort Worth, 30 miles west of here, have long had a pithy way of explaining the difference between the two cities.
Fort Worth is where the West begins, they say.
Dallas is where the East peters out.
But in one enormous artistic undertaking on a 4.2-acre plot downtown, Dallas is now officially on a mission to redraw forever the boundary of the American frontier.
The city is erecting a giant bronze rendering of a 19th-century cattle drive, with 70 six-foot-high steers and 3 trail riders herding them up a ridge and past a man-made limestone cliff a block from City Hall.


Berlin Wright Gets The New Yorker Job
The New Yorker has awarded its account to Berlin Wright Cameron in New York, a month after Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, the weekly magazine's agency for the last three years, resigned.
Billings have not been determined.
The decision reunites The New Yorker and Andy Berlin, the chairman and chief executive of Berlin Wright, who was formerly a principal and chief executive of Goodby, Berlin.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to its regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, which will be held tomorrow because of today's observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.96 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.14 percent.


Market Place; What's next for Beta Well when its business runs dry?
IT'S great to have a very profitable business. But what do you do when it vanishes?
If the company is Beta Well Services, a Canadian company traded on the American Stock Exchange, you bury that fact as deep as you can in your annual report, which you delay issuing for as long as you can.
At least that's what it looks like.
Beta, which became a hot stock last year on the strength of Russian oilfield service operations, appears to be losing all those revenues.
Whether it can replace them or not is, at best, highly questionable.


Sanctions On Japan Less Likely
Japan has prepared a plan for opening its public-sector construction market for bidding by foreign companies, making it less likely that Washington will impose trade sanctions on Thursday, a United States official said today.
"I can't tell you it's done," said the official, who has been briefed on the Japanese plan.
"But I'm feeling better about it. I'm hopeful that this will be O.K."


Jill L. Colman, Randy P. Kiewe
Jill Lori Colman, a daughter of Stephen and Helen Colman of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Randy Paul Kiewe, the son of Sol and Janet Kiewe of Linwood, N.J.
Rabbi Jeffrey T. Segelman performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Kiewe and her husband graduated from Brandeis University, he cum laude.
The bride received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a managing director at Credit Research and Trading, an investment company in Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother is a lawyer.


Farmland Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


About Sunday Weddings
Starting next weekend, marriages scheduled for Sunday will be reported on the day of the wedding, in Styles of The Times.
That section already carries reports of marriages for the previous six days.
Wedding reports will no longer appear on Mondays.


ASSAD HOLDS OUT PROSPECT OF NORMAL TIES WITH ISRAEL AFTER TALKS WITH CLINTON
After more than five hours of talks here with President Clinton, President Hafez al-Assad of Syria today held out the prospect of normal relations with Israel soon and said his country was committed to achieving peace in the Middle East this year.
The statement by Mr.
Assad was the most explicit sign yet of Syrian willingness to rejoin peace talks with Israel in earnest.
Mr.
Clinton said immediately that he hoped the statement "would provoke a positive response in Israel."


Paula Roberts, Stephen Cogut
Paula Rene Roberts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milo Roberts of Belmond, Iowa, was married yesterday to Stephen Cogut, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Justin Cogut of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik officiated at the Sign of the Dove restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Cogut, 34, graduated from the Iowa Methodist School of Nursing and was until recently a registered nurse at the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center.


U.S. Rejects Call by Aristide To Reinstate Him in 3 Weeks
In a clear rebuff to Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the United States today rejected his call for foreign governments to help him return him to power in three weeks.
"The establishment of that kind of a deadline probably is not workable at the present time, and although we'll continue to help President Aristide, I think we are not going to commit to that kind of a deadline," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in an interview from Geneva on the NBC program "Meet the Press."


Geneva Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jennifer Vrahatis, Adam Whitehead
Jennifer Yael Vrahatis, the daughter of Nancy G. Gallo of Baldwin, L.I., and the late George Vrahatis, was married yesterday to Dr.
Adam Peter Whitehead, a son of Richard and Carole Whitehead of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi Gutman Baras officiated at the Merrick (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Whitehead, 25, graduated from Queens College.
She is studying ultrasonography and echocardiography at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn, from which her husband received a medical degree.
Her mother is a registered nurse at South Nassau Hospital in Oceanside, L.I.
Her stepfather, Frank T. Gallo, is a nuclear and mechanical engineer for the Environmental Protection Agency, in Queens.


Labor and Management Fly in Formation
To the Editor:
While agreeing in general with "A Smart Move by United," your editorial applauding employee efforts to obtain a major stake in United Airlines (Dec. 20), I am disappointed by cliches about strike threats and labor costs.
You correctly identify some of the myriad problems air carriers face -- excess capacity at the hubs, crushing debt, a weak economy, excessive taxation and regulation, all of which far outstrip labor costs in bottom line impact.
However, your premise that strike threats, or desperation to "stay afloat" have forced airlines into labor contracts they cannot afford shows serious misunderstanding of collective bargaining.


Some Old Montana Magic Eliminates Oilers
You are Joe Montana and the Kansas City Chiefs' offense.
You have played one half.
You have been smacked sideways by the Houston Oilers' rowdy, Buddy Ryan-inspired defense.
You trail by 10-0.
You look bruised.


Bosnia Is Using Islamic Funding For Serb Arms
Bosnia's mostly Muslim army has used funds obtained from Islamic countries to buy weapons from its enemies, the Serbs, a high-ranking Bosnian official said today.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, did not name any countries that may have contributed funds for weapons, but said the sellers were interested in perpetuating the fighting between their traditional enemies, the Muslims and the Croats.


Los Angeles Church Honors Men Who Stopped Racist Threat


Just Repeat After Riley: There Is No Controversy
To Pat Riley, the situation is simple.
"There will not be a point guard controversy," the Knicks' coach said after practice here today.


Off-Duty Police Officer, 27, Shoots Himself to Death in the Bronx
A 27-year-old off-duty New York City police officer who had just returned from eating dinner with his wife fatally shot himself early yesterday in the bedroom of the couple's Bronx apartment.
The suicide, the first of a police officer in New York City this year and the ninth since last March, has prompted the new Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, to review the Police Department's suicide prevention efforts to find ways to encourage officers to come forward for help, said John Miller, Deputy Commissioner for Public Information.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the cold weather in much of the East misstated the record low for Jan. 16 in New York City in some copies.
It is 1 degree above zero, not 1 below.


Mr. Gore's Video Vision
Vice President Al Gore envisions an America where poor children sit in front of a television tapping information from the best libraries in the country; where physicians examine patients hundreds of miles away; and where everyone calls up a vast array of newspapers, movies and encyclopedias at the flick of a TV controller.
It's a worthy vision.
And Mr.
Gore has offered sensible principles to make his vision come alive.
Congress would invite cable and telephone companies to compete as an incentive for them to build two-way communications networks.
In exchange, networks would have to make interactive video widely available to homes and businesses.


Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday is being observed today.
Here are holiday schedules NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and New York City offices closed.


Lines Drawn On Albany Bill For Restricting Of Weapons
The calls were not nice, and as the white phone messages piled up like paper snow, State Assemblyman Martin A. Luster began to taste the tricky politics of getting tough on crime.
He supports strong restrictions on assault weapons.
And as lawmakers around the nation react to a public primal scream against violence, he plans to vote on Monday against the weapons in a special legislative session on gun crimes called by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Still, he is not crazy about phone messages that read, "Fed up with your position." Or worse in this election year, "I will do everything I can to keep him from getting re-elected."


Man at The Side of (Not Behind) Whitman
John R. Whitman is not shy.
It turns out his Greta Garbo performance during his wife's gubernatorial campaign was part of a political strategy and not at all reflective of a retiring personality.
Sitting with his wife in her transition office, sipping Diet Pepsi and laughing freely at his own jokes, Mr.
Whitman talked without prodding about Christine Todd Whitman, her campaign, the next four years and his much-discussed role in it all.
In those long, weary months on the trail, Mr.
Whitman, 49 years old, steadfastly avoided the spotlight, professing his desire not to become a public figure.
He did so, he says, because he wanted to avoid becoming an issue.
But now the campaign is over.


Larmer, Keenan Return on High Note
Mike Keenan came to Chicago reluctantly, unhappily.
He did not want to return to the site of his last National Hockey League job.
He did not want to dine with his 14-year-old daughter, Gayla, in some sterile restaurant, rather than at his old home near the lake, where Gayla and her mother, Rita -- Keenan's estranged wife -- still live.
The night before the Rangers departed for Chicago, he acknowledged that his only goal for this weekend was a victory.


Grand Valley Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Metric Label Requirement
The Federal Trade Commission announced last week that consumer products packaged after Feb. 14 must be labeled with metric measurements as well as the measurements customarily used in the United States.
The requirement is an amendment to F.T.C. regulations putting into effect the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act.
The commission, however, will not take action against companies that fail to provide metric labeling until Nov. 8.


Rowan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Celebrating the Fallen World
As a playwright and director with a philosophical bent, Richard Foreman is a practicing metaphysician in the experimental theater.
During the last 25 years, his plays -- 40 of them since he originated his Ontological-Hysteric Theater -- have repeatedly analyzed the imbalances between art and life.
Even while he has branched out to become a director of opera and plays by others, his contribution remains instantly identifiable.
Whatever he does, he leaves sight and sound tracks as his signature, and his art has always had a deeply intellectual foundation.
In rehearsal at St.
Mark's Theater with his new play, "My Head Was a Sledgehammer," Mr.
Foreman is at the electronic controls, interjecting suggestions to his actors and orchestrating the mechanics of the enterprise.
With a mournful mien that extends from his eyes to his mustache, he is a younger, avant-garde doppelganger of Broadway's David Merrick.
As the author fine-tunes the performance, a spiderlike chandelier revolves like a fan in a Singapore hotel; string -- a Foreman trademark -- crisscrosses and stratifies the stage, and Oriental carpets cushion the walls.
Actors in black dunce caps rush by as a professor prepares to lecture at a blackboard.


Washington Talk; Debate on Health Care May Depend on 'Crisis'
When different people say, "There isn't a crisis in health care," they mean different things.
But none are particularly helpful to the Clinton Administration's hopes for enacting sweeping health care legislation.
When Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said it on Jan. 9, he meant that he would rather deal with welfare legislation first, although he has often acknowledged that the health care system is a mess and needs fundamental change.


Wellfleet Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
'No Longer Readymade'  Meg Stuart  Performance Space 122


Schulman (A.) Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Beatles Set to Record, Magazine Report Says
The three surviving members of the Beatles have set a firm date for returning to the recording studio, according to an article in today's issue of The New Yorker.
In February, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr will begin recording new music, not remakes of old songs, to accompany "Anthology," an upcoming video biography of the group, sources at EMI Records told Mark Hertsgaard, author of the article.


Did Giants Lose Way 2 Weeks Earlier?
A day after the massacre, Giants coaches and players had time to reflect on what happened.
The haze was still there, but it had cleared some.
And the picture the Giants drew of themselves was of a team that went into the game on Saturday against the 49ers still tired and emotionally spent from an overtime loss to Dallas two weeks before.
The 44-3 defeat by the 49ers ended what was a spectacular season for the Giants, a season in which Coach Dan Reeves was named coach of the year and inspired the team to do things no one expected them to do, such as finishing only two games away from the Super Bowl.


Lessons About King For a New Generation; In Some Classrooms, a Freedom Fighter
At Martin Luther King Jr.
High School in Manhattan, where the heroes are rap singers and students pass through weapon detectors to get to class, teachers promote the school's namesake as a prophet whose principles of nonviolence can reduce teen-age crime.
At Intermediate School 62 in the Kensington area of Brooklyn, where immigrant students have converged from dozens of countries, teachers honor Dr.
King as a "freedom fighter" and encourage students to compare him with Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti.


Stryker Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
'After Images of a Middle-Class Black Child'  Kevin Wynn Collection  Bessie Schonberg Theater


Ms. Tager, Mr. Strassberg
Chari Alisa Tager, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Tager of Delray Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Mark Strassberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Strassberg of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Brooks Susman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Strassberg, 30, graduated from the State University at Albany.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at Marymount Manhattan College in New York.


Behind Mexican Rising Lies a Wider Despair
To the Editor:
As you note in "The Other Mexico" (editorial, Jan. 4), the peasant, or campesino uprising in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas does not "herald any wider national insurrection." But neither is it simply, as you phrase it, a protest of "an older Mexico beneath the free-market, modernizing society" of President Salinas de Gortari and his supporters, the rich and well off who dictate economic and political policy.


Review/Opera; Clashing Keys for 'Valentino'
At the beginning of Dominick Argento's latest opera, which was given its world premiere by the Washington Opera on Saturday night, Rudolph Valentino lies on a coffin, draped with roses.
The silent-film star's dreamy, languid gaze appears on screens mounted in a set resembling the lobby of a 1920's movie theater.
A voice, ostensibly from an early Victrola, begins to sing in the style of Rudy Vallee, mourning the passing of the screen idol.
The pop lyrics are first overlaid with the sound of a male chorus intoning the Latin Requiem, then with the vocalizing of a soprano, and finally, with loving declarations by a woman in black.
There are five singing lines going at once in clashing keys and styles.
It is a daring way to open an opera, even for someone as lyrically gifted as Mr.
Argento.
And for all the awkwardness of the first night's performance of this opening gambit, it was clear that it was meant to suggest momentous grandeur, religious pomp, pop sentimentality and personal devotion, all combined into a contradictory whole.
There is somebody of great importance lying in state (or so the music proclaims), whose impact was profound.
"The Dream of Valentino," which will be performed until Feb. 13, promises to explain how and why.


Much Evidence and Conflict In Branch Davidians' Trial
In the first three days of testimony in the trial of 11 Branch Davidians charged with murdering four Federal agents, jurors were bombarded with physical evidence -- scores of illegal weapons, a battered door and 40 spent shell casings -- and vastly different interpretations of what the evidence proved.
The chief prosecutor, Ray Jahn, paraded hundreds of charred firearms past jurors last week as Texas Rangers and a weapons expert from the Federal Bureau of Investigation offered testimony to support the Government's claims of a huge gun cache inside the Branch Davidians' compound near Waco.


Licensed Gun Owners Don't Commit Crimes
To the Editor:
As a former New York City prosecutor who has practiced firearms licensing law in the city and state of New York for more than a decade, I am alarmed by those who misunderstand the arguments made by the law-abiding and honest citizens of this state against much of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's newly proposed gun legislation, which will further infringe upon the Second Amendment rights of the people of the state of New York.


Review/City Ballet; Distilling 2 Eras of America's Mood
Unlike so many others who founded and directed their own dance troupes, George Balanchine was not afraid to invite another great choreographer into his company.
In 1949, a few months after the establishment of the New York City Ballet, Balanchine named Jerome Robbins as his associate artistic director.
Balanchine knew that Mr.
Robbins had a creative voice of his own: their differences, not their similarities, made City Ballet a premiere international company.


Unmourned Departure at Coopers
Just a week after Eugene M. Freedman won the prize he had craved for so long -- the chairman's post at Coopers &amp; Lybrand -- one of his senior partners asked him if he was already plotting how to get re-elected in three years.
Given that Mr.
Freedman would be precluded by the firm's partnership agreement from a second term because of his age, the comment was more prescient than the partner realized.
Since taking over the firm in 1991, in the opinion of many of his current and former partners, Mr.
Freedman has done little more than look out for Gene Freedman.


Gander Mountain (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


El Paso Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Coleman? No Sweat as Nets Win
For the second straight game, the Nets played without Derrick Coleman, who is suffering from back spasms, and for the second straight time they won.
This time they scored a 99-94 victory over the Utah Jazz before a crowd of 16,105 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Tonight, the Nets also played without small forward Chris Morris, who came down with the flu after scoring 21 points, with 6 assists and 7 steals, in Friday night's 103-93 victory here over the Denver Nuggets.


Michael Aldridge, 73, Versatile British Actor
Michael Aldridge, a veteran and versatile British actor who appeared on American television screens in British productions in roles that ranged from bumbling to gin-guzzling, died last Monday in London.
He was 73 and lived in Greenwich, a borough of London on the south bank of the Thames.
Mr.
Aldridge flourished particularly on American television in the 1980's.
He won critical praise in 1988 for his portrayal of a "marvelously fuddy-duddy" gentleman doing a bit of amateur sleuthing in "Charters and Caldicott," a six-part "Mystery" series on public television.
And Mr.
Aldridge's gin-guzzling was well received in 1987, when he portrayed a raffish journalist in "Charlie," a four-hour detective film on public television.


Leftists Help to Swell School Protest in Paris
The French economy may be stagnant and unemployment still rising, but it took a perceived threat to the public school system to bring hundreds of thousands of people into the streets of Paris today in the first major protest against the rightist Government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur.
The demonstration was enthusiastically backed by Socialist and Communist opposition leaders, who, still nursing their wounds after the conservatives' overwhelming victory in parliamentary elections last March, were eager to be seen identifying with a genuinely popular cause.


Lesson in Shareholder Power for Japanese Refiner
Do owners have the right to run their companies?
On Wall Street, no one bothers to ask that question because it is accepted that those who control the stock call the shots.
That was, after all, the rationale of the 1980's takeover boom.


Russell Will Move Account to BBDO
The Russell Corporation, the maker of sports and casual apparel in Alexander City, Ala., will move the account of its athletic division, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million, to BBDO New York.
The agency was awarded the account on Friday after a two-month review that began with five to six shops and was narrowed to BBDO New York and two others: Gillis Advertising &amp; Public Relations in Birmingham, Ala., which has handled the account for almost seven years, and the Richards Group in Dallas.


A Militant Black Group Calls Off 'Armed Struggle' in South Africa
The militant Pan Africanist Congress announced today that it was suspending its "armed struggle," calling off a terrorist campaign to which a series of lethal attacks has been attributed over the last year.
The declaration opens the way for the Pan Africanists to take part in the country's first free elections next April and possibly to have members of its secretive guerrilla organization included in a new national peacekeeping force.


Let's Have Primaries For Special Elections
To the Editor:
The election of former Assemblyman Oliver Koppell as New York State's Attorney General and of Alan Hevesi as New York City Comptroller highlight the need for a state constitutional amendment to reform the manner of replacing members of the State Legislature who are unable to complete their terms of office.


Giuliani Delivers Strong Plea, Seeking to Ease Blacks' Fears
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani offered an impassioned plea to black New Yorkers yesterday, seeking to assure them that "there is nothing to fear" in his mayoralty.
But he stuck by his refusal to meet with certain figures he views as divisive.
"I read in the papers that there were some in the African-American community who fear me," a somber Mr.
Giuliani said at a ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine commemorating the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
"I can't tell you how much that hurts me. Except for the most external factor, we're all the same."


Essay; Will Versus Paper
Now we know why Vice President Gore was suddenly detoured to Budapest last month, ostensibly to attend a funeral.
He met secretly with Leonid Kravchuk, the Ukrainian President, to set up the most important function for Bill Clinton's debut on the European scene: to act as catalyst in moving Ukraine's nuclear missiles back to Russia to be dismantled.
American tax dollars cannot be better invested than in such disarmament.
Although the "re-aiming" of missiles away from cities was meaningless flackery, the tripartite agreement signed by Yeltsin, Kravchuk and Clinton was a triumph of good sense and skillful American diplomacy.
The ballyhoo of summitry shored up the Ukrainian leader in persuading parliamentarians -- who could still queer the deal -- to trust Russia.


Former Justice Reimburses Rhode Island
Thomas F. Fay, the former Chief Justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court, and his former court administrator, Matthew J. Smith, have reimbursed the state more than $35,000 for money that auditors determined they had improperly spent from a special court account on expenses like tuxedo rentals, car repairs, meals at expensive restaurants and a trip to Fenway Park in Boston.
Based on the auditors' findings, the state's Attorney General, Jeffrey B. Pine, sued the two men last month to recover the money.
After a hearing this week in Superior Court, a check for $35,494 was delivered to Mr.
Pine's office.
The state then dropped its lawsuit.


Bolster the Election Commission
President Clinton has an important chance to revamp the notoriously weak Federal Election Commission that is charged with enforcing campaign finance rules -- and he's about to blow it.
Any day now, Mr.
Clinton is expected to announce his choices to fill two expired seats on the six-member commission.
Choosing independent, respected people could help end the partisanship and gridlock that have made the F.E.C. ineffective.


Bitter Cold Stings East Coast, Shattering Record Temperatures
The coldest weather in years gripped the New York region and much of the Atlantic seaboard again yesterday.
It shattered records in many states, left a New Jersey man and a Massachusetts woman dead, turned roads and rivers to ice and intensified the miseries of the homeless and heatless thousands.
A respite from Arctic cold that kept half the nation in a deep freeze all weekend was due today, but with it a huge snowstorm that whitened the Midwest yesterday was expected to envelop New York and most of the East today, leaving accumulations of 3 to 6 inches before giving way to sleet and rain in coastal areas tonight and more brutal cold tomorrow.


Deborah Podell, Ari S. Fishkind
Deborah Lee Podell, the daughter of Dr.
Robert and Judith Podell of New York, was married yesterday to Ari Shmuel Fishkind, a son of Stanley and Renee Fishkind of Baltimore.
Rabbi J. David Bleich officiated at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
Mrs.
Fishkind, 23, graduated cum laude from Barnard College, and is a first-year medical student at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist at Beth Israel Hospital in New York.


Bernard Davis, Harvard Professor Of Medicine and Author, 78, Dies
Dr.
Bernard D. Davis, a Harvard Medical School professor who attracted widespread attention in a 1976 dispute about medical schools' admission standards, died on Friday at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 78.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth.


Vodka Now for Clinton
President Clinton normally limits his public drinking to water and decaffeinated coffee, but the ceremonial duties of his six-nation trip over the past week led him to quaff Pilsner beer in Prague with President Vaclav Havel, sip champagne in Minsk with the leaders of Belarus and raise another glass of the bubbly at a ceremony early one morning at the Kremlin.
More astonishingly, a senior official confided, Mr.
Clinton submitted to the importunings of President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine by taking several straight-up vodkas as they dined quickly last Wednesday night on borscht and Ukrainian dumplings during their meeting in an airport terminal on the outskirts of Kiev.


Sports of The Times; These Chiefs Have The Answer: 'It's Joe'
Out at midfield, Joe Montana was sprawled across the red-white-and-blue N.F.L. shield, and it appeared as if he might be carried off on it.
As the 37-year-old quarterback struggled to his feet early in the second quarter, the Chiefs were losing, 10-0, and an illegal-procedure penalty had wiped out Montana's pass to wide receiver J. J. Birden at the Oilers' 4-yard line.
Moments later, on third-and-12 at the Oilers' 30, Montana floated a pass to Willie Davis at the goal line, but the wide receiver dropped it.


Air &amp; Water Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Roger Ramirez, 80; Wrote 'Lover Man'
Roger (Ram) Ramirez, the pianist and composer of the song "Lover Man," died on Tuesday at the Parkway Hospital in Forest Hills, Queens.
He was 80.
The cause was kidney failure, said his wife, Marcy.


Books of The Times; Distracting People From Stalin's Acts
Double Lives  Spies and Writers in the Secret Soviet War of Ideas Against the West  By Stephen Koch
Illustrated. 419 pages. The Free Press/Macmillan. $24.95.


The City That Never Stops Slows in a Freeze
Tears froze and glittered like diamonds, and all most people could think about, as the coldest weekend in years burned across their faces, was a place to be warm.
Some New Yorkers treated the last two days of potentially lethal cold the way they treat everything else, with disdain, but the cold did to the city what few things ever could.
It thinned it out, slowed it down and gave even people in safer neighborhoods a reason to be afraid of the streets.


United Asset: Little-Known Financial Giant
As Norton Reamer, president of United Asset Management, puts it, "$100 billion may sound big, but it's really not a lot of money."
And from Mr.
Reamer's perspective, his statement does make some sense.
As the founder of a one-of-a-kind holding company, Mr.
Reamer has been busily acquiring independent money management firms -- 39 of them, at last count, with $100 billion in assets at his fingertips.


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Julie C. Faber, David J. Papier
Julie Claire Faber, a daughter of Sydney and Rose Faber of London, and David Joshua Papier, a son of Joan L. Lieberman of New York and the late Marshall Papier, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Shlomo Riskin performed the ceremony at the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza in Jerusalem.
Mrs.
Papier graduated from Harrow College in London, and was until recently a medical administrator at Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School in Jerusalem.
Her father is a business-systems consultant in London.
Her mother is a nurse in a private medical practice in London.


New Signs of Shrinkage Within Book Publishing
Small but significant convulsions were felt last week in New York's shrinking book publishing industry.
On Tuesday, Houghton Mifflin said it was folding its unprofitable Ticknor &amp; Fields imprint.
On Wednesday, the company eliminated 11 positions in its New York and Boston offices.
And on Friday, after a painful meeting with employees in New York, Harcourt Brace said that it was laying off half of its two dozen employees in New York, including three of five full-time editors, and drastically reducing the size of its adult trade list.


Norman Hepple, Portrait Painter, 85
Norman Hepple, a British portrait painter who portrayed Queen Elizabeth II and numerous members of the British upper, and upper-middle, classes, died on Jan. 3. .
He was 85 and lived in Richmond, near London.
Mr.
Hepple was considered courtly and skilled at chatting with his subjects while they posed.
Mr.
Hepple rose to be president of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters from 1979 to 1983 and a fellow of the Royal Academy.


Abroad at Home; While Rome Burns
In the images that pass for statecraft President Clinton's European tour was a great success.
He charmed the leaders of Eastern Europe while denying them NATO membership.
He was as impressive in a Russian as in an American town meeting.
He and President Yeltsin agreed to point their nuclear missiles away from each other.
But the missiles can be retargeted in minutes.
And charm will not count for much with Russians or East Europeans when they face the menace that really threatens them.


Doobie Brother's Dream, Police Career, Unfulfilled
John Hartman dreams of being a full time police officer, walking a beat, chasing criminals and talking to children about the dangers of drugs.
But he is finding that goal impossible to reach because of his first job.
As one of the founding members of the 1970's rock band the Doobie Brothers, he admits to having used marijuana, cocaine and hashish over several years.


Get the Government Out of Our Business
To the Editor:
"Neither Snow, Rain nor Competition" (editorial, Dec. 31), suggesting the United States Postal Service end its "harassing crusade" against the business customers of its competition and concentrate on delivering its own mail, is on the money.
Incredible as it sounds, postal inspectors determine for us if businesses may use overnight services for what the inspectors judge to be "nonurgent mail."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  SYRIA UPBEAT ON TIES WITH ISRAEL
After talks with President Clinton, President Hafez al-Assad of Syria held out the prospect of normalizing relations with Israel soon and said he was committed to reaching Middle East peace this year.
A1


There's No Stopping the Digital Presses


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; As brand switching replaces loyalty among beer drinkers, three brewers revamp their rosters.
THREE of the world's largest beer marketers have made big alterations in their agency rosters, affecting accounts with billings estimated to exceed $90 million.
Think of all the brews that would buy at your corner bar.


Abbott Hopes That Conquering Passion Will Extinguish Pain
Jim Abbott is pondering the next baseball season with the Yankees, and change is central to his thoughts.
He is discussing changing his attitude and approach, changing his address from the city to the suburbs, trying to change his frustrating struggles with the strike zone and getting friendlier with his changeup.
Actually, Abbott does not want to change his attitude as much as he wants to refine it.
He is an intense pitcher who has conceded he sometimes lets a misplaced cut fastball, a meager hit or a critical newspaper article upset him for hours or even days.
The altered Abbott does not want those worries.


William J. McRoberts, Security Executive, 72
William J. McRoberts of Rumson, N.J., a retired corporate security executive and private detective, died on Wednesday at Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J.
He was 72.
The cause was heart disease, said his wife, June McRoberts.


Gun-exchange Programs Reach Capital


Cowboys Nervously Bide Their Time and Then Roar Past the Packers
For the first 17 minutes of today's playoff game, the Dallas Cowboys resembled players who had forgotten how they became Super Bowl champions last year.
They gave up the ball once on a fumble, once on an interception, once when a fake punt on fourth-and-1 from their 28-yard line was stopped for no gain.
But the Green Bay Packers got only 3 points out of those three mistakes.
That was too little because once the Cowboys' offense found itself, it ran off 24 points in a little more than 18 minutes.
That span included 10 points in 18 seconds and three touchdown passes by Troy Aikman.
All the while, the Cowboys' defense tightly controlled the Packers' offense, and the Cowboys emerged with an easier-than-it-sounded 27-17 victory.


Family Traditions of Gifts to Neediest
When Edward U. Gips was born at Women's Hospital on the Upper West Side, his father marked the happy event by sending a donation to a relatively new charity campaign conducted by The New York Times, called "The 100 Neediest Cases." That was in December of 1922.
Last month, Mr.
Gips sent off two charitable contributions.
As has been his unwavering practice, one went to the hospital, now part of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, and the other went to the campaign his father supported, now called The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Bridge
A successful defense of a major national team title is a rare event, but even rarer is a successful defense of a major national pairs title.
The only pair ever to have done so in the Life Master Pairs were Alvin Roth and Barbara Rappaport, in 1971 and 1972.
Mrs.
Rappaport, now Barbara Haberman, has made few national appearances in recent years, but still maintains her talent for card play.
In the diagramed deal, played in a Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams earlier this month, she played in four spades and found the way to generate two club tricks.


Newspapers Race for Outlets In Electronic Marketplace
The rapid development of electronic information technologies has placed the American newspaper industry at a crossroads.
New methods of delivering information to desktops and living rooms are threatening the economic foundation of the $45 billion newspaper industry, historically one of the most lucrative and influential of American businesses.
Newspaper companies are racing toward electronic media of all kinds in an attempt to pre-empt the competition.


Bernard Davis, Harvard Professor Of Medicine and Author, 78, Dies
Dr.
Bernard D. Davis, a Harvard Medical School professor who attracted widespread attention in a 1976 dispute about medical schools' admission standards, died on Friday at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 78.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth.


G.M. and Union Reach Pact In Strike at Louisiana Plant
The General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers union reached a tentative agreement early this morning that may end a six-day strike at a Louisiana plant that produces one of G.M.'s most popular vehicles.
The 2,300 hourly workers at the plant in Shreveport were scheduled to vote on the agreement at 2 P.M.
Monday.
If the accord is approved, production will resume Tuesday morning, union leaders in Shreveport said.


Manitowoc Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; What mini-series? And Roseanne who? The industry would rather discuss the Fox football deal.
THE talk of the network television industry is not the next family sitcom or cop drama, but football.
The Fox network's stunning raid on CBS's 38-year-old National Football League franchise, a deal that will have Fox spending almost $400 million a year on football, has had repercussions throughout the business since it was announced last month.
Robert A. Iger, the president of ABC, who has seen many surprising developments during 20 years in network broadcasting, said last week that he was "still aghast because it is such a huge change."


KinderCare Learning Centers Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 10


Harding's Camp Takes The Offensive
As prosecutors in Oregon and Michigan continued their investigation today, Tonya Harding's lawyer said he was convinced that "not one shred of evidence" exists to prove the figure skater participated in a conspiracy to injure her chief rival, Nancy Kerrigan.
That statement, by Robert C. Weaver Jr., came on a day the Harding camp began responding publicly to questions surrounding the attack on Kerrigan 10 days ago in Detroit.
But with United States Olympic officials suggesting on Saturday that Harding could be dropped from the Olympic team, even if she were not charged by the authorities, the response appeared an orchestrated effort in damage control to rehabilitate Harding's eroding public image and break whatever momentum may be building for her removal.


Life of Promise Cast Into Shadow
For a young man growing up in the South Bronx, Jeffrey Rivera had been doing extremely well.
He had been an academic star at his junior high school, dazzled the coaches with his running speed, and gone on to win a place at one of the city's finest high schools.
He had served as an acolyte and dreamed of becoming a teacher or lawyer.
But a few months ago, relatives and acquaintances said, the 16-year-old boy began hanging around with a rough crowd that seemed to look up to an 18-year-old boy who had been in jail several times and had been wounded twice in sidewalk shootouts.


State Events May Be Closed to City Sports
New York City high school track and field athletes, recognized nationally for their outstanding performances, face imminent ouster from state championship competition because, according to coaches, they are too good.
Despite opposition from some of its leading coaches, the state's largest high school sports body, the New York State Public High Schools Athletic Association, is expected to vote in Syracuse Jan. 22 or Jan. 23 to eliminate New York City teams from its state championship competition in five sports including track and field.
The other sports are swimming, wrestling, girls tennis and girls gymnastics.


Steel Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc., La Jolla, Calif., 2.5 million common shares.
Montgomery Securities.


Reviews/ Music; An Endearing Relic From a Simpler Time
Encountering Erich Wolfgang Korngold's Suite for Piano Left Hand, Two Violins and Cello (Op. 23) on Tuesday evening at the 92d Street Y in Manhattan was like finding one of those big, round-edged, gas-guzzling family automobiles from the 1950's.
By today's supposedly rational standards, it may be grandiose, inefficient, even wasteful; yet it is also comfortably solid, an endearing relic of an era that through the distorting lens of time seems simpler and more emotionally direct.
By the time Korngold composed the suite, in 1930, Schoenberg and his school had already wrung what they considered useful out of the densely chromatic late Romantic style, and were hoping to discover a new world beyond tonality.
Korngold, like Richard Strauss, demurred, believing that there was life in tonality yet.
Here he used traditional forms -- a prelude and fugue, a lilting Viennese waltz and a set of variations -- as well as freer structures.
But the forms did not constrain his imagination: color, sentimentality and even a kind of cinematic drama pour out of the piece.


The Coldest Day of the Year
Whether yesterday's low temperature of 3 degrees will stand as the coldest of 1994 remains to be seen.
Although it was far below the normal low of 25 degrees, it was still shy of the record for the date of 1 degree set in 1893, and downright balmy compared to Feb. 9, 1934, the coldest day on record, when the mercury hit 15 degrees below zero.
The ice on the Hudson River was reported as 14 inches thick at Tarrytown and Bay Shore motorists drove across the Great South Bay to Fire Island.


Western Digital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Behind Mexican Rising Lies a Wider Despair; Trade Pact's Fallout
To the Editor:
Readers should not be misled by "The Other Mexico," your apparently sympathetic Jan. 4 editorial on the Indian uprising in Chiapas, Mexico.
Native people across North America have been opposed to the North American Free Trade Agreement all along because they understand that it can only intensify pressures against the already burdened indigenous communities of this continent.


INSIDE
Harding's Camp Speaks Out
Tonya Harding's lawyer said there is no evidence the skater was part of a conspiracy to injure Nancy Kerrigan.
SportsMonday, page C1.
King's Legacy in Classroom
Though Dr.
Martin Luther King has become a standard figure in the school curriculum, classroom opinion about him remains mixed.
Page B1.
Chiefs and Cowboys Win
Kansas City rallied behind Joe Montana to top the Houston Oilers, 28-20, and Dallas beat the Green Bay Packers, 27-17.
SportsMonday, page C1.
A2 Arts


Joan M. Auten, U.S. Embassy Aide, 76
Joan M. Auten, an aide at the United States Embassy in London for 44 years before her retirement a decade ago, died on Jan. 7 in Wellington Hospital in London.
She was 76.
The cause was pneumonia, said a friend, Michael Clark.


Behind Mexican Rising Lies a Wider Despair; Liberation and Payoffs
To the Editor:
For the peasant uprising in Chiapas, Mexico, the Mexican Government blames "liberal Catholic priests in the area" and accuses "Catholic priests of the theology of liberation."


No Headline
That era is now enormously distant.
But you ask them what a hero is, and after Batman and Superman, they'll always say Martin Luther King.
They understand how he put his life on the line. -- ROD RODGERS, whose dance company has performed a tribute to Dr.
King in New York City schools for a decade.  [ B1:3. ]


Beijing Will Take Steps On Rights, Bush Is Told
Former President George Bush, on a private visit here, told President Jiang Zemin this weekend that the Clinton Administration needed real progress on human rights from the Communist leadership here or it might be forced to cancel China's favorable trade privileges in the American market.
At the same time, the Chinese leader reportedly told Mr.
Bush that China was planning to take a number of unspecified steps to improve its human rights record in coming months.


Dover Journal; Under the Chalk Cliffs, Mountains of Contraband
They looked like just another vacationing couple rolling off the Channel car ferry from France.
But a few months ago, police officers who visited their house outside London discovered that they were bringing back more than souvenirs and happy memories from their jaunts to the Continent.
Stacked inside the house were 500 cases of beer, 190 cartons of cigarettes, 300 bottles of spirits and 250 pounds of rolling tobacco.
It was only a sampling of what the couple and their three sons had purchased on shopping trips to France and carried back to Britain inside cars and vans so it could be sold illegally, at considerable personal profit, to shops, liquor stores and pubs.


Tinder in Mexico -- A special report.; In Remote Mexican Village, Roots of Rebellion Are Bared
There are no guns in this small farming community that pioneers cut from the rain forest some 30 years ago; none, at least, that an outsider is allowed to see.
But signs of the insurrection that has shaken Mexico since the year began are everywhere: in the empty shacks of families who fled their rebel neighbors in terror; in the uniform pants and lace-up boots that have replaced threadbare trousers and ratty sandals; in the swagger of younger men back from their first battles and the prideful things that their fathers say.  'Whole World Is Listening'
"The peasants have awakened and realized that they had to do something in order for them to listen to us," said Carlos Aguilar, 58, who helped to found the community beside a cool mountain stream in the southern state of Chiapas.
"Now the whole world is listening."


METRO DIGEST
THE CITY THAT NEVER SLEEPS DOES FREEZE
Tears froze and glittered like diamonds, and all most people could think about, as the coldest weekend in years burned across their faces, was a place to be warm.
Some New Yorkers treated the last two days of potentially lethal cold the way they treat everything else, with disdain, but the cold did to the city what few things ever could.
It thinned it out, slowed it down, and gave even people in safer neighborhoods a reason to be afraid of the streets.
A1.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Pigeonholed American Just Beginning to Fly High
Revenge is too strong a term, but an attitude of "I'll show them" might be appropriate to describe the motivational fuel for Marty McInnis.
He remembers all the slights, all the oversights.


Atmel Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lori Pugliese, David Sherman
Lori Ann Pugliese, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Pugliese of Sunrise, Fla., was married yesterday to David Kohlman Sherman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan M. Sherman of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Leonid Feldman officiated at the Ocean Grand Hotel in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Sherman, 33, is a sales representative in New York for the Mead Corporation's Lexis and Nexis data services.
She graduated cum laude from Pace University.


Review/Music; Experimental Sounds, Unsound Experiments
The Kitchen's second annual Gruppen festival, which ended on Saturday, adopted the alarming Wagnerian slogan "Chamber Music for the 21st Century." Gesticulations toward the musical future often indicate fractures in the musical present; sure enough, the programs on Thursday and Friday showed a split between music rooted in 20th-century experimental tradition and groups attempting a self-consciously diverse synthesis of contemporary forms and genres.
"Experimental tradition" might seem a contradiction in terms, but such a thing exists, distinct and complex and by no means exhausted.
Essential Music, the brilliantly resourceful percussion-based ensemble, demonstrated as much on Friday night.
William Russell's "Made in America," a 1936 showpiece for tablefuls of sonorous junk metal, blended seamlessly with various contemporary descendants.
Russell had a brief but significant career as a percussion innovator before giving up classical music for jazz in the 1940's; Essential Music has just made a superb recording of his few extant compositions for the Mode label.


Harvey Matofsky, Film Producer, 60
Harvey Matofsky, a film producer and former publicity agent, died on Jan. 3 in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 60.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter Karen.


CLINTON IN EUROPE: The Mideast Poker Game; After Assad's Play, the Pressure is Now on Israel
By telling President Clinton that he is ready at last for "normal, peaceful relations" with Israel, President Hafez al-Assad of Syria put pressure on Israeli leaders today in the poker game called the Middle East peace talks.
Now it is up to them to say if they are ready to turn over a card, by revealing more about their intentions on withdrawing from the Golan Heights, the strategically important plateau that Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 war.


Review/Film; It's Not Just The Killing, It's the How
Among the devices used to maim, torture and kill in "Death Wish V: The Face of Death" are an industrial sewing machine, a steam press, an acidic chemical bath and a shrink-wrap machine that trusses up a victim who is then suspended on a hook like an item of laundry.
These tools of the trade are in a clothing factory that is the setting for the film's creepier action sequences.
There is also a soccer ball, operated by remote control that explodes in someone's face.
But the most grisly scene in a movie that has one of the highest levels of gratuitous sadism to be found in a modern film, is one in which a mobster in drag follows a beautiful woman into the ladies room of a restaurant, gags her and repeatedly smashes her face into a wall mirror.


SATELLITE SYSTEM FOR THE PENTAGON BRINGS QUESTIONS
An elaborate satellite system created to help fight a long nuclear war with the Soviet Union is being prepared for launching next month, even as questions mount in Congress about its cost and need, given the diminished prospects for such a conflict.
Built to act as a space-based brain for nuclear war, the system would be a global switchboard -- a network of satellites to relay military commands long after Washington and the Pentagon were destroyed in battle.
It would also be one of the most expensive projects in the Pentagon's history.


ITALY CALLS VOTE FOR A PARLIAMENT
President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro dissolved Italy's scandal-stained Parliament today, setting the country on track for what is expected to be a confusing and bumpy ride to early elections and the first genuine skake-up in Italy's postwar leadership.
Mr.
Scalfaro also named the departing Prime Minister, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, as head of a new caretaker Government.
Its first act was to set parliamentary elections for March 27.


Transactions
WEEKEND BASEBALL  American League NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Kirk Randazzo director of stadium operations.
National League ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Ray Lankford, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
BASKETBALL  National Basketball Association GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Tod Murphy, forward, to a 10-day contract.
INDIANA PACERS -- Activated Pooh Richardson, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Vern Fleming, guard, on the injured list.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Traded Anthony Cook, forward, and a conditional first-round pick in the 1994 draft to the Milwaukee Bucks for Anthony Avent, forward.
FOOTBALL  National Football League INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Named George Boone special scout and Hank Kuhlmann assistant coach.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Announced the retirement of Lawrence Taylor, linebacker.
HOCKEY  National Hockey League NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Assigned Tom Draper, goalie, to Salt Lake City of the International Hockey League.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Recalled Vlastimil Kroupa, defenseman, from Kansas City of the International Hockey League VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Reassigned Dan Kesa, right wing, to Hamilton of the American Hockey League.
Central Hockey League DALLAS FREEZE -- Placed Randy Jaycock, goalie; Guy Prince, left wing; and Ryan Schmidt, defenseman, on the injured list.
FORT WORTH FIRE -- Waived Chris French, goalie.
Activated Bryan Schoen, goalie.
TULSA OILERS -- Placed Chris Robertson, left wing, on the injured list.
COLLEGE  ALABAMA -- Extended the contract of Gene Stallings, football coach, through 1998.
Named Homer Smith offensive coordinator.
Moved Mal Moore, assistant head coach and quarterbacks coach, to an administrative job; Woody McCorvey, receivers coach, to assistant head coach; Bill Oliver, secondary coach, to defensive coordinator; and Randy Ross, recruiting coordinator, to assistant coach.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


The Talk of Hollywood; Confronting Adversity As the Phone Rings On
The phone keeps ringing in Mike Medavoy's mansion high atop Coldwater Canyon.
Jonathan Demme calls.
So do Michael Ovitz, Warren Beatty, Milos Forman, Oliver Stone.
"People say to me, 'Whatever you want to do, I'll be there,' " Mr.
Medavoy said quietly the other morning.
"You never know what these calls mean. But then again it's better than not having the phone ring."


CHRONICLE
Representative CAROLYN B. MALONEY has a Valentine's Day gift to the city, albeit one that's not exactly sentimental: an appearance by JANET RENO .
The United States Attorney General will speak at a "town hall" meeting on Feb. 14 at an Upper East Side synagogue.
Representative Maloney, Democrat of Manhattan, has sponsored 20 town halls since her election to the House in 1992.
Other speakers have included Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, on health care; Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, on women's issues, and the Deputy Treasury Secretary, Roger C. Altman, on the budget.


WIC Western reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Gore Preaches, and Practices, the Techno-Gospel
The Vice President strode into his office, took a seat at a Compaq personal computer and briskly pecked out a confident greeting.
"Welcome to the White House," Al Gore typed. "Let's get started."


RESULTS PLUS
WORLD CUP SKIING  Austrians Finish 1-2  Thomas Stangassinger, battling a relapse of the flu, led a 1-2 Austrian finish at home in a slalom race yesterday in Kitzbuhel.
He finished ahead of Thomas Sykora, and completed a successful weekend for the Austrian team before the home fans, following Patrick Ortlieb's victory in Saturday's downhill. (AP) Wachter Wins Again: Anita Wachter of Austria scored her third World Cup victory of the season, beating Deborah Compagnoni, a hometown hero, in a giant slalom in Cortina D'Ampezzo, Italy.
Wachter, the World Cup champion, dominated a highly technical race by clocking the fastest time in both runs down the Olimpia Tofane course.
Her total time was 2 minutes 38.80 seconds as Compagnoni finished .73 seconds behind. (AP)
TRACK AND FIELD  Ford Games Showcase  Lyria Martin, a La Guardia High School sophomore, and William Arnold, a Bishop Ford junior, turned in impressive performances yesterday in the Bishop Ford games at the West 168th Street Armory.
More than 1,500 boys and girls from 73 Eastern high schools took part in the meet.
Martin, the Eastern states outdoor 100-meter champion, won the girls 55-meter dash in 7 seconds flat.
Martin's time was 40.5 seconds.
Arnold, winner of the mile at Brown University last month in 4 minutes 22.9 seconds, waited until the final turn to pass the leader, Jim Colling, the Virginia state mile champion from Chantilly, to win in 4:25.0.
Colling, running his first indoor race this season, was second in 4:26.2.
Bruce Rosado, another Ford runner who won the 800 meters at Brown in 1:59.3, kicked down the final straightaway to win the 1,000-meter run in 2:34.8.
HORSE RACING  Diazo a Disappointment  Zignew, a 21-1 long shot, took the lead inside the eighth pole and scored a 1 3/4-length victory yesterday in the $225,500 San Fernando Stakes at Santa Anita in Acadia, Calif.
Zignew held off the stretch drives of Nonproductiveasset and Pacific Tango for her fifth victory in 12 starts.
The winner covered a mile and an eighth in 1:47 4/5 and paid $44.80, $20.60 and $11.60 for $2 across the board.
Diazo, the 17-10 favorite with stablemate Stuka, was kept in good position behind pace-setter Bat Eclat during the first mile of the Grade II event for 4-year-olds.
That's when Zignew passed Del Mar Dennis and Diazo at the top of the stretch and went on to win the second leg of the Strub Series.
Diazo, trained by Bill Shoemaker and ridden by Laffit Pincay, captured the first leg when he won the Malibu Stakes on Dec. 26.
He was ninth in the 12-horse field yesterday. (AP) FIGURE SKATING  Stojko Beats Browning  Elvis Stojko, making a strong statement leading to the Winter Olympics, beat the four-time world champion, Kurt Browning, Saturday night to win the Canadian championships in Edmonton, Alberta.
Stojko and Browning will be joined on the Canadian men's team in Lillehammer, Norway, next month by Sebastian Britten, the bronze medalist. (AP)
CROSS-COUNTRY SKIING  Olympic Team Selected  Leslie Thompson, Todd Boonstra, Ingrid Butts and Dorcas Wonsavage became three-time Olympians Saturday night as a 17-member United States was named in Anchorage for next month's Winter Olympics. (AP)


SHL Systemhouse (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Another Pacific Passage For a Conde Nast Soldier
Wearing a blue kangaroo tie and looking tanned and relaxed, Bernard H. Leser, president of Conde Nast Publications Inc., was enjoying himself.
Never mind that this 68-year-old executive had arrived on a nonstop flight from Tokyo the previous morning, had spent the day in his office and was back at his desk at 8 A.M.
He was in full form, explaining why he would step down as president in June -- after seven years in the job and 35 years with the company -- to become chairman of Conde Nast's Pacific operations.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.S. Committee Hopes for Some Advice Soon
The president of the United States Olympic Committee said today that he hoped for a recommendation "within days" from figure-skating officials on whether Tonya Harding should be allowed to compete in the Winter Games next month in Lillehammer, Norway.
One U.S.O.C. official said he thought Harding would be removed from the team this week.
But others cautioned that Olympic officials would move deliberately and would not be stampeded into any decision.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY
Health Care REIT Inc  Pall Corp  Southern Co


Bernard Davis, Harvard Professor Of Medicine and Author, 78, Dies
Dr.
Bernard D. Davis, a Harvard Medical School professor who attracted widespread attention in a 1976 dispute about medical schools' admission standards, died on Friday at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 78.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth.


Patents; Filing by fax is the latest step in the march toward computerized patent and trademark applications.
FOR the first time in decades, the United States Patent and Trademark Office is changing its application filing rules.
Embracing the electronic age, the agency will allow inventors to fax many of the reams of required documents.
The change is supposed to clear the way for inventors to file eventually by computer modem.
The new regulations took effect on Nov. 22.
Until then, the agency required that any signed document be an original: no photocopies, carbons or faxes.
But many times examiners could not tell whether a signature was original.
Signed documents also got lost.
Unfortunately, if an inventor could not prove that he had submitted an original by the filing deadline, the application was rejected.


Nellcor Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Michael Wolff; Real-Estate Broker, 54
Michael Wolff, a New York real-estate broker, died on Friday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 54.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


9,000 Offer To Go Feed Wild Birds In Taste Test
Cornell University has recruited 9,000 amateur researchers in a mass experiment to determine the food preferences of wild birds in cold weather.
In tens of thousands of outdoor tests that will end in April, bird-watchers in the United States and Canada are putting a smorgasbord of seeds before birds and recording their choices.


'Reinventing' New York, From a Strategist's View
ATTEMPTS at "reinventing Rudy" into a gentler politician may have been overtaken by the crush of events that have already tested his administration during its first two weeks in office.
But David Osborne, the national guru of "reinventing government," says that the Mayor can still revive his campaign agenda of fulfilling and enforcing the social contract.
"Do you have a choice?" said Mr.
Osborne, co-author with Ted Gaebler of "Reinventing Government" (Addison-Wesley, 1992), which was written for public managers but which was seized as a largely nonideological bible by aspiring politicians.


Super Bowl! Super Bowl! Super Bowl! Bills Want No. 4
There were 29 seconds left when quarterback Jim Kelly of the Bills kneeled down with the football to secure Buffalo's 29-23 victory over the Raiders at Rich Stadium Saturday afternoon.
Before Kelly could stand up, many of his teammates were jubilantly jumping in the air, waving their arms and heading for the locker room.
A few minutes later, when reporters were allowed in the locker room, that excitement had dissipated as if it had been siphoned off by an invisible vacuum cleaner hose hanging over the entrance.
They were happy to win a hard-fought game against the Raiders.
But they are focused on what lies ahead and beyond the American Football Conference championship game, which they'll play next Sunday at 12:30 P.M. at Rich Stadium.


U.S. Initiates Effort to Halt Airline Insecticide Spraying
The Clinton Administration is planning a series of measures to discourage governments overseas from requiring that jetliners arriving in their airports be sprayed with insecticide, a practice that Federal officials say needlessly exposes millions of Americans to harmful chemicals.
The United States ended the in-flight spraying of insecticides in passenger cabins of arriving airliners in 1979, after determining that the health danger it posed outweighed any benefits.
But the United States cannot forbid other governments from requiring spraying aboard airliners, even American carriers, arriving in their countries.


CART Headquarters: New Hand at a Hot Throttle
A current joke poses this question: Is it better to win the lottery or be named president of Indy-car racing?
The answer is the latter.
In both cases, you get a million dollars for doing nothing, but with the Indy-car job, you don't have to wait 20 years.
That joke had its genesis a few years ago, when Championship Auto Racing Teams, Indy-car racing's main governing group, paid John Frasco $1 million a year over three years to step down as its head.


U.S. Altering Bank Plan
Responding to criticism from state regulators and small banks, a senior Treasury Department official says the Administration is modifying its plan for consolidating bank regulatory agencies to allow a bigger role for state regulators.
Frank N. Newman, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance, said last week that after Congress returns on Jan. 25, the Administration would propose that small state-chartered banks and savings and loan associations be examined only by federally certified state examiners.
Many of these institutions are now examined twice each year, by a state regulator and again by a Federal regulator.


Bergen Brunswig Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hall's Hurley Explains
Depression, lack of self-esteem and difficulty dealing with stress led to DANNY HURLEY's decision to take a leave of absence from Seton Hall's basketball team on Dec. 4, the junior guard has said in an interview with several New Jersey newspapers.
"I had it in my head that anything short of being an N.B.A. player, I'm a failure," he said.
"When I wasn't performing like an N.B.A. player, I started getting depressed." (AP)


United Carolina Bancshares Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knight's New Shoe Fits
Coach BOB KNIGHT of Indiana has signed a five-year contract for the Hoosiers to wear the Converse Run 'N Slam basketball shoes.
Earlier this month, Adidas canceled its shoe contract with Knight after he entered an agreement with another company to supply his trademark red sweater.  (AP)


Cullen/Frost Bankers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bells of Bronze Age Show the Complexity Of Old China's Music
Studies of 2,500-year-old musical instruments found in the excavated tomb of a Chinese ruler from the Bronze Age suggest that the complexity and sophistication of music and musical instruments in ancient China was much greater than previously believed, according to articles in the most recent issue of Archaeology magazine.
The tomb contained percussion, string and wind instruments in a remarkable state of preservation, including the largest assemblage of Bronze Age bells ever recovered.
Discovered in 1977, near the city of Suizhou in Hubei Province in central China, the tomb, from the fifth century B.C., has long been considered "one of the most significant archeological discoveries of the 20th century," said Peter A. Young, editor in chief of the magazine.


Citizens Banking Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE EARTHQUAKE: One Neighborhood; Waking in Astonishment To See a Street Destroyed
Just before sunrise today, the residents of Balboa Boulevard wandered about in bathrobes and pajamas, gazing in astonishment at their devastated neighborhood in a section of the city called Granada Hills.
A violent earthquake that was centered just a few miles south in the San Fernando Valley caused houses to collapse, produced a gas main rupture that set fire to several houses and loosed a torrent of water in the street.


Modern's Union Members Stage a One-Day Strike
Union employees at the Museum of Modern Art staged a one-day strike yesterday to protest what they described as the museum's intransigence in negotiations for a new contract for clerical and junior-level curatorial staff members.
Chanting "No contract, no justice" and blowing whistles, about 90 workers circled in front of the museum's main entrance on 53d Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues in Manhattan.
Passers-by who looked as though they might enter the museum drew a chorus of boos, catcalls and entreaties to honor the picket line. (By 3 P.M., about 1,200 people had entered, said a museum spokeswoman; attendance at the end of last week ran between 2,100 and 2,700 visitors a day.)


How to Make Donations
Interaction, a voluntary relief assistance group supported by the Federal Government, has issued this list of agencies to which money may be sent to help earthquake victims:
American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013.
Telephone: (800) 842-2200.
Local Red Cross chapters can provide additional information.


The Giants Have Too Many Uniforms to Fit into a Cap
On the flight home from San Francisco, safety Myron Guyton was talking to his friend and teammate, safety Greg Jackson.
They were talking about the cold monster that has no mercy or respect for their friendship.
They were talking about the salary cap, and how it and free agency could drastically change the makeup of the Giants.
"I was telling Jack it might be the last time we play together," Guyton said.
"It's tough."


Haemonetics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


THE EARTHQUAKE: Phones and Power; Gas and Electric Services Are Disrupted for Millions of Customers
The early morning earthquake that thundered through Southern California yesterday snapped electric lines, caused fires at generating stations and disrupted power as far north as Canada and as far east as Wyoming.
The areas hit hardest, however, were the bedroom communities of the San Fernando Valley, including northern stretches of Los Angeles, where perhaps 2 million people were without power.
More fires broke out in Los Angeles as at least 142 gas mains split, and as many as 5,000 customers were left without gas.
It may take days to restore gas and electricity fully in some areas, officials at utilities said.


Four Chamber Concerts
The Bridgehampton Chamber Music Festival is to present a new series of concerts this season at the Jewish Museum, Fifth Avenue at 92d Street.
The first, on Sunday at 5 P.M. and to be repeated on Monday at 7:30, will feature Marya Martin, flutist; Alan Kay, clarinetist; Ani Kavafian and Mark Peskanov, violinists; Toby Appel, violist; Fred Sherry, cellist; Andre-Michel Schub, pianist, and Nancy Allen, harpist, playing works by Dvorak, Ravel, Robert Beaser and Jonathan Kramer.
The other concerts in the series are to take place on Feb. 27 and April 10.
Tickets are $25 for each program.
Information: (212) 750-5776.


Greyhound: The Airline of the Road
The fleet is rather narrow bodied, cruising altitudes quite low.
No flight attendants, no peanuts, no drinks.
But even with its wheels planted firmly on the ground, Greyhound Lines Inc. is starting to act more and more like an airline.
The only nationwide bus company that links the smallest American towns and the largest cities, Greyhound is making some high-flying plans.
It is rewarding frequent riders and issuing tickets in advance.
It will guarantee seats and offer hotel tie-ins and its own credit card.
To avoid accidents, its buses carry radar.
Trying to Be a Model
The ever-evolving world of transportation, which has seen one bankruptcy after another since deregulation in the late 1970's, has come down to this: Airlines, with cheap fares and short hops, are starting to look like bus companies, while the biggest bus company is trying to be more like an airline.
And the goal at Greyhound, which emerged from bankruptcy in 1991, is to shape a bus system that the airlines will seek to emulate.


Venezuela Mine Scheme Targets Salesians
To the Editor:
Napoleon A. Chagnon, professor of anthropology at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and the Roman Catholic Salesian missionaries have known each other for the last 30 years.
Mr.
Chagnon has, in fact, been instrumental in helping the Salesians formulate several projects for the Yanomamo Indians.


Most Markets Were Open
The Government securities market was closed in the United States yesterday for the observation of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., although there was light trading in Treasury issues overseas.
But the stock market, the currency market and the futures markets were open.


Empty Asylums: Rights in Conflict
The emptying of the nation's big mental institutions over the last two decades has been one of the more problematic victories of civil liberties lawyers.
Thousands of inmates, freed from squalid warehouses where they had been stored on the principle of out of mind, out of sight, have found their way not into smaller, homelike accommodations where they would receive treatment but onto the streets of cities across the land.
One advocate for the rights of the mentally ill proclaims the rule: "As long as you're not hurting anybody, you should be allowed to be as eccentric as you want to be."
Tonight's "Frontline" offering, "A Place for Madness," just touches on how that seemingly reasonable proposition, as put into practice by people who have trouble behaving reasonably, has affected what is known as the quality of urban life.
The program concentrates instead on a small but worrisome number of the mentally ill whose propensity for violence is not now judged sufficiently proved to deprive them of their liberty.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Engineers' View; California Says Its Renovation Plan Limited Damage to Highway Bridges
Los Angeles drivers may have been stunned by the freeway devastation caused by the earthquake yesterday, but earthquake engineers and state officials said the damage might have been worse if not for a $1 billion renovation program, in which some 300 old bridges and overpasses had been reinforced since 1989.
James Drago, a spokesman for the California Transportation Department in Sacramento, said "most or all" of the dozen bridges that collapsed or sustained heavy damage yesterday were built before 1971 and had not been reinforced and modernized under the current program.
One of the most heavily damaged bridges, on the Santa Monica Freeway, had been scheduled for retrofitting beginning next month.
The schedule for reinforcement is based on the ages and designs of the bridges.


The Veep Signs On
The Clintons' style of damage control has certain hallmarks that have been on clear display since the 1992 campaign.
Phase one involves expressions of anger from President and Mrs.
Clinton.
Mr.
Clinton's unseemly outburst at NBC correspondent Jim Miklaszewski in Prague was a classic example of his calibrated tantrums.
The anger is usually followed by dollops of self-pity.
The implied message is this: "Why are you asking me these petty questions when I am working so hard to improve the world?"


Excerpts From Giuliani Speech
Following are excerpts from Mayor Giuliani's speech yesterday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, as transcribed by The New York Times:
Dr.
King taught us that hate is to be disregarded at all times and that love is mightier than hate.
He taught us that courage is stronger than complacency and he never relied on pretense.
He knew that the naysayers and detractors at every turn would distort his meaning, yet he lived his life confident that the truth would set us free.


Lotas Minard Gets U.S. Shoe Business
Lotas Minard Patton McIver in New York has been awarded its second big assignment from the U.S.
Shoe Corporation.
The agency was named last week to handle the reintroduction of U.S.
Shoe's Bandolino shoe brand, which had been dormant for almost a decade.
In early December, the agency was awarded the creative portion of U.S.
Shoe's Easy Spirit women's shoe account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million; it was previously handled by Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis.


Black Anger on Mayor's 'Discipline' Remark
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, in the midst of an effort to improve his relations with black New Yorkers, was criticized yesterday by black elected officials who complained that Mr.
Giuliani's comments on Sunday about Representative Charles B. Rangel and black officials reflected racial insensitivity.
After a speech on Sunday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine commemorating the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Mr.
Giuliani talked to reporters about criticisms from Mr.
Rangel and other black elected officials who said the Mayor had not reached out sufficiently to black officials in recent weeks.
In his comments, Mr.
Giuliani said, in part, "And they're going to have to learn how to discipline themselves in the way in which they speak also."


On My Mind; Giuliani, Violence and Trouble-Peddlers
What's going on in New York?
The new Mayor has not been in office three weeks and already he is giving Americans a substantial gift and an important opportunity.
The gift is to stand up early behind the most important promise for which he was elected.
It was to maintain law and order, the essential combination needed by any democracy to stay alive and move forward.


Bentsen Prods Indonesia On Rights of Workers
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told President Suharto of Indonesia today that while the United States believed his Government was making progress on workers' rights it should do more if it wanted to retain its preferential trade privileges with Washington.
Mr.
Bentsen was visiting Indonesia as part of an Asian tour intended to advance the Clinton Administration's efforts to get American businesses to focus more on the rapidly expanding economies of Indonesia, Thailand and China.


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE EARTHQUAKE: Mapping the Devastation; The Damage: First the Quake, Then Aftershocks and Fires
Northridge
The earthquake was centered in the Northridge district of Los Angeles, about 20 miles northwest of downtown. 1.
At least 15 people died when an apartment complex in Northridge collapsed.
"The building shifted north about six feet." said one rescue worker, viewing the damage.
At day's end, rescuers continued to search for survivors or bodies. 2.
Seismologists said the earthquake may have lifted the mountains jabove Northridge more than one foot. 3.
Not far away, the Northridge Fashion Center mall and a nearby parking structure sustained heavy damage.
Rescuers worked for over nine hours to free a man trapped in his parked car. 4.
A 64-car freight train carrying sulfuric acid derailed between Northridge and Chatsworth.
Officials said there was a small acid leak from the accident.
Elsewhere in the San Fernando Valley 5.
SYLMAR -- Nearly 70 homes in Sylmar were destroyed by fires resulting from gas leaks.
Many of the destroyed homes were mobile homes. 6.
SAN FERNANDO -- Reported collapsed buildings, gas leaks, water maikn breaks and fires. 7.
SHERMAN OAKS -- Reported colapsed buildings, gas leaks, water main breaks and fires. 8.
STUDIO CITY -- Reported collapsed buildings, gas leaks, water main breaks and fires. 9.
RESEDA -- Reported collapsed buildings, gas leaks, water main breaks and fires. 10.
GRANADA HILLS -- Reported colapsed buildings, gas leaks, water main breaks and fires.
The Kaiser Permanente Medical Center was destroyed in the quake; Granada Hills Community Hospital had patients waiting in the parking lot for emergency treatment.
Disrupted Travel 11.
LOS ANGELES INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT -- Engineers closed the airport for several hours as they checked for structural damage, disruptingj air travel nationwide.
Commuter trains were stopped briefly.
Collapsed Freeways 12.
SIMI VALLEY FREEWAY -- A section of the freeway collapsed just north of the quake epicenter. 13.
INTERSTATE 5 -- The quake also caused a collapse of the intersection of Instertate 5, another major roadway, and Highway 14.
A police motorcycle officer on his way to work was killed in the collapse. 14.
THE SANTA MONICA FREEWAY -- A mile-long section of the busy Santa Monica Freeway was closed after an elevated portion of the roadway fell to the ground.
Earthquake at a Glance
Epicenter: The Northridge section of Los Angeles, 20 miles northwest of downtown.
Richter scale reading: preliminary 6.6.
Aftershocks: At least 20, including some as strong as 5.5.
Time: 4:31 A.M. (7:31 A.M. Eastern time).
Range: The quake was felt from San Diego 125 miles to the south to Las Vegas, Nev., 275 miles to the northeast.
Deaths: 30, including 15 in the collapse of an apartment building in Northridge.
Injuries: Hundreds.
Fires: Dozens of homes destroyed by fire, including 44 houses in Sylmar.
Broken gas lines fed many of the fires.
Curfew: The Los Angeles Police Department declared a dusk-to-dawn curfew.
Glendale imposed a similar curfew.
Freeway damage: Collapsed section of Interstate 10 (the Santa Monica Freeway) in Los Angeles; collapsed interchange in the San Fernando Valley -- Interstate 5 (the Golden State Freeway) and Interstate 14 (the Antelope Valley Freeway); collapsed section of State Route 118 (the Simi Valley Freeway).
Electricity: Millions of people were without electricity through the first day, and the authorities said it could take three days to restore all service.
Water: Utility officials reported 200,000 people without water.
Households that do have running water were advised to boil it before using it for drinking, washing dishes or cooking.


Universal Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Downed Balloon's Crew Is Eager to Try Again
Despite the forced landing of the Earthwinds balloon on Wednesday only seven hours after it began an attempt to circle the world, its flight crew and many members of its support staff say they are eager to try again.
The balloon's main financial backer, Barron Hilton, the chairman and chief executive of the Hilton Hotels Corporation, said through a spokeswoman on Thursday that a decision on the project would depend on several factors, including the continued support of other sponsors, the results of a technical investigation and the availability of another plastic-film helium balloon.
The Earthwinds project has so far failed in four attempts to fly nonstop around the world and has spent about $7 million in doing so.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Response; Federal Agencies Rush Aid Without Formal Emergency
Federal officials sent medical disaster teams and urban search-and-rescue units to Los Angeles early today, without waiting for Gov.
Pete Wilson's formal request for assistance or President Clinton's emergency declaration.
Generators, communication equipment and other relief supplies were rushed to Los Angeles by more than 50 trucks from Denver as part of the Federal Mobile Emergency Response System.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Freeways; Collapsed Freeways Cripple City Where People Live Behind Wheel
The earthquake that struck Los Angeles before dawn today crippled crucial freeways, raising the prospect that the American city most defined by its cars and interlocking highways would be gripped by traffic chaos for months.
The city's freeways and highways, mostly built since World War II, soar and wind like roller coasters, often resting atop columns as they crisscross one another.
The buckling and collapse today of three heavily traveled elevated portions raised the prospect of at least partial paralysis for a city where the automobile is seen as intrinsic to the region's life.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Economy; Storms, Floods, Fires, a Deep Recession, and Now Comes This
The earthquake that shook the Los Angeles area yesterday was the latest in a string of costly disasters to strike a state still suffering from a deep recession and now facing perhaps billions of dollars in damages.
"The bad news is that it happened," said James A. Snyder, president of the Personal Insurance Federation of California, a Sacramento-based insurance industry group.
"The good news is that we've had a lot of practice."


Chess
A qualification tournament organized by the Professional Chess Association, the breakaway international body established last year by Gary Kasparov, was won by 22-year-old Michael Adams of England and 24-year-old Viswanathan Anand of India.
They each scored 7 1/2-3 1/2, and each was awarded a $35,000 prize in the 11-round, Swiss-system event, which finished in Groningen, the Netherlands, on Dec. 30.
The prize was put up by Intel, the computer-chip giant, which has indicated interest in continuing to finance P.C.A. events.
The winners will be joined later this year in the quarterfinal elimination matches by the five players who tied for third place in this elite 54-entrant competition: Vladimir Kramnik and Sergei Tivyakov of Russia, Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn, Boris Gulko of Fair Lawn, N.J., and Oleg Romanishin of Ukraine.
They each tallied 7-4.
Moreover, Nigel Short of England, Kasparov's last challenger, will round the group out to eight, from whom the challenger for Kasparov in 1995 will emerge.


Mechanism Explained For Drug Resistance In Some TB Strains
TUBERCULOSIS researchers have made a laboratory discovery that they say paves the way for the development of new and more powerful drugs against the infectious disease, which has become a growing public health threat throughout the world.
As strains of the tubercle bacillus have become resistant to the drugs that have long controlled the infection, tuberculosis has once again become a deadly disease in the United States, as well as in less developed countries.
Only a few years ago, the United States Government set the year 2010 as the date for eliminating tuberculosis from this country.
But now Federal health officials say the disease is out of control in several areas of the country, including New York City, where it has become a major problem in hospitals and homeless shelters and among people who are infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacterium that causes the disease, has become resistant to as many as seven drugs.


Fewer Men Earn Doctorates, Particularly Among Blacks
More women are gaining doctoral degrees than ever before, but the number of men receiving Ph.D.'s has dropped during the last decade, particularly among blacks, a study released today by the American Council on Education showed.
Over all, doctorates earned by members of minorities were on the rise, but whites remained overwhelmingly dominant, earning 88 percent of the degrees awarded in 1992, a figure that showed little change from 1982.
But among whites, the number of women obtaining doctorates was up by 30 percent from a decade ago, while the number of male recipients decreased by 9 percent.


Nightspot's Decline, From Dinner Theater to Court
For almost 17 years, the Darien Dinner Theater was a major attraction in Fairfield County, a place where suburbanites could enjoy a Broadway-style show without trekking into Manhattan.
"People came by the busloads from all over the state and from Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New Jersey and Westchester to have dinner and see a great show," said David Hawes, general manager for Corbin Associates, the theater's landlord.


Cells May Bear Mark Of Each Cancer Agent
IMAGINE that the body keeps a book of insults.
Recorded there are injuries done to it by environmental agents, from noxious chemicals to intense sunlight.
Now imagine that scientists might learn to read this record to discover which agent was the cause of a person's cancer, or which might be likely to lead to cancer in the future and how soon.


CHRONICLE
Is this any way to start a new year?
QUEEN ELIZABETH's string of bad luck continues: she broke her left wrist while horseback riding last weekend at Sandringham, the royal estate in Norfolk.
"She was out riding on Saturday as usual when her horse tripped and fell, and the Queen fell onto her left wrist," a spokesman for Buckingham Palace told The Associated Press yesterday.
"It is not a serious break; it is just an inconvenient thing. It was thought just to be a bruise to start with, and the break was not diagnosed until nearly 24 hours afterward."


COMPANY NEWS: Wind Wildcatters; Energy Alternative Blows In Oil Heartland of Texas
As the Department of Energy's scriptwriters might envision it, the sequel to the movie "Giant" would have West Texans turning into owlish tree- or cactus-huggers, forsaking their drilling rigs for environmentally correct wind turbines.
The department joined a Texas utility company here on Friday to announce a trial that would produce enough wind-generated electricity by early 1995 to supply 3,000 homes in the middle of the nation's richest oilfields.


MAJOR DENIES ROLE IN IRAN TOOL SALES
Seeking to distance himself from a long-simmering political controversy, Prime Minister John Major said today that he had played no role in decisions by mid-level Government ministers that allowed the export of arms-making equipment to Iraq in the years leading up to the Persian Gulf war.
Testifying at an official inquiry into the exports, Mr.
Major said that despite holding a series of senior posts with responsibility for foreign policy and economic affairs before becoming Prime Minister in November 1990, he did not learn until two years later that the Government had permitted the sale to Iraq of militarily useful equipment prior to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Standex International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Riggs National Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In German Theater, A Daring Director Takes Center Stage
There are probably more full-year repertory theaters, more actors, more performances, more new plays and more theatergoers in the German-speaking countries than in the rest of the world combined.
Most of this enormous activity remains unknown to American audiences, given the language barrier.
Very occasionally, a German company will make it across the ocean, as the Thalia Theater of Hamburg did last fall with "The Black Rider" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
But there is more to theater in Germany, and even in Hamburg, than the Thalia.
Right now, the hot item in the German-speaking theater world is the Thalia's main Hamburg rival, the Deutsches Schauspielhaus, or German Theater.
The Schauspielhaus is in the news because of the arrival this season of Frank Baumbauer as its new intendant, or director.
Mr.
Baumbauer, 48, comes from Munich and got started there and in Dusseldorf as a stage director.
From 1983 to 1986 he was intendant at the Bavarian State Theater in Munich and, after a year's stopover in Stuttgart, served from 1988 to 1993 as director of the Basel Theater in Switzerland, where he was in charge of the entire theatrical operation, including opera and dance.


Back to the One-Room School
Bridget Carruth teaches a houseful of children every day, running a modern, urban version of the one-size-fits-all schools that once dotted the American prairie.
On a recent day, in what used to be the living room of her two-story brick house in the Wakefield section of the Bronx, Ms.
Carruth's sister, Debi, the only other staff member, conducted a class with seven students who ranged from 3 1/2 to 7 years old.
Upstairs, in a converted bedroom, Ms.
Carruth taught spelling to the older children, giving special attention to Jermaine Hamilton, a 9-year-old with a reading problem whose local public school had wanted to assign him to a special-education class.


Southern National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why Everyone Needs to Get the AIDS Message
To the Editor:
I hesitate to disagree with John Gagnon in "Losing Ground Against AIDS" (Op-Ed, Jan. 6), but I jumped for joy when I read that the television networks and some cable stations would air condom promotion public service announcements.


NS Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


By Design; Tiny T-shirts
Forget the oversize T-shirt.
Now, it's the undersize T-shirt.
And the undersize tank top.
The idea is to look as if you were wearing something you outgrew at least 20 years ago.
It should hug the torso and not quite cover the midriff.
To achieve this effect, women are buying the smallest size they can find, even if it means venturing into the children's department.


Saatchi Chairman To Head Association
Edward J. Wax, chairman and chief executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York, has been nominated to serve as the 1994-95 chairman of the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
He will succeed Roy Bostock, the 1993-94 chairman, who is also chairman and chief executive at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York.


Southern Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Fire in the White House Fireplace
To the Editor:
At least since the days of Franklin D. Roosevelt's fireside chats in the Great Depression, a fire burning in a White House fireplace in the background has symbolized enduring values cherished in high places.
Today, a fire in a handsome fireplace figures frequently in the background of pictures of Presidential speechmaking and of White House gatherings of small groups of statesmen.
But they are not the fires of yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
China and the United States reached an 11th-hour textile agreement, averting a major trade clash over the $7.3 billion in Chinese textiles sold in the American market each year.
The Clinton Administration had vowed to reduce Chinese textile imports by more than $1 billion unless a new pact ended overshipments and cheating by Chinese companies.  [ Page D1. ]


CHRONICLE
Sometimes having a talent for mathematics really pays off.
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences will award its prestigious Crafoord Prize, which is worth $300,000, to SHING-TUNG YAU of Harvard University and SIMON DONALDSON of Oxford University for their work on differential geometry, Reuters reported yesterday.
The Crafoord Prize is considered the equivalent of a Nobel Prize, in disciplines not eligible for a Nobel.
Differential geometry is the study of curved lines and surfaces and their properties.


Higher Bid By Viacom Called Near
Viacom Inc. is expected to raise its bid as early as this morning for Paramount Communications Inc. to match the total value of the current offer from QVC Network Inc.
A person close to the negotiations said late last night that Viacom and its new partner, the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, were expected to increase the stock portion of their offer substantially while raising the cash portion only marginally.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The industry continues to struggle with a poor record in hiring and promoting minorities.
ASKING J. Melvin (Jo) Muse about the advertising industry's woeful inability to recruit, hire, train and promote members of minority groups is like lighting a fuse.
"I'm literally sick of the discussion," said Mr.
Muse, chairman and chief creative director at Muse Cordero Chen Inc., an agency in Los Angeles.
"I don't even want to talk about it.


With Phones Out, Computers Talk
Within minutes after the San Fernando Valley was rocked by an earthquake yesterday morning, the nationwide web of computer networks was abuzz with messages to and from people touched by the shock.
Hundreds of computer users turned to electronic mail when they were unable to make long-distance telephone calls into and out of the earthquake area.
People in the stricken area discovered they could dial local telephone numbers that gave them access to electronic mail networks unaffected by the quake.


Microsoft Will Supply Software for Sega
The Microsoft Corporation will supply portions of the basic software for controlling the new video game machine to be introduced late this year by Sega Enterprises, according to people familiar with the agreement.
Microsoft, which dominates the market for personal computer operating system software, has been seeking to extend its reach by developing basic controlling software for hand-held information appliances, office equipment and advanced cable television systems.
The agreement to contribute to an operating system for Sega, one of the top companies in the video game business, could represent a big stride beyond personal computing for Microsoft.
Operating system software controls the inner workings of computers and computer-like devices.


From Coast to Coast, Skaters Return to Ice
She sneaked onto the ice a day before, at 2 in the morning, when the temperature and spectators had dropped to zero.
Today, Nancy Kerrigan went public on skates for the first time since being clubbed in the right knee on Jan. 6 at the national championships.
She stroked around the rink without so much as a jump, not an axel or lutz or a salchow or a toe loop, yet the curious showed up to chronicle her every spin and spiral.
Before 8 A.M., cars filtered down Nancy Kerrigan Way to Stoneham Arena, north of Boston.
The parking lot filled.
A pool of reporters and photographers was ushered in.
Others pressed their faces like orphans to the arena's glass doors.
A patrol car circled.
A couple of prep school teams waited impatiently outside in the snow, their hockey game suddenly taking a backseat to figure skating as a full-contact sport.


THE EARTHQUAKE: Trapped; Airborne in Bed: A Building Collapses, Leaving 15 Dead
By ELIZABETH KOLBERT
Erik Pearson heard a loud explosion and felt a jolt like a bomb.
Still on their bed, he and his wife then fell 12 feet through the ceiling of the apartment below.
"We were airborne," said Mr.
Pearson, a 27-year-old nursing student.
"I heard the glass break from the glass sliding doors. Our apartment came down and pitched diagonally." The door was jammed shut, the couple said, but they climbed down to safety off their once third-floor, now second-floor, balcony.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Overview; SEVERE EARTHQUAKE HITS LOS ANGELES; AT LEAST 30 KILLED; FREEWAYS COLLAPSE
A violent earthquake jolted millions of people out of bed before dawn today, crumpling freeway overpasses, leveling buildings and igniting scores of fires.
Hundreds of people were injured and at least 24 were reported killed, including 14 at a three-level apartment complex that was reduced to two stories.
The quake, centered in the Northridge area in the San Fernando Valley, 20 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles, measured 6.6 on the Richter scale of ground motion and was felt for hundreds of miles, knocking out power and water service for hundreds of thousands of residents.


Harding's Old Film Newly Valuable
The video of a 15-year-old Tonya Harding on Sunday's "60 Minutes" provided the first sympathetic look at the figure skater since her bodyguard and two other men were charged last week with the clubbing of Nancy Kerrigan.
The video, shot before and during the 1986 championships in New York, described alleged physical abuse toward Harding by her mother.
"She's not a good mother," Harding said.
"She hits me and beats me." Diane Rawlinson, Harding's coach, said Harding's mother beat her "with a hairbrush."


Cuomo Names Ex-Party Chief To Run Re-election Campaign
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has named a veteran political aide, John A. Marino, to manage his 1994 re-election campaign, Mr.
Marino said today.
The 45-year-old Mr.
Marino, formerly Mr.
Cuomo's handpicked chairman of the State Democratic Committee, said he would take a leave from a Manhattan investment management firm, Glickenhaus &amp; Company, so he can oversee what is expected to be a difficult race.


Classical Music in Review
North/South Consonance Ensemble  Christ and St. Stephen's Church Manhattan
Seeking musical images commensurate with the fathomless terror of the Holocaust, composers from Schoenberg to Penderecki have unleashed masses of orchestral dissonance.
But the most powerful musical statements on this largest of themes have taken a more modest and oblique form: the ghostly dance finale of Shostakovich's Piano Trio No. 2, and Britten's Dachau-inspired setting of "Death Be Not Proud." This inverse relation is not lost on Max Lifchitz, whose "Of Bondage and Freedom," which was performed by the North/South Consonance Ensemble on Sunday afternoon, makes a considerable impact with only violin, piano and soprano voice.


Clinton, Marking King Holiday, Pushes Domestic Policy Programs
Declaring that "the absence of discrimination is not the same thing as the presence of opportunity," President Clinton today marked the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday holiday by promoting several of the Administration's domestic policy initiatives and linking them to Mr.
Clinton's just-completed trip to Europe.
The President, speaking at Howard University to an audience of students and prominent blacks, was accompanied by most of his black senior advisers, including Mike Espy, the Secretary of Agriculture.


Review/Music; Stageful of Artists in Tribute to Marilyn Horne
The Marilyn Horne Foundation, which had a campaign opener of sorts at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, proposes fiscal and entrepreneurial medication for what seems to be the dying art of song recitals.
In a program called "Divas in Song," a succession of female singers described a career arc: Renee Fleming and Ruth Ann Swenson fresh and ascending; Frederica Von Stade and Helen Donath, with their potentials squarely reached and firmly held, and then Ms.
Horne and Montserrat Caballe, the first in graceful and dignified descent, the second giggling and mugging her way toward retirement.
The afternoon celebrated Ms.
Horne's 60th birthday.
The day belonged to song repertory.
Indeed, opera was put on the shelf.
The foundation recorded the concert, and will benefit from a forthcoming compact disk. (Donations, needless to say, are also welcome.)


John Nuveen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Montgomery Ward Names A President
Montgomery Ward said yesterday that it had appointed Bernard W. Andrews president and chief operating officer of its retail division, the third person to hold that spot in a year.
Ward, which is privately held, has had several high-level executive departures.
The previous retail president, Harold Kahn, quit in early December after holding the post for only 10 months.
Daniel H. Levy, who was retail president until last February, became chairman of Conran's Habitat in July.
Last year, the company also lost its head executives for apparel, jewelry and public relations.


Coslet Offered Bengal Offensive Coordinator Job
Bruce Coslet, who was dismissed as Jets coach two weeks ago, could be moving back to square one.
Coslet was interviewed by General Manager Mike Brown of Cincinnati yesterday in Mobile, Ala., for the Bengals' offensive coordinator job.
Coslet was the Bengals' offensive coordinator from 1986-89 and the Bengals finished at the top of the National Football League in total offense in 1988 and 1989.
He was hired by the Jets in 1990.


State Street Boston Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Connors Spurns Slams
JIMMY CONNORS admits his Grand Slam days are long gone, but the 41-year-old iconoclast isn't ready to switch fulltime to the senior circuit.
"My tennis is just like riding a bicycle; you never forget how to do it," said Connors, who has 109 career titles and hasn't given up hope on 110.
Connors, absent from the ATP Tour since last May, said yesterday from his home in Santa Ynez, Calif., that he will return to play next month in the Volvo of San Jose and the Philadelphia Indoor.


Fifth Third Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Folk Esprit as a Political Statement
Traditional revelry was combined with contemporary relevance when the Hungarian State Folk Ensemble appeared on Sunday afternoon as part of the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts series at Brooklyn College.
Most of the afternoon was sheer jollity.
The company from Budapest offered robust folk dances and the performers often burst into song as they kicked and whirled.
The troupe is on a three-month tour of the United States that began on Jan. 9 in Washington and that will take it westward to California.
Its choreography, based on traditional sources, is by Sandor Timar, the group's artistic director, and Erzsebet Nagy and Domokos Szakacs, its dance directors.


Birmingham Steel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's Now Post Time For First Commissioner
J.
BRIAN McGRATH, a marketing executive from the entertainment industry with no experience in horse racing, was hired yesterday as the first commissioner of the Thoroughbred Racing Associations.
He said he would try to sell the sport more widely to television and corporate sponsors.
McGrath, 51, acknowledged that he had been hired only by the Thoroughbred Racing Associations, the main organization of race tracks, and that he had no mandate from breeders, owners, trainers or jockeys to run the business.
He was selected by a five-man search committee of executives from the Thoroughbred Racing Associations, an organization that monitors the operations of about 50 member tracks.


Entire Region Must Share in Economic Growth
To the Editor:
We were pleased that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City and Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey met Jan. 6 to begin ending New York-New Jersey economic border warfare.


Rockwell International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Paul Bancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cuomo Again Ignores The Causes of Poverty
To the Editor:
In describing the welfare proposals in the New York State of the State Message by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo (news article, Jan. 6), you indicate that most home relief recipients in New York are "single males."


Octel Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Touch of Arrogance Is Enough for Hoyas
For the last season and a half, Georgetown Coach John Thompson has exhorted Othella Harrington, his top recruit of a year ago, to follow in the tradition of great Georgetown centers and get a little more disdainful of opposing defenses.
At halftime of Georgetown's game against Seton Hall tonight, with the Hoyas trailing by 24-21, Thompson repeated his challenge.
"We weren't really playing well and he told me to step up," Harrington said.


Provident Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Patterns
New York Visits Florence
The rehearsals last week before Donna Karan's first runway show in Florence, with Ms.
Karan draped in a hooded black cashmere sweat shirt, felt less like a casting call than a call to arms.
New York's New Yorkiest designer -- or Newyorkese, as the Italians more mellifluously called her -- was bringing a world of car phones, private planes, helicopter commuting and Wall Street to the quiet provincial town.
No wonder there was a crush to get in.
When Ms.
Karan introduced her thick cashmere sweat shirts for men three years ago, many scoffed at them as a gimmick.
But cashmere in Italy was this season's cotton, and Ms.
Karan's cashmere long underwear, socks, T-shirts and leggings looked positively prescient.


The Past Plays a Role In 2 Mississippi Trials
"The past is not dead," William Faulkner once said. "It isn't even past."
Few places in America have changed as much as Mississippi has since Faulkner died 32 years ago, but two racially charged trials over the next month are a reminder that long after Emmett Till and Ross Barnett, after Freedom Summer and Goodman, Chaney and Schwerner, this remains a state where the past seeps into the present like the smoke from a grass fire.


Market Place; Is it now the time for some bottom fishing in the oil patch?
WITH crude oil prices in the doldrums and likely to stay there, now may not seem like the time to buy oil company stocks.
But oil analysts say there are some special opportunities, especially among the domestic oil companies, including ARCO, Phillips Petroleum, Pennzoil and Amarada Hess.
Some, however, acknowledge that the best time to buy may be six months from now, when oil prices start moving.
Simon Trimble, an oil analyst at Lehman Brothers, says that because of pessimism over the future price of oil, the domestic oil stocks have taken a rougher beating in the market than have the large international companies, which generally can better weather regional economic downturns because they get their oil and market their products globally.


De Klerk Seeks Backing for Poll From Zulu King
The President of South Africa courted the King of the Zulus today in hopes of winning his blessing for elections in April and defusing the threat of insurrection that hangs over the country's democratic rebirth.
After a day marred by mayhem among the King's followers, President F. W. de Klerk could not say he had won over the Zulu monarch.
But Mr. de Klerk's advisers said they believed the King, Goodwill Zwelethini, appeared to be losing his taste for the political resistance being waged in his name.


First Chicago Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Standard Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE EARTHQUAKE: Why It Happened; Scientists Say Unknown Fault Deep Within Earth Probably Caused Tremor
Mountains and hills in the San Fernando Valley may have been heaved more than a foot higher early this morning when an earthquake fault ruptured about nine miles beneath the Northridge section of Los Angeles, seismologists said.
The earthquake of 6.6. magnitude was almost identical to one that struck 23 years ago in the nearby Sylmar section, scientists said.
Both were caused by deeply buried faults whose existence was not known until the earth began shaking.


U.S. Bidding in Nuclear-Fuel Market
The United States, in agreeing last week to buy billions of dollars worth of uranium that had been the explosive material of Russian and Ukrainian nuclear warheads, is trying to strengthen a business it once monopolized.
Through the Department of Energy, Washington had been the sole producer of fuel for nuclear power plants in the Western world.
But starting in the late 1960's, the onetime American monopoly in enriched uranium gradually fell to a 40 percent market share, as European countries and consortiums got into the business.


Computer Vision of Global Warming: Hardest on Have-Nots
USING a combination of computer models, an international team of scientists investigating the effects of global warming on agriculture has summoned up a detailed vision of the future that will cheer farmers and commodity traders in the northern latitudes, but not people in developing countries.
Experts say the three-year study is apparently the first in what is likely to be a torrent of interdisciplinary, computer-assisted projections of the myriad biophysical and socioeconomic consequences of climate change.


THE EARTHQUAKE REPORT
The Damage . . . A16
LOCATIONS AND LOSSES -- An earthquake that measured 6.6 on the Richter scale struck at 4:31 A.M. yesterday about 20 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles.
It was felt from San Diego, 125 miles to the south, to Las Vegas, Nev., 275 miles to the northeast.
Water and natural gas lines were ruptured, sending torrents rushing water through streets and fireballs billowing into the predawn sky.
Dozens of homes and other buildings collapsed.


ARISTIDE SEEKING TO RALLY SUPPORT
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, ended a weekend gathering of Haitian politicians here with a rousing call for unity to end military rule, but the gathering exposed fundamental differences among his supporters.
Father Aristide has faced strong diplomatic pressure to embrace new allies, with the goal of isolating the military leaders who overthrew him 27 months ago.


Bridge
Most bridge players find the subject of squeeze play difficult but fascinating.
It is the art of making an extra trick or two by embarrassing an opponent, and sometimes both opponents.
The latest of many books in this field is "The Squeeze at Bridge" by Wang Jianhua (spelled Chien-Hwa Wang by his British publisher), who was making important contributions to theory almost 40 years ago when practically nobody else in China had heard of the game.
His well-written book, covering all important aspects of squeeze play, is available from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York N.Y. 10036, for $14.95 including mailing.


New Drug May Prevent Jaundice in Newborns
IN a development that may lead to prevention of most neonatal jaundice, researchers at the Rockefeller University in New York have developed a preventive drug that could eventually be given to all newborns.
Jaundice, the most commonly treated medical condition in newborns, occurs when bilirubin, a toxic yellow pigment, is produced faster than an infant's liver can remove it from the bloodstream, causing the skin to appear yellow.
In severe cases, the buildup of bilirubin can cause damage to the brain and central nervous system.


Universal Electronics Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cowboys' Fate May Be Connected to Smith's Improving Shoulder Bones
The Cowboys are almost apologetic about their lethargic start in Sunday's 27-17 victory over the Green Bay Packers.
They expect to do better this Sunday when they face the San Francisco 49ers here for their conference title and a return to the Super Bowl, which they won last year.
"If we don't make the Super Bowl," said Troy Aikman, the Cowboys' quarterback, "it will be a big disappointment."


U.S. Aide Sees Nations Hindering Balkan Tribunal
A senior Clinton Administration official has accused unspecified countries of not cooperating with efforts to prosecute war criminals in the former Yugoslavia.
The president of the United Nations tribunal set up to judge the accused plans to start trials in June or July.
After visiting the tribunal here, the United States representative at the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, said on Sunday that although the United States had urged other countries to support the tribunal's efforts, response "has been spotty" so far.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Mood; Lives and Nerves Shattered, but Not Civility
Ventura Boulevard, the main thoroughfare through the devastated San Fernando Valley, was ghostly this morning, its shops a shambles, its sidewalks littered with broken glass, its traffic signals out and its automatic teller machines useless.
But the stillness was misleading.


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arab Reaction Hopeful
Successful talks in Geneva Sunday between Presidents Clinton and Assad brought an overwhelming sense of euphoria in the Arab world, with both officials and news organizations expressing hope that 1994 will bring a settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri of Lebanon called the Geneva meeting a "turning point" in the two-year-old Middle East peace effort.
He said he had a telephone call from Secretary of State Warren Christopher telling him that 1994 would be "a year of peace in the Middle East."


Correction
A picture yesterday with an obituary of the actor Michael Aldridge was published in error.
It actually showed Robin Bailey, who appeared with mr.
Aldridge in a 1986 PBS "Mystery" series.
Mr.
Aldridge is shows above.


Parametric Technology Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Germans Jailed in Attack on Athletes
Two German skinheads who attacked a group of American athletes in October were sentenced to stiff prison terms today.
The leader of the gang, Silvio Eschrich, 21, was sentenced to two years and eight months; Tino Voelkel, 16, was sentenced to one year.


Capital Baseball Selects Arnold
Capital Baseball Inc., an organization seeking to return a major league baseball team to the Washington area, has selected Arnold Advertising in McLean, Va., as the first agency to handle its marketing and promotion efforts.
Initial billings were estimated at $2 million to $4 million, with the potential for a substantial increase if the organization's efforts are successful.
Arnold's responsibilities will include developing local and national marketing programs, carrying the theme "The national pastime belongs in the nation's capital," and seeking corporate sponsorships.


Rochester Telephone Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.94
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.94
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.12
3.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.24
5.21
6.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.29
6.26
7.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.26
7.26
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.54
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Accepting Reformer's Resignation, Yeltsin Tries to Prevent Another
As turmoil in the Government caused the ruble to fall to a new low against the dollar, President Boris N. Yeltsin today accepted the resignation of Yegor T. Gaidar, the architect of Russia's economic reforms, and negotiated to keep the Finance Minister, Boris G. Fyodorov, in his job.
Mr.
Gaidar resigned as a First Deputy Prime Minister and Economics Minister on Sunday, saying that the Government was not pursuing a rational economic policy and that his advice was being ignored by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, a former manager of state industry.


First Midwest Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mark Twain Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MAJOR DENIES ROLE IN IRAN TOOL SALES
Seeking to distance himself from a long-simmering political controversy, Prime Minister John Major said today that he had played no role in decisions by mid-level Government ministers that allowed the export of arms-making equipment to Iraq in the years leading up to the Persian Gulf war.
Testifying at an official inquiry into the exports, Mr.
Major said that despite holding a series of senior posts with responsibility for foreign policy and economic affairs before becoming Prime Minister in November 1990, he did not learn until two years later that the Government had permitted the sale to Iraq of militarily useful equipment prior to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.


Reviews/Television; Code Breaking and the Good It Does
In the secret war between code makers and code breakers, which has probably been waged since prehistoric times, "Nova" is on the side of the breakers.
No surprise about that, since in the 20th century the smartest of them seem to have been British and American.
"Codebreakers" begins in 1914, when the Oxbridgers gathered in Room 40 of London's Admiralty building scored what the narrator calls "code breaking's first great victory": They cracked the German Navy Code.
In 1917 they decrypted the famous Zimmerman telegram, disclosing Germany's plans for unrestricted submarine warfare against the United States, and so helped nudge America into the conflict.


Israel Welcomes Assad Stand, Carefully
Israel said today that there was greater promise now for future peace with Syria, but for a second day the Government stepped with extreme caution around the Syrian President's statement that he was ready for normal relations.
Israeli leaders welcomed the tone of remarks made by President Hafez al-Assad on Sunday after his long meeting with President Clinton in Geneva.
As expected, they announced that next week they would resume long-suspended peace talks in Washington with Syria and with Jordan, Lebanon and the Palestinians.


New York, Stuck in Winter's Headlock, Is Pummeled Once Again
A wintry blast of snow, sleet and freezing rain struck the New York region and much of the Atlantic seaboard yesterday, burying some inland sections in mountains of new snow, snarling air and bus traffic and turning highways in the city and other coastal areas into treacherous, accident-littered iceways.
Despite the heavy weather, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road commuter trains ran on or close to schedule last night.
But flights at Newark, Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports were delayed, many evening commuter buses were canceled and others ran up to 90 minutes late, and automobiles were the last, worst refuge for travelers.


Sequel to an Old Fraud: Argentina's Powerful Nuclear Program
If progress springs from folly, then the Island of Huemul, half a mile offshore in the middle of the deep blue waters of Lake Nahuel Huapi, should be made an Argentine national monument.
Among the thickets of alerce trees, thorn bushes and wild roses stand the silent remains of towering buildings, laboratories and warehouses built by a Austrian scientist 45 years ago who thought he had harnessed the power of a hydrogen bomb.


Sports of The Times; Joe Cool Has Coped With Cold
NOW that Joe Montana will be wearing long underwear in Buffalo next Sunday, the doubters are snickering.
Joe Cool will freeze in that windchill.
At 37, he's too old, too bruised, too brittle.
Don't be so sure.
Back when Joe Montana was 32 years old, he arrived with the 49ers in Chicago for the 1988 National Conference championship game at Soldier Field on Lake Michigan's icy shores.
With the windchill 26 degrees below zero at kickoff, he surely would congeal in weather that was suited to Bears, preferably polar.


Japan's Companies Hear U.S. Trade Appeals
After months of fruitless trade negotiations with the Japanese Government, the Clinton Administration is taking a new tack.
It has begun to talk directly to Japanese companies, urging them to buy more foreign products and take other actions on their own to reduce Japan's huge trade surplus.
The direct appeal to the companies is partly an effort to circumvent Japan's bureaucrats, whom American officials accuse of being recalcitrant and responsible for the current stalemate in negotiations under a new framework for trade talks agreed to by the two nations in July.


THE EARTHQUAKE: Critic's Notebook; Similarities In Scenes And Views
About noon New York time, almost five hours after Los Angeles was jarred awake by the earthquake, a small seismic change occurred on television: Ted Koppel took over as ABC's lead broadcaster.
Peter Jennings, ABC's usual lead anchor, along with Tom Brokaw of NBC and Dan Rather of CBS, who had also just returned from traveling abroad with President Clinton, made it to work in time for the nightly news.


If Powermac Comes, What's a Mac User to Do?
AS Apple Computer Inc. prepares to mark the 10th anniversary of the Apple Macintosh this month, it is also getting ready to unveil the Mac's successor, a next-generation machine reportedly called the Powermac.
If rumors of a March introduction prove true, a difficult decision awaits many Macintosh users.
Should they take advantage of what are likely to be lower prices as Apple tries to clear out its inventory of existing Macintosh models?
Or should they leap to the Powermac platform, which promises at least to double the processing power of today's fastest Macintoshes?


Inauguration On Television
Several New York City and New Jersey television stations plan live coverage of inauguration day events in New Jersey.
WCBS-TV, Channel 2: Live coverage on noon news program.
WNBC-TV, Channel 4: Special half-hour report beginning at noon.
FOX, Channel 5: Live coverage on noon news program.
WABC-TV, Channel 7: Live coverage on noon news program.
WPIX-TV, Channel 11: Live and taped coverage on 10 P.M. news program.
NEW JERSEY CHANNEL, Channel 50: Live coverage of the inauguration, beginning at 11 A.M. and lasting at least two hours, depending on the weather.
From 8 to 9 P.M., the network will broadcast live from the inaugural ball.
Additional coverage on 6 and 10 P.M. news programs.


Threat of Encroaching Deserts May Be More Myth Than Fact
COMMON wisdom has it that the deserts of the world are on the march, steadily expanding, permanently converting pastures and croplands to sand dunes, and that human mistreatment of the drylands that flank the deserts is responsible.
But scientists using the most up-to-date investigative techniques have found no evidence that this is true, at least in the case of the Sahara and its immediate environs, everyone's favorite and most serious example of what is called "desertification." In view of the lack of evidence, many experts suspect that the threatening image of encroaching deserts may be more myth than fact.


Teco Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Old Champions Face New In Europe
Next month, Norway will be host for the most star-filled Olympic figure-skating competition in history.
This week, aficionados of marquee names and triple axels will have to settle for the European championships.
It is not much of a compromise.


Xilinx Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Short Cuts To Reach Macintosh Charts
THE experiment was to produce a business chart, to accompany a talk or to be handed out with a document, with as little work as possible.
After making organization charts with two Windows presentation graphics programs, discussed last week, I turned to two Macintosh programs.
The first was Astound, a product of Gold Disk of Santa Clara, Calif., a company familiar since 1984 as a leading publisher of Amiga software.
There was no template for an organization chart, so I made an agenda for a Jan. 18 meeting of Beleaguered Computing, the international and fictitious behemoth.
Following a minimum number of the directions in the eight-part tutorial in the "Getting Started" manual, I put in the title, the headings (which started with bullets) and the subheadings (starting with dashes) and changed the color of a line of text.
This was fairly easy with the eight menus across the top and the nine icons along the left side.
The result looked as if it had been produced by somebody who really knew what he was doing, which was the point of the exercise.


A Warning Exit in Moscow
On its face, Yegor Gaidar's departure from the Russian Government is a blow to Boris Yeltsin and an embarrassment to President Clinton.
Only last Friday in Moscow, Mr.
Clinton praised President Yeltsin for his commitment to economic reform, though he was apparently then aware that Mr.
Gaidar, one of Russia's ablest reformers, was about to quit as First Deputy Prime Minister.
Citing profligate decisions taken without Cabinet consultation, Mr.
Gaidar gave a blunt farewell: "I cannot be at one and the same time in the Government and in opposition to it."
A dramatic exit, certainly.
But not yet a last bow for Mr.
Gaidar, who has quit, or threatened to quit, on previous occasions.
Resignations are a way of forcing decisions, and one of the biggest facing Mr.
Yeltsin is whether to continue on a ruinous inflationary course.
The specific moves protested by Mr.
Gaidar illustrate the point: the earmarking of $500 million for a lavish new parliamentary building and, far more troubling, a proposed monetary union between Russia and insolvent Belarus.


Malcolm Forbes Jr., Heir at Whitman's Side, Escapes His Father's Shadow
Malcolm S. Forbes Jr. still remembers when he and Christine Todd Whitman, who becomes Governor of New Jersey today, first joined hands in support of their favorite Republican candidate.
"The Nixons came to New Jersey in 1952 for the vice-presidential campaign," Mr.
Forbes recalled recently at the lower Manhattan headquarters of Forbes magazine, flagship of the publishing empire he has run since his famously flamboyant father, Malcolm Forbes, died in 1990.
The younger Forbes, who is known as Steve, was 5 years old and Christie Whitman was not much older.


Fans Have Word for Laettner: Booooooo!
Bill Laimbeer can stay retired.
Christian Laettner, the new-age model, has come to take his place.
In his one and only Madison Square Garden appearance of the season yesterday, Laettner got the Laimbeer treatment, boos for everything he did or didn't do.
He didn't seem to mind.
When the fans behind the basket closest to the Minnesota Timberwolves' bench taunted him for fouling out, Laettner stood from his chair and yelled right back.


Tests for Mr. Giuliani
It did not take long.
Just a few days in office and reality hit Rudolph Giuliani, sort of tumbled down on him the way it always does in New York.
Governing is messy, unpredictable and raw, especially in this inherently fractious city.
Unlike campaigning, it is not a matter of neat sound bites and rigid declarations.
That is what Mr.
Giuliani is learning the hard way, as he tries to assert his will in the aftermath of the recent melee at a Harlem mosque.
He is learning, too, that preconceived notions about how government should work have little to do with how it does work.
The former prosecutor is seeing that presiding over New York City demands flexibility, and above all a willingness to reach out to alienated communities.


Despite Boos, Mayor Seeks Black Support1
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani faced down boos and hecklers yesterday at a Brooklyn tribute to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and in a passionate address told the predominantly black audience, "For you to succeed, I have to succeed because we're in this together if this city is going to move forward."
The moment that Howard Golden, the Brooklyn Borough President, introduced Mr.
Giuliani to the 1,800 people gathered at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, boos erupted.
The heckling alternated with scattered applause as Mr.
Giuliani spoke, forcing Mr.
Golden at one point to chastise the audience and urge it to show the Mayor "a little common decency."


Police Trying to Learn if Harding's Funds Were Used for Attack
In pursuing evidence of a conspiracy, Federal and state authorities say they are trying to determine whether any of Tonya Harding's money was used in the assault on her American skating rival, Nancy Kerrigan.
Harding, who resumed training for the Olympics around 1 A.M. today, has strongly denied any involvement in the crime.
American Olympic officials have said they would drop her from the team if she is charged in the attack.
Kerrigan also skated in public for the first time, in Stoneham, Mass., since the incident.


OTHER MAJOR NEWS
U.S.-China Pact Averts Trade Fight
China and the United States reached an 11th-hour textile agreement, averting a major clash about the $7.3 billion in Chinese textiles sold annually in the American market.


Whitman Takes Charge
Christine Todd Whitman will be sworn today as the 50th Governor of New Jersey.
Here is the schedule of events. 9:30 A.M. - Interfaith prayer service, 9:30 A.M.
Trinity Cathedral, Trenton.
NOON - Governor's swearing-in ceremony, noon, War Memorial, Trenton. 1 P.M. - Reception, Masonic Temple, Trenton. 3 P.M. - Swearing-in ceremony for the Attorney General and Secretary of State, State House. 7 P.M. - Black-tie inaugural ball, Raritan Exposition Hall, Edison.


Yonkers Looks to Hudson Riverfront for Its Future
On a day when craggy ice floes clogged the Hudson River and the majesty of the Palisades was curtained by heavy fog, two public works employees sat in their truck, sipping coffee and watching the river.
They were the only humans in sight along the city's rundown hodge-podge of a waterfront.
But by early in the next century, city officials hope, the downtown portion of Yonkers's 4.5-mile Hudson River shoreline will be transformed into a lively strand bustling with sightseeing ships, canoes, a public marina, shops and apartment buildings.


Books of The Times; Reinvention of a Past Rich With Tribal Magic
The Bingo Palace  By Louise Erdrich  274 pages. HarperCollins.. $23.
"Some people fall right through the hole in their lives," Lipsha Morrissey observed in Louise Erdrich's first novel, "Love Medicine." It's an observation that applies to many of the characters in Ms.
Erdrich's first three novels, and in her new one, "The Bingo Palace," we learn that it probably applies to Lipsha Morrissey as well.


No Headline
"I couldn't stop screaming as I ran out of the house. I looked up and all I could see was darkness coming toward us and it got real windy. I thought it was the sun exploding." -- ERIK WYLER, a Los Angeles resident.  [ A1:6. ]


Woodward &amp; Lothrop Files For Bankruptcy Protection
Woodward &amp; Lothrop Holdings Inc., the parent company for two venerable retailers in the Washington and Philadelphia areas, said yesterday that it had filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code and had reshuffled top management.
Joining in the filing, which was entered in United States Bankruptcy Court in New York, are John Wanamaker Inc., the Philadelphia-based retailer that is a Woodward &amp; Lothrop subsidiary, and Woodward &amp; Lothrop Inc., the retailer that has catered to Washington customers for more than a century.


People
*
Martin Mitchell Jr., executive vice president of new business at AC&amp; R Advertising, New York, has resigned to pursue consulting and teaching assignments.
He will serve as an consultant to AC&amp; R. *
Steve Drongowski, president and chief operating officer at Fahlgren, Columbus, Ohio, was promoted to chief executive, succeeding Smoot Fahlgren, who continues as chairman at the agency's Parkersburg, W. Va., office.


Medical Care To Sell a Unit To Caremark
Medical Care America Inc., in a move to refocus its business and fend off unwanted suitors, said today that it had signed a definitive agreement to sell its home-infusion unit to Caremark International for $175 million in cash.
Analysts said the deal, if approved by the Federal Trade Commission, would make Medical Care far less attractive to a competitor, Surgical Care Affiliates Inc.
Medical Care, based here, rejected a $950 million bid from Surgical Care in October.


Classical Music in Review
'Musicspheres'  David Eggar Cellist Alice Tully Hall
"Musicspheres: Four Worlds of Style with the Altered Stage Ensemble" offered deliverance from the sedate formalities of the typical cello recital.
David Eggar's evening of music on Friday swarmed with recent college graduates, he among them.
There were dancers, mimes, actors, musicians, gloomy lighting effects, jazz, rock, Impressionism, postmodernism and more, offering, to paraphrase Stravinsky, a department store of styles.


Politics Not Quite as Usual; In Whitman's Cabinet, Resumes Seem to Outrank Party Ties
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman has nominated a Cabinet whose members will bring a wide range of backgrounds to their new positions.
Raw political experience is not noticeable among them.
In contrast to her predecessor, Jim Florio, Mrs.
Whitman, who takes office tomorrow, seems to have spent more time studying the professional resumes of her recruits than their political pedigrees.
Nowhere in her Cabinet can be found the core group of party politicians that Mr.
Florio brought down the hall from the Legislature to his Cabinet room.


No Headline
N.B.A.
Bullets Lose Game and Chapman, Too  Dale Ellis scored 16 of his 20 points before halftime as San Antonio took control late in the first half on the way to a 100-87 victory over Washington at Landover, Md.
Washington's leading scorer, Rex Chapman, who was averaging 18.9 points per game, suffered a dislocated right ankle in the first quarter when he stepped on Lloyd Daniels's foot and will be sidelined for up to 10 weeks.
The Spurs (26-12), who have won six in a row, played without center David Robinson, who was suffering soreness in his right knee.
Robinson had played in 119 straight games. (AP) Bulls 121, 76ers 91: B. J. Armstrong and Scottie Pippen sparked a third-quarter spurt with 11 points apiece as the Bulls routed Philadelphia for their 14th straight victory at home.
The Bulls, with 16 victories in their last 19 games, led by 12 at the half and broke away in the third period, outscoring the Sixers, 33-19, for a 92-66 lead.
Armstrong finished with 21 points and Pippen had 20. (AP) Cavaliers 114, Magic 107: Gerald Wilkins scored all of his 26 points in the second half and Mark Price sank a tie-breaking 3-pointer with a minute left as Cleveland beat visiting Orlando.
The Cavaliers lost all of a 14-point fourth-quarter lead before rallying in the final 60 seconds.
Shaquille O'Neal, hampered by early foul trouble, scored 28 of his 31 points in the second half. (AP) Hawks 102, Bucks 98: Dominique Wilkins matched his season high with 38 points, including 16 in the third period, as Atlanta beat Milwaukee to improve its home record to 17-1. (AP) Jazz 109, Pistons 94: Karl Malone had 25 points and 11 assists as visiting Utah beat Detroit.
The loss was Detroit's 13th straight, just one short of the franchise's single-season record.
It was the Pistons' eighth straight home loss. (AP) Warriors 104, Suns 99: Latrell Sprewell made two free throws with 11.8 seconds left and Dan Majerle shot an airball from 3-point range five seconds later as Golden State beat visiting Phoenix.
Golden State won its fourth straight and ended a six-game losing streak to the Suns dating to Nov. 28, 1992. (AP) N.H.L.
Bruins Continue Domination of Whalers  Cam Neely scored a tie-breaking goal late in the third period as the Bruins maintained their Boston Garden mastery over Hartford with a 5-3 victory.
The Whalers have not beaten the Bruins in Boston Garden in 13 games -- last winning there on Nov. 12, 1990 -- and have defeated their New England rivals only twice in the last 24 games. (AP) Canadiens 3, Capitals 1: Patrick Roy made 25 saves and Vincent Damphousse scored the winning goal as Montreal topped Washington on home ice.
Eric Desjardins scored in the first period, Damphousse in the second and Gilbert Dionne in the third for Montreal, which ended a two-game losing streak. (AP) Sharks 3, Flames 2: Todd Elik's second goal of the game, with 9:59 to play, broke a third-period tie and lifted San Jose past visiting Calgary.
The Sharks regained the lead moments after Calgary pulled even on Joe Nieuwendyk's second goal of the game with 13:37 remaining. (AP) Red Wings 6, Lightning 3: Ray Sheppard scored twice and assisted on goals by Steve Yzerman and Paul Coffey as Detroit defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning in the third of six neutral-site games to be held this season in Minneapolis.
Actual attendance was less than half the announced 8,764.(AP) TRACK AND FIELD  George Washington High Excels  George Washington High School of Manhattan, with the sophomore Tamieka Grizzle running the anchor leg, won the 1,600-meter relay in 3 minutes 53.3 seconds, fastest time in the country this indoor season, in the Martin Luther King Public Schools Athletic League girls' relays at the West 168th Street Armory.


Leland Stowe, 94; War Correspondent Won 1930 Pulitzer
Leland Stowe, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1930 and, in 1940, reported on the Nazi conquest of Norway, died on Sunday at the Glacier Hills nursing home in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 94 and lived in Ann Arbor.
Mr.
Stowe was a reporter for The New York Herald Tribune in 1929 when he covered the Paris Reparations Conference, a meeting that led to a reduction in the reparations demanded of Germany for World War I. His coverage of the conference won him the Pulitzer Prize for foreign correspondence.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Jeffrey Dooley  Countertenor
St. Michael's Church Manhattan
Glenn Gould, who advocated abandoning the concert hall for the recording studio, might have been amused by Jeffrey Dooley's concert on Saturday evening.
As a tribute to Alfred Deller, the English singer who popularized the countertenor voice, Mr.
Dooley recreated one of his favorite Deller recordings, a 1956 collection of consort songs, "William Byrd and his Age."


Wachovia Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stottlemyre Re-Signs
Three right-handed starters who had filed for arbitration signed contracts with their teams yesterday.
The Toronto Blue Jays re-signed TODD STOTTLEMYRE for one year at $2,325,000, the same amount he made in 1993.
The Cincinnati Reds and ERIK HANSON agreed to a one-year, $2.7 million contract, a raise of $1.45 million for Hanson, who pitched last year for the Seattle Mariners.
And JAMIE NAVARRO received a $300,000 raise, to $1,125,000, from the Milwaukee Brewers. (AP)


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yankees Sign Velarde for '94
In a shrewd move that avoided arbitration, the Yankees signed the versatile Randy Velarde yesterday to a one-year contract worth $1.125 million, a modest $75,000 raise.
Five Yankees are expected to exchange salary figures with the team as part of the arbitration process today.
Velarde, 31 years old, started at four positions last season and batted .301 in 85 games.
He is likely to compete with Mike Gallego for the shortstop job, unless one of them is traded.
Had injuries not sidelined Velarde for almost two months, he might have attempted to have his salary determined by an arbiter again.
Velarde, who is eligible for free agency after the 1994 season, won in arbitration last year and had his salary increased from $360,000 to $1.05 million.


Q&amp;A
Winter Humidity
Q.
To humidify or not to humidify: that is the question.
Do the possible benefits of moist air in winter outweigh the possible dangers?


Telxon Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Giants May Have Been Battered but Their Spirit Is Unbroken
Regret, but not shame, pervaded the Giants' locker room today as they cleaned out their belongings, their playoff run over and their season ended.
Perhaps if it was a club crammed with hoary veterans, there would have been the sense today of the end of an era, or of leaving a job unfinished.
But for those who remain, there was the sense of continuity, albeit tinged with uncertainty, with the new world of free agency.


Paris Journal; In the City of Light, Her Accent Seems Just Right
As an early backer of Bill Clinton and fund-raiser-cum-cheerleader for many other prominent Democrats, Pamela Harriman had no need to convince Washington of her political savvy and clout.
When she was named American Ambassador to Paris, though, the French were quite nervous.
The stories that preceded her arrival here last May focused less on her role as a Washington powerbroker and Friend of Bill than on the rich and powerful men who had shaped her extraordinary life.
Even in the large American colony here, eyebrows were raised.


Tomb Find Suggests a Royal Family Murder
SOUTH of Chichen Itza, the spectacular Maya ruins in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico familiar to archeologists and tourists, lies the plain of Yaxuna.
Dark mounds of stone rubble rise out of the fields of corn like islands in an archipelago.
Excavations at these mounds have now revealed scenes out of the past that are both regal and macabre.
Archeologists working at Yaxuna (pronounced YASH-oo-nah) last summer and fall discovered two tombs that over 16 centuries had somehow escaped the depredations of looters.
These are the first undisturbed ancient tombs to be scientifically investigated in the Yucatan, and their contents are seen as striking evidence that the rule by kings so common in the Maya cities of the southern lowlands, in present-day Guatemala and Belize, extended to the northern lowlands -- and so did a pattern of ruinous conquest warfare.


Neediest Cases; Small Sums Help Close Neediest's Gap
Inspired by stories of donors who have pitched in with even the smallest amounts to help The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, dozens of people in New York and around the country have followed suit -- sending in money they raised, found on the streets or collected a nickel or a dime at a time.
The checks are usually modest, ranging from $7, given by an aide to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, to as much as $40 or $50.


Session on Guns Produces Little but Discord in Albany
There was plenty of stagecraft: angry hunters, a table of menacing assault weapons, a legislator who flew from the Caribbean to snowbound Albany to cast his vote.
But there was little action today as the Legislature met, in a session ordered by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, to consider laws against gun violence on Martin Luther King Jr.
Day.
The Governor and lawmakers in both parties did not get far beyond accusing each other of playing politics, with the crime issue as well as with the memory of Dr.
King.
The Assembly, led by the Democrats, passed eight bills, including legislation that would sharply restrict the rapid-firing assault weapons.
It was the second year in a row the Assembly passed an assault-weapons bill.


Mexican Rebels Give Statement To Government
The envoy named by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to negotiate an end to the two-week-old peasant uprising in the south said today that the Government had made its first formal contact with the rebel leaders.
The envoy, Manuel Camacho Solis, said a leader of the Zapatista National Liberation Army who calls himself Insurgent Subcommander Marcos had sent him a communique outlining the group's demands and perhaps laying a basis for talks between the two sides.


The 'Champagne Girl' of '36 Can Empathize
Eleanor Holm Whelan has been thinking about Tonya Harding.
Whelan was on the S.S.
Manhattan to Berlin for the 1936 Summer Olympics when she was kicked off the team for drinking champagne.


Leo Larkin, City's Legal Chief Under Mayor Wagner, Dies at 82
Leo A. Larkin, New York City's Corporation Counsel for the last term of Mayor Robert F. Wagner, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82 and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Raise the Fee For Selling Firearms
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration thinks it has found the panacea for all crime issues by raising the licensing fees for legal gun dealers (news article, Jan. 5).
Violence and crimes committed with the use of firearms are inexcusable.
However, it is not reasonable or proper to limit the rights of small businesses and legal gun owners through excessive fees.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen is using the fervor in Washington for increased restriction even before the Brady Bill becomes active.
Restrictions on legal gun sales will only raise the cost of legal ownership and not provide law enforcement with any additional tools to curtail crime.


Couture Recalls Bygone Glamour
Everybody concerned worries about what to do about the mammoth, expensive haute couture shows.
They bring a lot of publicity but little business.
This morning, Pierre Cardin did something.
Instead of presenting a spring collection in January and a fall show in July, he ran the two together.
He transferred the show from the theater in the Espace Cardin, a building he owns, to a smaller space in his hotel, the Residence Cardin.
He invited only 190 clients or potential clients -- Claude Pompidou and Bernadette Chirac, longtime fans, had the seats of honor in the main room.


Saudis Near an Accord To Slow Arms Payments
In a plan that carries broad implications for American foreign policy and military industry, Saudi Arabia is nearing agreement with five of the country's biggest military contractors to stretch out $10 billion in payments due over the next two years.
Dropping oil prices and Saudi Arabia's general financial decline since the end of the Persian Gulf war have left Riyadh short of cash and in the unusual position of needing more time to pay for an array of tanks, missiles and fighter jets.
More than $20 billion in arms sales are pending.


A New Owners' Meeting Gets Off to a Slow Start
Revenue sharing and the election of a commissioner, the biggest business issues in major league baseball for more than a year, were on the minds of club owners today as they arrived for still another meeting.
Some people, however, felt they could not begin to elect a commissioner until the revenue-sharing issue was settled.
"If they adjourn revenue sharing without a conclusion and go on to other business, there will be so much bitterness, nothing will get done," said one man who is close to several owners.


Semester Starts At Swarthmore On Stormy Note
A four-to-six-inch snowfall ushered in the spring semester here at Swarthmore College today, but the talk of the campus was last week's storm of publicity surrounding the college's handling of a student's complaint about sexual harassment and intimidation.
The media have focused on the case's combustible mixture of allegations about sexual harassment, racism and political correctness.
"The sensationalism surrounding this case is pretty egregious," said Ben J. Schreier, a 21-year-old senior from Boston.


First Union Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Herve Alphand, 86, Diplomat And a Close Aide to de Gaulle
Herve Alphand, France's Ambassador to the United States during the Kennedy Administration and a close aide to de Gaulle, died Thursday in Paris.
He was 86.
His family announced his death today. He was buried on Saturday.


3 to Be Inducted Into Hall of Fame
The One Club for Art and Copy will induct three well-known executives into its Creative Hall of Fame at a dinner in New York tonight.


Qualcomm Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Why Everyone Needs to Get the AIDS Message; Worse Than Gunfire
To the Editor:
Re "Losing Ground Against AIDS" (Op-Ed, Jan. 6) by John Gagnon:


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP., Maynard, Mass., said it had won a $20 million contract from Polish State Railways to supply and install a new computerized freight management system.
FIELDCREST CANNON INC., Eden, N.C., a bed and bath products company, said it would open a bedding manufacturing plant in Laurel Hill, N.C..


S. M. Kritsick, 42; Veterinarian Gave TV Advice on Pets
Dr.
Stephen Mark Kritsick, a veterinarian who was a genial television commentator on pet care, died on Sunday at his parents' home in Lexington, Mass.
He was 42 and had homes in Hudson, N.Y., and Nantucket, Mass.
The cause was AIDS-related lymphoma, his family said.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Locatelli Trio  The Frick Collection
The Frick Collection makes a specialty of introductions, the latest being the Locatelli Trio from Britain, which played for the first time in New York on Sunday afternoon.
The music was by Corelli, Bach, Handel, Locatelli and Tartini.
Elizabeth Wallfisch, Richard Tunnicliffe and Paul Nicholson played period versions of the violin, cello and harpsichord.


Panel Starting Critical Phase In Clinton Land Deal Inquiry
A Federal grand jury in Little Rock, Ark., will reconvene on Tuesday and begin a critical new phase in the investigation of ties between President Clinton's land development company and the owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan.
For the first time, the panel is expected to hear from several central witnesses, including Mr.
Clinton's former business partner, and weigh potentially pivotal evidence from the boxes of documents the White House was ordered to turn over to Government prosecutors in recent days.


Ewing Leads Knicks' Parade Of Big Numbers
The Knicks spent yesterday's holiday having a productive day at work.
Charles Oakley, with 14 points and 18 rebounds, played the entire 48 minutes and continued his drive toward a possible All-Star Game selection.
Patrick Ewing (34 points, 14 rebounds) passed the 15,000-point mark with another eloquent performance.
John Starks (27 points, 11 assists) provided the outside scoring threat that made Ewing's job easier.
And Greg Anthony (11 points, 6 assists, 5 steals) let his play do the talking, one day after Pat Riley chastised Anthony for questioning the organization's faith in his abilities.


Accounts
*
Empire Kosher Poultry, Mifflintown, Pa., to Jerry Inc., New York, to handle its account, which has been at DeVito/Verdi Inc., New York, for the last two years.
Billings were estimated to exceed $3 million. *
Robert Stock Ltd., New York, to Calman &amp; Stefenson, New York, to handle the men's apparel company's account, previously at Gyro Advertising Inc., Philadelphia.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Why Is Baby Crying? The Artist Isn't Telling
IT'S worse than freezing out and Jorge Rodriguez DeGerada is trekking through streets putting up signs few people will notice, let alone understand.
He has his reasons.
Mr.
Rodriguez DeGerada (George to friends) believes in what he does, putting his art out there, free, on the streets.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  DETROIT PISTONS -- Signed Ben Coleman, forward, to a 10-day contract.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Tod Murphy, forward, to a 10-day contract.
INDIANA PACERS -- Activated Pooh Richardson, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Vern Fleming, guard, on the injured list.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Traded Anthony Cook, forward, and a conditional first-round pick in the 1994 draft to the Milwaukee Bucks for Anthony Avent, forward.
Baseball  American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Jaime Navarro, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Randy Velarde, infielder, on a one-year contract.
Named Kirk Randazzo director of stadium operations.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Todd Stottlemyre and Paul Spoljaric, pitchers.


Textile Accord With China Averts Trade Clash
China and the United States reached an 11th-hour textile agreement today, averting a major trade clash about the $7.3 billion in Chinese textiles sold in the American market each year.
The Clinton Administration on Jan. 6 had threatened to reduce Chinese textile imports by more than $1 billion unless a new agreement could be signed by today to stop gross overshipments and cheating by China.


Review/Music; At Home in the 20th Century
The New Orchestra of Westchester is no typical community band, but rather a skilled group of New York area freelancers as adept in new music as in old.
Led by Paul Lustig Dunkel since its start in 1983, it is kin to the American Composers Orchestra, of which Mr.
Dunkel is resident director.
A program of 20th-century music represents no special challenge for these players.
Nor was the program they performed on Saturday evening in the Concert Hall on the State University campus here particularly challenging for the audience.
Roger Sessions's Piano Concerto of 1956, winningly lyrical for all its stern mid-century manner, was flanked by two earlier items of established repertory, Ravel's "Ma Mere l'Oye" Suite (1911) and Sibelius's Second Symphony (1902).


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an obituary of the actor Michael Aldridge was published in error.
The picture -- also erroneously reproduced in mirror image -- showed Robin Bailey, with whom he appeared in the PBS television series "Charters and Caldicott." The obituary also misstated the year the program was shown.
It was 1986, not 1988.
A correct picture of Mr.
Aldridge appears today on page D23.


Survey Lists Big Concerns
Americans' chief concerns in their personal finances are reducing debt and preparing for retirement, a survey of certified public accountants shows.
"It mirrors the country as a whole -- people want Congress to reduce the Federal debt, and they want to reduce their own debt," said James A. Shambo, chairman of the personal financial planning executive committee of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.


Robert Black Tribute
A musical tribute to Robert Black, the conductor, composer and pianist, who died on Nov. 14 at the age of 43, is planned at 7:30 P.M. on Monday at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street.
The concert will feature performances by Speculum Musicae and the New York New Music Ensemble, contemporary-music groups with which Mr.
Black was closely associated.
Three pianists, Alan Feinberg, Jeffrey Swann and Mr.
Black's brother William, will also perform.
Admission is free.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  PRISON FOR 2 GERMAN SKINHEADS  Two German skinheads who attacked a group of American athletes in October were sentenced to prison, one for two years and eight months and the other for one year.
A3


Grumman Plans to Lay Off 800 Over Next Two Years
Grumman Corporation, the largest employer on Long Island, plans to lay off 800 employees over the next two years and move all its manufacturing operations off the Island by the end of 1995, company officials said today.
The changes, which the officials said would be announced on Tuesday, include the closing of the naval aircraft construction and repair operation at Calverton.
They are a continuation of Grumman's effort to reduce its long-term dependence on Government military contracts, which have declined since the end of the cold war and have led Grumman to cut its payroll from a high of 33,000 people in 1987 to 17,900 at the end of 1993.


The 'Champagne Girl' of '36 Can Empathize
Eleanor Holm Whelan has been thinking about Tonya Harding.
Whelan was on the S.S.
Manhattan to Berlin for the 1936 Summer Olympics when she was kicked off the team for drinking champagne.


Observer; The Won't-Do Guy
I have been studying the Washington news this past week while you, I'll bet, have been in deep immersion with ice skaters and the families Bobbitt and Menendez.
Am I being condescending?
Absolutely not.
The kneecapping of Nancy Kerrigan and the Bobbitt and Menendez bloodlettings speak painfully of our time and place.


METRO DIGEST
SNOW CUTS A WIDE SWATH
Up to 30 inches of snow piled up on a layer of ice and brought parts of the Ohio Valley sliding to a halt, with National Guardsmen mobilized and major highways shut down.
B8.
NEW YORK CITY
'DISCIPLINE' REMARK BRINGS ANGER
Mayor Giuliani, in the midst of an effort to improve his relations with black New Yorkers, was criticized by black elected officials who complained that Mr.
Giuliani's comments on Sunday about Representative Charles B. Rangel and black officials reflected racial insensitivity.
B3.
Excerpts from Mr. Giuliani's speech yesterday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. B3.
BACK TO THE ONE-ROOM SCHOOL
In a two-story brick house in the Wakefield section of the Bronx, Bridget Carruth teaches a houseful of children every day, running a modern, urban version of the one-size-fits-all schools that once dotted the American prairie.
Ms.
Carruth, whose school has 14 students, is one of a small but growing number of teachers who have left large urban school systems to open home-based schools.
B3.
REGION  GRUMMAN PLANS TO LAY OFF 800
Grumman Corporation, the largest employer on Long Island, plans to lay off 800 employees over the next two years and move all its manufacturing operations off the Island by the end of 1995, company officials said.
B6.
ANTICRIME LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
The Legislature met, in a session ordered by Governor Cuomo, to consider laws against gun violence.
B4.
CUOMO NAMES CAMPAIGN MANAGER
Governor Cuomo has named a veteran political aide, John A. Marino, to manage his 1994 re-election campaign, Mr.
Marino said.
B4.
FROM THEATER TO NIGHTCLUB TO COURT
For almost 17 years, the Darien Dinner Theater was a major attraction in Fairfield County, a place where Connecticut suburbanites could enjoy a Broadway-style show without trekking into Manhattan.
But those days are over.
B5.
REDUCTION OF CASINO PANEL IS URGED
State Senator William L. Gormley said he would introduce legislation this month to eliminate two of the five members of the commission that regulates Atlantic City's 12 casinos.
B6.
YONKERS LOOKS TO ITS RIVERFRONT
By early in the next century, city officials hope, the downtown portion of Yonkers's 4.5-mile Hudson River shoreline will be transformed into a lively strand bustling with sightseeing ships, canoes, a public marina and shops.
B6.
THE HEIR AT WHITMAN'S SIDE
For Malcolm S. Forbes Jr., Christine Todd Whitman's victory in New Jersey was proof that the tax-cutting ideology he has championed outlives the end of the 1980's.
B7.
Neediest Cases B2  Chronicle B5 Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B6


Aftershock
To the people of southern California, it always seems to happen the same way.
Sometime before dawn, in that deepest hour of sleep, they suddenly awaken, confused and disoriented.
The china is shaking.
The windows are rattling.
In an instant -- less time than it takes to read this sentence -- they leap from bed, staggering and stumbling and gathering other family members under the flimsy security of a door frame.
And so it was yesterday in the San Fernando Valley, where a violent predawn earthquake, measuring 6.6 on the Richter scale, killed at least 24 people, set fires, buckled freeways and turned buildings into rubble.


A Delicate Balance for a Coffee Chain
George Howell is Juan Valdez in a blue blazer, so obsessed with finding quality coffee that he is said to spend hours each day cupping, or tasting, new roasts from around the world.
With a sharp sniff and a quick slurp, he can tell a Kenyan Kangocho from a Jamaican Blue Mountain.
And that discriminating taste is what brings some customers miles out of their way to his Coffee Connection stores, for beans by the pound and coffee by the cup.
"He's the best there is," said Erna Knutsen, a San Francisco-based coffee importer who sells beans to Coffee Connection, which has 22 stores, mostly in the Boston area.
"He never compromises on anything. He never asks me the price; he only wants quality. That's why he's succeeded."


UJB Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prudential And Texas Set Accord
Settling state charges of widespread fraud at the firm, Prudential Securities has agreed to temporarily suspend all new business throughout Texas and pay the state a record $1.5 million penalty, state regulators said yesterday.
The terms of the settlement were among the strongest ever brought by a state securities regulator against a big national brokerage firm, particularly one that had not been convicted of a felony, securities industry experts said.
Texas state securities regulators said the suspension and payment were believed to be the harshest of any securities fraud settlement in Texas.


CHRONICLE
DOROTHY LOUDON, the Tony Award winning actress, likes serving as master of ceremonies at the annual induction of new members into the Theater Hall of Fame.
"It is sweet and civilized and kind of old-fashioned, and I figure that it is about as close as I will get to being in the Hall of Fame," she said yesterday.
The awards will be presented on Monday at the Gershwin Theater -- where the hall is housed -- before a dinner at Sardi's.
Chosen by the 265 members of the American Theater Critics Association, this year's inductees are Jane Alexander, John Guare, Lanford Wilson, Joel Grey, Barbara Cook and John Raitt; Jack Gilford, Richard Barr and Josephine Hull will receive posthumous awards.


CBS Wins the Rights to '98 Winter Games
One month after losing the TV rights to pro football to the Fox Network, CBS will announce tomorrow its victory over Fox in securing the rights to the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, for an estimated $375 million.
Winning the Nagano rights provides a crucial jolt of adrenaline and good news to CBS Sports by providing a major event to look forward to so quickly after its failed football negotiations.
And last year, CBS lost a last-ditch bid to renew its deal with major league baseball and was greatly outbid by NBC for the rights to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.


Pennsylvania Defies U.S. Abortion Rule
Gov.
Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania said today that he would defy a Federal directive requiring state Medicaid programs to pay for abortions in certain cases of rape or incest.
In a letter to President Clinton, Mr.
Casey said the Federal Government had exceeded its authority in trying to override a state law permitting such payment only when the rape or incest had been reported to local law-enforcement or health officials.


2 UConn Women Hurt
Two members of the Connecticut women's basketball team were injured in an auto accident in Storrs on Monday.
KARA WOLTERS, a freshman center, was driving south on Route 195 with TONYA BOONE, the senior captain, as a passenger when her car skidded on ice and collided with another car, the school said.


Sports of The Times; Steve Tasker Is a Special Specialist
IT is very rare for a football coach to make a statement so strong that a reporter needs to write down every word to make sure he got it right.
Marv Levy of the Buffalo Bills made just such a statement right after his team throttled the Los Angeles Raiders, 29-23, last Saturday:
"I was talking to my trainer and I said, 'You know, I don't know if there's ever been a player in the National Football League who plays his position as well as Steve Tasker.' "


Cordis Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Excerpts From the Iran-Contra Report: A Secret Foreign Policy
Following are excerpts from the final report of the independent counsel for the Iran-contra affair, Lawrence E. Walsh, including rebuttals: Executive Summary
In October and November 1986, two secret U.S.
Government operations were publicly exposed, potentially implicating Reagan Administration officials in illegal activities.
These operations were the provision of assistance to the military activities of the Nicaraguan contra rebels during an October 1984 to October 1986 prohibition on such aid, and the sale of U.S. arms to Iran in contravention of stated U.S. policy and in possible violation of arms-export controls.
In late November 1986, Reagan Administration officials announced that some of the proceeds from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran had been diverted to the contras.


People
*
Tom Quinn was named to the new position of director of marketing services at McAdams, Richman &amp; Ong, Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
He was previously president at DeDonato, Gladstone &amp; Quinn, Wilmington, Del.


Dauphin Deposit (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; Metaphysical Lessons In the Dream Logic Of Richard Foreman
Richard Foreman's theater tends to wither in the description of it.
From the time of his earliest plays in the late 1960's, he has stocked his work with enough visual and verbal conundrums to keep disciples of abstraction babbling through years of exegesis, but the fact is that there is simply no satisfactory way to invoke what the experience of sitting through his plays is like.
They exist fully only in the moment of their performance.
And to try to boil them down to synopsis or allegory is to make them sound both pretentious and slightly bogus.
Accordingly, to watch "My Head Was a Sledgehammer," the most recent offering of Mr.
Foreman's Ontological-Hysteric Theater, is to be swept into a dazzlingly self-contained, thoroughly exhilarating universe that seems in the viewing -- as does the best of Mr.
Foreman's work -- logical, rational and disturbing in the way that individual dreams can be.
It is a testament to Mr.
Foreman's hypnotic artistic control that only afterward do you scratch your head and wonder what it was all about.


D.R. Horton reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How One New York Coffee Bar Came to Be
ON the southwest corner of 91st Street and Broadway stands Joe Bar, a modest glass and brick testament to the dreams of a New York couple and a college friend.
This is the story of Joe Bar, which began its commercial life on Nov. 20.
It is also the story of three neophytes who seized upon the American dream of owning a business, refusing to be deterred by the naysayers, who warned of recession, high rents and other formidable risks.


Ever Unpredictable, Flu Pulls Its Punch
SO what ever happened to the devastating flu epidemic that we were all warned would strike this winter?
Influenza viruses, never wont to miss an opportunity to attack, were indeed causing a fair bit of misery and excess deaths in about 30 states by the new year, according to Federal flu watchers, who issued the latest national data last Thursday.
But fortunately the outbreaks have not been nearly so severe as Americans were warned to expect.


J-J-J-Just Remember That July Will Come
With temperatures moving like a skier on a long trail -- up, down, then down some more -- officials in the New York metropolitan region yesterday began to consider the aftereffects of so much ice and snow.
School administrators, teachers, even students -- some of whom admitted ever so reluctantly that they were actually bored after a long stretch of snow days and holidays -- faced the possibility of makeup days in the spring.
Transportation officials contemplated how they would handle the much quicker arrival of potholes.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In many college dorms, brand pitches replace Che, rock bands and James Dean as poster subjects.
WOULD you buy advertising posters and plaster a room with them? Of course not, you say.
If you're a college student, though, the alternative to pinning up glossy images from Madison Avenue might be staring at cinder block painted as cheerily as a battleship.


Excerpts From the Iran-Contra Report: A Secret Foreign Policy
Following are excerpts from the final report of the independent counsel for the Iran-contra affair, Lawrence E. Walsh, including rebuttals: Executive Summary
In October and November 1986, two secret U.S.
Government operations were publicly exposed, potentially implicating Reagan Administration officials in illegal activities.
These operations were the provision of assistance to the military activities of the Nicaraguan contra rebels during an October 1984 to October 1986 prohibition on such aid, and the sale of U.S. arms to Iran in contravention of stated U.S. policy and in possible violation of arms-export controls.
In late November 1986, Reagan Administration officials announced that some of the proceeds from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran had been diverted to the contras.


Book Notes
Auction of a War Diary
The elements were irresistible to sharkish acquiring editors all around town: a precocious teen-aged author with a riveting story to tell; a recent front-page profile in The New York Times; and, of course, the inevitable and extremely helpful comparisons to "The Diary of Anne Frank," one of the most read and beloved books to come out of World War II.
And so, 14 publishers participated in a frenzied auction last week for the American rights to "The Diary of Zlata Filipovic," a day-by-day account of life during the Balkan war told by Zlata Filipovic, a 13-year-old girl from Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The sale was conducted by Editions Robert Laffont/Fixot, the book's French publisher, and, like any book auction that plays off headlines, publicity and big publishers' fears of missing out, it resulted in a very impressive final price.
In the end Viking won with a bid of about $560,000, and immediately announced plans to publish the book in hardcover in March, with the title "Zlata's Diary." Viking plans an ambitious first printing of 200,000 copies.


Universities Turn to Computers to Lure Students
At a time of shrinking enrollment, some colleges are embracing new technology to market themselves better and to give students more information about their institutions.
At about 100 high schools across the country, students can customize their college search using a CD-ROM data base produced by Collegeview, a company based in Cincinnati, with information on 1,600 institutions.
So a student interested in studying biology at a private, four-year college in New Jersey that has a women's varsity soccer team could plug these requirements into the system and get a list of colleges that match.


Jose T. Moscoso, 53, A Manhattan Lawyer
Jose Teodoro Moscoso, a Manhattan lawyer most recently associated with law firm of Baker &amp; McKenzie, died last Wednesday at his family's home in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
He was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was complications from AIDS, his family said.


Hill, Holliday Quits Burger King Review
Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc. of Boston said yesterday that it had withdrawn from the estimated $180 million Burger King review.
The agency said the decision was made after a recent meeting with executives at the Burger King Corporation at which the fast-food chain detailed the "full extent of the commitment and resources they need." Those resources, the agency added, "are so enormous that we simply do not want to put our current client relationships in jeopardy."


Technology May Be a Plus for Viacom


Review/Fashion; Where Reality and Luxury Meet
Reality was tempered with the predictable commitment to luxury as the haute couture collections continued to unfold today.
Emanuel Ungaro tried to straddle both streams.
He began his show with clothes from his ready-to-wear collection, worn by models who seemed to jump spontaneously onto the runway and then walk about a bit.


In Terms of Technology, Viacom Might Have an Edge
When it comes to money on the table, Barry Diller and his QVC Network Inc. and Sumner Redstone and Viacom Inc., are closely matched, at least for now, in their epic five-month struggle to buy Paramount Communications Inc.
But when it comes to advanced technology -- the genie in the lamp poised to deliver everything digital to a nation of Aladdins -- Viacom may have an edge, whether the 70-year-old Mr.
Redstone, born in the age of radio and silent films, wins Paramount or not.
For one thing, Viacom will be able to tap the technological skills of A.T.&amp; T., its partner in a cable television project to begin later this year.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday with an article about the bankruptcy filing of Woodward &amp; Lothrop Holdings Inc. misidentified the subject in some copies.
He was A. Alfred Taubman, the real estate developer who controls Woodward &amp; Lothrop, and not Arnold H. Aronson, who resigned as the company's chairman and chief executive.


A New Job for David W. Scott


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
This Night, 3's Are Wild  Mark Aguirre led a record assault by making six of seven 3-point shots, and Ron Harper made four free throws in the final minute as the visiting Los Angeles Clippers beat the Miami Heat, 126-124, last night.
The two teams combined for 23 3-pointers in the game, breaking the National Basketball Association record of 21 by Milwaukee and Portland on Dec. 30, 1990.
Los Angeles set a team record with 11 3-pointers, and the Heat had 12 3-pointers, the second-highest total in team history.
Mark Jackson scored 24 points for Los Angeles, while Aguirre had 23.
Rony Seikaly scored 28 for Miami, which lost its fifth straight game. (AP) Celtics 95, Rockets 83: Robert Parish, held scoreless by the Rockets last week, had 19 points and 17 rebounds as Boston won in Houston.
The Suns announced that guard Kevin Johnson, who has been out with leg injuries, now has chicken pox.
Trailing by 78-73, Lou Roe converted a 3-point play for Massachusetts with 3.8 seconds to pull the Minutemen to 2.
DePaul's Brandon Cole missed two free throws with two seconds left.
UMass managed a last shot, but Roe's jumper went hard off the rim at the buzzer. (AP) Florida 59, Kentucky 57: Craig Brown made two free throws with 7.6 seconds left to lead Florida past No. 7 Kentucky before a record crowd of 12,221 in Gainesville, Fla.
Kentucky's Travis Ford was fouled seconds after Brown made the score 59-57.
Ford made the first free throw and intentionally missed the second.
Walter McCarty of the Wildcats (13-1, 3-2 Southeastern Conference) grabbed the loose ball but missed a 10-foot jumper as time expired.
Florida (14-2, 4-0) used a 15-4 run to take a 55-51 lead with less than a minute remaining and set up their upset. (AP) Pittsburgh 77, Boston College 75: In Newton, Mass., Jerry McCullough hit a go-ahead free throw with 1:33 left and Chris Gant added 2 with 35 seconds left, lifting Pittsburgh (9-4, 3-3 in the Big East) over Boston College.
Howard Eisley of Boston College (11-5, 3-3 Big East) had tied the score at 74-74 with 2:31 left when McCullough grabbed a rebound in a crowd and was fouled, hitting the second of two free throws. (AP) N.H.L.
Leafs Tie Ducks  In Toronto, Dmitri Mironov scored with 2:24 remaining in the third period to salvage a 3-3 tie with Anaheim.
Toronto rallied from a three-goal deficit to extend its unbeaten streak to seven games (6-0-1).
The expansion Ducks came in with a six-game winning streak in Canada.(AP) SKIING  Norway Rules Slopes  Jan Einar Thorsen won his first World Cup giant slalom yesterday in Crans-Montana, Switzerland, giving Norway its third victory on the slopes in a week.
Thorsen, better known as a speed-race specialist, overtook the first-run leader, Rainer Salzgeber of Austria, to win with a combined time of 2 minutes 32.83 seconds.
Mitja Kunc, part of a surging new generation of Slovenian skiers, was second, .10 behind, for a career best.
Salzgeber finished third. (AP)


NEW JERSEY'S NEW GOVERNOR: Reporter's Notebook; Little Warning Given of Tax Cut in Whitman Speech
In a town where political secrets have never had much of a shelf life, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman managed to protect a major one on her tax-cutting plans.
So there was more than a little stir today, over both the theater and the substance of the statement, when Mrs.
Whitman used her inaugural address to ask the Republican-controlled Legislature to enact a 5 percent income tax cut for every family in New Jersey retroactive to Jan. 1.


The Temperature Plummets
The stairway in Morningside Park in Manhattan was part beauty and part treachery yesterday as pedestrians coped with icy steps.
Winter is a long way from over, and officials in the New York metropolitan region are already wondering what it will mean in the spring.
Transportation officials fear pothole obstacle courses after winter ends and students, teachers and school administrators, off because of the weather, wonder if they'll have to make up school days later.
Temperatures are expected to hover near the single digits today, offering no relief for a weary region still trying to dig itself out of ice and snow.
Page B7. (Lee Romero/The New York Times)


Why N.A.A.C.P. Won't Disown Nation of Islam
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal wonders (column, Jan. 11) why black public opinion has been deafening in its silence on the intemperate and outrageous remarks by a Nation of Islam spokesman at Kean College in New Jersey.


Agent Says Raid on Cult Had Flaws
A Federal agent testified today that the raiding party serving arrest warrants on the Branch Davidian compound outside Waco, Tex., was ambushed, but he acknowledged significant flaws in the planning of the raid.
The agent, Roland Ballesteros, a six-year veteran of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, was the first official to reach the compound's front door during the Feb. 28 raid.


How to Aid the Victims
Interaction, a coalition of more that 150 not-for-profit American humanitarian aid groups, has issued this list of agencies to which money may be sent to help earthquake victims in the Los Angeles area:
Adventist Development and Relief Agency, Los Angeles Earthquake Victims, P.O.
Box 4289, Silver Spring, Md. 20904.
Telephone: (800) 424-2372.


In America; Dissecting Violence
A tremendous amount of attention has been paid lately to the growing plague of violence that is menacing much of the country and threatening to destroy its major cities.
Similar attention is not being paid to the many individuals and organizations struggling to find effective ways to stop the violence.


Where does reality meet luxury? In haute couture: C13.


An Insider's View of City From (Get This!) Outside
SO this guy named Gerry Frank calls up on the telephone and says he lives near Portland, for crying out loud, Oregon, and has written a guidebook to New York City that has sold a half million copies and he wants to eat somewhere and talk about it.
As come-ons go, not bad, right?
Even routinely defensive, conventionally egomaniacal and only mildly chauvinistic New Yorkers would be intrigued and provoked.
You can easily see how they might wonder who is this yold, this patzer, this rube, from around Portland, for Pete's sake, Oregon, and how come he is making big bucks with his book called "Gerry Frank's Where to Find It, Buy It, Eat It in New York."


More on Iran-Contra
The background, reactions and excerpts from the report: pages A8 to A11.


President to Leave Saatchi in New York
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide of New York unexpectedly announced yesterday that Robert E. Kennedy, its No. 2 executive, would retire effective March 1.
Mr.
Kennedy, 52, is president and chief operating officer at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide and chairman and chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising North America.
He has been at the agency and its predecessor shops for 33 years.


INSIDE
Staying in Paramount Fight
Viacom raised its offer for Paramount, adding cash and assurances that the stock portion of its bid would retain value after a merger.
Page D1.
Skater Denies Role in Attack
Tonya Harding met for more than nine hours with authorities and told them she played no part in the attack on skater Nancy Kerrigan.
Page B11.
CBS Gets 1998 Olympics
Filling a sports programming void after losing pro football, CBS won the rights to televise the 1998 Winter Games in Nagano, Japan.
Page B11.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
2.95
3.35
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.96
3.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.14
3.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.21
5.24
6.23
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.26
6.29
7.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.26
8.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.52
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Temple of Dendur Opens Front Porch
For 15 long years, those who sought to visit the Temple of Dendur were forced to worship from afar.
Until now.
Today, for the first time since the temple was installed in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1978, visitors are being admitted to the pronaos, or columned hall, of the only complete Egyptian temple in the Western Hemisphere.


From Cuomo, Too, Plans to Cut Taxes
In an election year when the economy looms large as a campaign issue, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday proposed what he described as a pro-business budget that would cut an array of business taxes, provide modest increases for education and anti-crime efforts and establish new restrictions on health care services for the poor.
The budget is Mr.
Cuomo's least painful in five years, calling for only 160 layoffs in the state's 151,000-member work force, no major service reductions and small increases for programs that faced cuts in recent years, including the arts.


Eating Well
THERE are a lot of people who think that all Italian food is good for you, even if it is swimming in olive oil.
They are in for a surprise.


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Streaking Rangers Can Rest on Their Laurels
There is a part of Mike Keenan that doesn't want this five-day All-Star break.
Keenan has plans for a mini-vacation.
He is leaving New York and the snow and taking a well-deserved rest.
Keenan's just not so sure he wants to walk away, at least not right now.
After a brief slide at the start of January, Keenan's Rangers have put together three marvelous hockey games, the third earning the team a 4-1 victory over the St.
Louis Blues last night.
The Rangers are on a roll, they are in first place in the National Hockey League, and Keenan just wants to sit by and watch the magic last.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Telephone conversation between me and an employee at a popular bistro in Hoboken, N.J.:
Me: I'd like to make a reservation for two at 8:30 on Friday.


Cuomo Calls For Tax Cuts For Business
In an election year in which the economy looms large as a campaign issue, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed today what he described as a pro-business budget that would cut an array of business taxes, provide modest increases for education and anti-crime efforts and establish new restrictions on health-care services for the poor.
The budget is Mr.
Cuomo's least painful in five years, calling for only 160 layoffs in the state's 151,000-member work force, no major service reductions and small increases for programs that faced severe cuts in recent years, including the arts and libraries.
Under the proposal, the $33.4 billion general fund budget for the fiscal year starting on April 1 would grow by 3.8 percent, the first time in six years that it would grow faster than the rate of inflation.


Sun Microsystems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


General Public Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inaugural Surprise: Whitman Wants Tax Cut Now
Christine Todd Whitman, New Jersey's 50th governor and its first female chief executive, today called for an immediate and early start on her campaign pledge to cut state income taxes by nearly a third.
Governor Whitman, who was sworn in today before an enthusiastic assemblage at the Trenton War Memorial, proposed that the first installment of tax cuts for individuals and businesses be retroactive to Jan. 1, rather than wait until July 1 and the new fiscal year.
The cuts must be approved by a Legislature controlled by her fellow Republicans.


Review/Film; Business of Abduction, Told by a Victim's Sister
"Secuestro: A Story of a Kidnapping," Camila Motta's documentary film about an abduction in Colombia, is really the story of an excruciatingly delicate, drawn-out business negotiation.
There is no overt violence or melodrama in this laborious day-by-day account of the kidnapping of the film maker's 20-year-old sister, Sylvia, in 1985 by 10 armed men while she was on her way to school.
It took three months of telephone negotiations between Sylvia's father, a banker in Bogota, and the kidnappers to secure Sylvia's release.
Among other things, the film, which opened today at Film Forum 1, is a sort of cinematic primer on keeping your head while under extraordinary emotional stress.
Had her father become hysterical, the film suggests, Sylvia would probably not have survived her ordeal.


THE EARTHQUAKE: Insurance; Adjusters Take Stock Of Losses After Quake
Insurance agents and claims adjusters yesterday made their way into areas of Los Angeles that were damaged by the earthquake on Monday.
Insurance companies have not yet compiled a formal estimate of the losses from the earthquake or the number of homes destroyed or damaged.
But they were expressing certainty that losses would only be a small fraction of those caused by Hurricane Andrew, which struck Florida and the Gulf Coast in 1992, destroying 60,000 homes and costing insurance companies $16.5 billion.


Talk May Be Cheap, but Nets' Coleman Certainly Won't Be
Derrick Coleman practiced today wearing a brace on his back and said that he expects to play Wednesday night against the Minnesota Timberwolves at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Whether he will play the next two years for the Nets is another story.
"I plan to sit down and talk with Derrick sometime in the near future, maybe this week or next," General Manager Willis Reed of the Nets said today.
"It's something we have to resolve. I think the fact that we drafted Derrick No. 1 and offered him the highest salary in team sports means that we would like to keep him here."


Public Schools for Profit, Phase 2: The Sales Pitch
Can the Edison Project, a company planning to create profit-making schools with a curriculum as ambitious as the nation's most elite academies, break government's virtual monopoly on mass education?
Three years and $60 million into development, the project is ready for the acid-test: success or failure in the market.
And while experts can only speculate about the outcome of this high-stakes gamble by the the media entrepreneur Christopher Whittle, many educators and economists think Edison has a fighting chance to pull it off.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Jan. 11 about an effort to reduce birth defects in China by dispensing folic acid pills misstated this year's date for the start of the new year according to the Chinese lunar calendar.
It is Feb. 10; it was Jan. 23 last year.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Freeways; Some Find Commuting A Trial, Others a Snap
It was 5:45 A.M. when Jill Angel, the morning traffic reporter for KNX radio, declared the drive into the city from the Santa Clarita Valley north of here to be a "nightmare."
Cars were already backed up for five miles on side roads, their headlights glimmering in the inky black.
Their usual route, Interstate 5, known locally as the Golden State Freeway, was closed because a section of an interchange had collapsed onto it during the earthquake early Monday.


Bridge
Six days of play in the Tri-State Regional Championships ended Monday night in Port Chester, N.Y.
Winners of the concluding titles were the following players:


Corrections
An article yesterday about the role of electronic mail in communications after the Los Angeles earthquake misidentified the computer user who signed a message "Desperate in New Jersey." She was Rebecca F. Davidson of Glen Rock, N.J.


Jury Selection Begins in 3d Trial in Medgar Evers Slaying


Apple Loses Key Official To Motorola
Apple Computer Inc. is losing the executive in charge of its new line of computers whose success is crucial to the company's future.
The executive, Randall Battat, 34, is leaving to join Motorola Inc., both companies announced yesterday.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Scientists' View; Geologists Seek Clues to Fault That Caused Quake
Teams of geologists and seismologists today tramped through the mountains above the Northridge section of Los Angeles, scrutinized the location of aftershocks that continue to rumble through the region and pored over geological maps in an effort to identify the fault that broke in Monday's devastating earthquake.
It will take several more days to find the culprit, said Dr.
Kate Hutton, a staff seismologist at the California Institute of Technology.
A leading candidate, she said, is the Oak Ridge Fault, a 70-mile fracture in the earth's crust that extends from the mountains above the Northridge area in the San Fernando Valley, past Ventura and out into the Pacific Ocean.


Mothers' Implants May Harm Infants
Researchers reported today that there might be a link between silicone breast implants and damage to the esophagus in breast-feeding infants.
The authors of the report, which is being published on Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association, said that the number of infants studied was too small to make firm conclusions about a link between breast implants and internal damage in children.
But they said that their study was a warning of possible problems, and that they hoped to do much larger studies.


Inman and The New York Times: An Examination of the Accusations of Bias
His conviction that a "new McCarthyism" had taken hold of the nation's press led Bobby Ray Inman to withdraw from consideration as Defense Secretary, the former nominee said today.
In an extraordinary hourlong, rambling monologue, Mr.
Inman described how his response to press coverage of his nomination evolved over a period of less than three weeks -- from "bemused detachment" at the first unflattering references to the conclusion that accounts of his record were so unfair and distorted that there was no reason to "put up with that garbage" after 30 years in public life.


Off the Menu
New Tastes at Tavola
Mark Strausman, the American chef who has been looking for his own restaurant since leaving Coco Pazzo last spring, has found a temporary home.
For the last few weeks he has been cooking at Tavola, 1481 York Avenue (78th Street).
Until recently, Tavola was called City Cafe, and it was an outpost for stylish new American cooking with French touches.


Russian Impasse Sets Off a Ruble Panic
As the ruble plummeted to new lows and ordinary Russians lined up to exchange them for dollars, President Boris N. Yeltsin and his Prime Minister apparently failed to agree today on a new Government, leaving the future of the reformist Finance Minister in doubt.
After six hours of talks, Mr.
Yeltsin and his Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, left for their country houses, and a spokesman said they might meet again on Wednesday.
Their inability to announce a new Government left a degree of suspense surrounding Finance Minister Boris G. Fyodorov, who has come to symbolize the fate of economic reform after the resignation Sunday of Yegor T. Gaidar.


Old Kent Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Owners Adopt Revenue Plan, But It's Tied To Salary Cap
A Missouri Compromise propelled major league club owners to unanimous agreement tonight on a revenue-sharing plan that Bud Selig, the game's acting commissioner, called historic, unique and meaningful.
But only labor negotiations with the players' union will determine if the plan ever goes into effect.
"This does not take effect until and unless there is a salary cap-type of basic agreement," cautioned Richard Ravitch, the clubs' chief labor executive, who worked for more than a year to produce an agreement under which clubs will share a greater portion of their local revenue.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KEYSTONE FINANCIAL INC. , Harrisburg, Pa., signed a definitive agreement to acquire Frankford Corp., Horsham, Pa., for $132 million in stock.
SAGE TECHNOLOGIES INC., Stamford, Conn., signed an agreement to acquire CBM Inc., a computer reseller based in Lexington, Ky., for a combination of cash and stock.
Terms were not disclosed.


Deposit Guaranty Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Purdue Puts The Big 10 In a Spin
Cold?
Did somebody say it was cold?
Not here, not when Purdue's students raced up onto the basketball floor tonight while the man in the big red sweater was quietly walking off in defeat.
Not when Glenn Robinson of the Boilermakers, despite scoring 33 points, overcame another uncharacteristically poor shooting night, while he and his teammates held Indiana without a point for the first 4 minutes 11 seconds of overtime.
Not after Purdue's 83-76 victory, on an ear-splitting evening under Mackey Arena's hot tin roof, created a four-way tie for first place among the Boilermakers, Hoosiers, Wisconsin and Michigan in an increasingly unpredictable Big Ten race.


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.N. Chief Dismisses Top-Ranking Aide From U.S.
After months of barely concealed disagreements, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has dismissed the highest-ranking American official at the United Nations, Administration officials said today.
Melissa F. Wells, 62, was asked to leave the post of Under Secretary General for management and administration when her contract expires in April.


Iowa State Star Is Hurt
LOREN MEYER, Iowa State's leading scorer and rebounder, suffered a broken collarbone early yesterday when the pickup truck in which he was riding collided with a train in Des Moines.
There no immediate word on how long he would be sidelined. (AP)


McDowell, Gonzalez In Record Requests
Jack McDowell, who led the American League in victories last season, and Juan Gonzalez, who led the league in home runs, submitted record-breaking salary arbitration numbers yesterday.
The Chicago White Sox, for whom McDowell won 22 games, also joined the record-setters.
On the day 80 players who filed for arbitration exchanged salary figures with their clubs, McDowell, who won a $4 million salary in an arbitration hearing last year, let the White Sox know he was seeking $6.5 million for the coming season.
David Cone of Kansas City is the highest-paid pitcher in the majors, averaging $6 million a year on a three-year contract.


California Microwave Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sumitomo Bank of Calif. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boise Cascade reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


NEW JERSEY'S NEW GOVERNOR: On Her Own Course; Whitman's Inaugural Speech Outlines Plans With a Sense of Independence
Christine Todd Whitman took the oath of office today and wasted no time in demonstrating that she intends to set her own agenda, whether or not it coincides with that of the Trenton establishment.
In an inaugural speech that reiterated the themes of her campaign and tried to dispel doubts about her pledge to cut taxes, Mrs.
Whitman said she not only intended to fulfill her promise, but would also to make the tax-cut plan retroactive to Jan. 1, instead of waiting until July.


Mrs. Bobbitt Is Symbol Of Feminist Resistance
To the Editor:
Like most of the American mass media, you have framed the Lorena L. Bobbitt affair as an issue of penile mutilation.
You ignore the social context of Lorena Bobbitt's actions.


Messier's Injured Wrist Doesn't Need Surgery
Mark Messier walked into a news conference yesterday afternoon and grabbed his right wrist, his face wrinkling in pretended pain.
Yes, Messier admitted, there are calcium deposits in his wrist.
Yes, he has contemplated surgery to relieve the problem.
But after extensive discussions with the Rangers' team doctors, Messier said, he is certain that he doesn't risk further injury by continuing to play with his wrist in its current condition.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Henry Balgooyen, Trade Expert, 81; Advised Presidents
Henry Warren Balgooyen, an economist and Presidential counselor who devoted many years to the fostering of inter-American cooperation and free trade, died on Saturday at his home in Katonah, N.Y.
He was 81.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Review/Opera; A New Generation in the Met's 'Aida'
The Metropolitan Opera fends off consistent criticism for its overweight productions, but the size of Monday night's "Aida" cannot be held against it.
This six-year-old affair -- conceived by Sonja Frisell, designed by Gianni Quaranta and costumed by Dada Saligeri -- responds, without a lot of intellectual mind bending, to the materials given it.
It does not seek subtlety where none exists.
With imagination, resourcefulness and right-on technical expertise, it successfully translates the concept of fortissimo from ear to eye.
And after all, no one has ever accused Verdi's 26th opera of being chamber music.
Finely orchestrated, vocally grateful both for singer and listener and relentless in its dramatic progress, "Aida" certainly is.
And there are its intermittent intimacies to admire as well.
But from the brilliant trumpet writing of the Triumphal March to the love of wide leaps in the singing lines (the major seventh is a recurring interval), monumentality seems most on Verdi's mind.


Bentsen Seeks Freer Asian Markets
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen today laid out the Clinton Administration's strategy for gaining access to foreign markets for American financial service companies, which say they are being shut out of some of the world's biggest emerging economies.
Asian stock markets, outside of Japan, have grown in value since 1988 from $180 billion, to $1 trillion, but many countries in this region still put severe constraints on American investment banks, brokerage firms, commercial banks and insurance companies that want to sell their services in these markets.


AT LUNCH WITH: Paul Zaloom; E=mc  , Where m=Mad and c=Cap
PAUL ZALOOM, political satirist, performance artist, puppeteer and children's television-show host, leans over his plate of smoked trout and begins explaining the theory of relativity.
"It's got to do with energy and mass," he says, launching himself with confidence.
After all, this is all in a day's work for Mr.
Zaloom, who plays the crazy scientist Beakman on the Saturday show "Beakman's World," on CBS.


Inquiry Into S.&amp; L. Reconvenes
A Federal grand jury looking into the collapse of a failed savings and loan association reconvened today in Little Rock, Ark.
There was no indication that it heard any evidence about the ties between the association and President Clinton's land development company.
Grand jury proceedings are secret, but people involved in the investigation said today that there had been no presentation of evidence about the real estate concern, the Whitewater Development Company.
Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, invested in Whitewater with James B. McDougal, the owner of the Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association, which was taken over by Federal regulators in March 1989.


Banc One Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Two Hearty French Classics Perfect for Those in Hibernation
A SMART cook -- one who understands the relationship between food, quality and price -- will automatically follow the seasons.
Even though I have emphasized this point many times before, it bears repeating.
Seasonal ingredients are the best, not only because they are at their lowest prices, but also because they are at their peak in taste and nutrition.
In my winter menu today, for example, I include white turnips, barley, cabbage, yams, pork patties and oranges, all of which indicate cold weather and satisfying, hearty food.


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


1972 Davis Cup Case Reopened
The United States Tennis Association is reconsidering its decision to strip Dennis Ralston of his 1972 Davis Cup captaincy 20 years after the fact.
The current U.S.T.A. president, J. Howard (Bumpy) Frazer, ordered the revision in the U.S.T.A.'s 1993 yearbook without consulting Ralston after two former U.S.T.A. presidents, Robert Colwell and Stan Malless, insisted they handled the captaincy in 1972.
Ralston is threatening to sue the U.S.T.A.


Union Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Music; Purcell, Faure and Rorem, As Sung by a Countertenor
In a remarkable recital on Monday night at the Walter Reade Theater, Brian Asawa showed the kind of pure, effortless countertenor voice that comes along only once in a long while.
It is hard to convey the uncanny effect of his full, fluid, lustrous tone, poised in the extreme upper register without the slightest strain.
Close your eyes for a moment, and you would think you were hearing a mezzo-soprano.
Mr.
Asawa sang not only with great technical assurance but with substantial and versatile musical understanding.
His program moved from Elizabethan ayres of Dowland and Purcell to Vivaldi's concert aria "Ingrata Lidia," then to melodies of Faure and lieder of Schubert and finally to Ned Rorem's cycle "From an Unknown Past." He found a strain of introspective, youthful melancholy in songs as various as Purcell's "Sweeter Than Roses," Faure's "En Sourdine" and Schubert's "Litanei." Steven Eldredge provided idiomatic, sensitive accompaniment.


THE IRAN-CONTRA REPORT: News Analysis; The Inquiry That Couldn't
The Iran-contra affair was a serious constitutional scandal, but its gravity was obscured by the prolonged and ultimately unsuccessful prosecution and by the Congressional investigation seven years ago, which turned into a political sideshow.
The report issued today by the independent counsel, Lawrence E. Walsh, added nothing but small details to what was already known about the case, but it re-emphasized these points:


Three Volumes for $60
"Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran-Contra Matters" spans three volumes and 2,507 pages.
The first volume offers a summary of the findings of the independent counsel, Lawrence E. Walsh, and a narrative history of the Iran-contra affair.
Then Mr.
Walsh gives a history of his own investigation along with a legal analysis of what he calls "the operational conspiracy." This volume continues with 31 chapters giving Mr.
Walsh's findings and conclusions on the individual players.


CHRONICLE
It is exactly one year since Reginald F. Lewis, a lawyer, corporate takeover dealer and philanthropist and one of the nation's richest businessmen, died of a cerebral hemorrhage related to brain cancer at age 50.
So today, 30 employees of TLC Beatrice International Holdings will board a bus in Manhattan and travel to Baltimore for a commemoration of his life at the Hyatt Hotel on the Inner Harbor.
TLC Beatrice International is the company Mr.
Lewis formed after acquiring the international operations of the Beatrice Company in 1987, in a $985 million leveraged buyout.


First Presidential Check-Up Finds Clinton Is 'in Excellent Health'
President Clinton was declared to be "in excellent health" yesterday after he underwent his first annual medical check-up as President.
Mr.
Clinton spent six and a half hours at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Maryland undergoing the routine examination; he later told reporters he felt "great."
Mr.
Clinton, who suffers from allergies, was advised to continue his desensitization shots, the White House said in a statement from Dee Dee Myers, the spokeswoman.


THE NEW YORK STATE BUDGET: An Eye on November; Budgets Have a Variety of Audiences: Voters of All Stripes and Bankers Too
In an ideal election-year budget, a chief executive spreads largess far and wide, and the closer the money gets to the swing voters the better.
New York's economy has not recovered sufficiently to afford Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that luxury.
So today Mr.
Cuomo did the next best thing.
He proposed a budget that allowed him to declare that the state, under his stewardship, had turned the fiscal corner after four nightmarish years.


No Headline
"I'm simply not prepared to pay the current cost of public service in distortion of my record." BOBBY RAY INMAN.  [ A13:1. ]


Treasuries Post Modest Price Gain
Prices of Treasury securities posted modest gains yesterday amid expectations that the Federal Reserve Bank is not about to raise short-term interest rates.
The gains reversed some losses from late last week, but came in the same choppy trading pattern.
By late in the day, the 30-year Government bond was being offered at a price of 9927/32 to yield 6.26 percent, down from 6.29 percent on Friday.
Prices and yields move in opposite directions.


The Unsung Champ Of a Green Felt Field; Flushing Man Is King of Billiards
The Mayor hadn't called, and even the Borough President was strangely silent, but the wife of the world champion had more pressing concerns than mere politicians.
Was it too much to ask, she wondered, for Coca-Cola to pick up the phone and say congratulations?
"Or maybe Pepsi?" asked Kyong Sun Lee.
"In Europe, the champions all have big sponsors. Maybe they will be calling soon."


Cuomo's Budget Assailed for Leaving Out State Takeover of Medicaid Costs
As cities and towns across the state digested what was in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed budget New York City and surrounding counties complained today about what was left out, a state takeover of local Medicaid costs that could save them millions of dollars in this tight budget year.
Such a takeover, which the Governor first proposed two years ago, could save New York City an estimated $130 million this year, by far the largest single item toward reducing the city's projected $2.3 billion budget gap.
And though the city would receive a modest increase in aid over last year under the Governor's plan, a spokesman for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said today that the takeover was "our top priority."


Public &amp; Private; And Now, Babe Feminism
When you don't want to write about something as badly as I don't want to write about the Bobbitt case, it's nature's way of telling you to figure out why.
Too easy to say that there's nothing more to say.
Not good enough to note that the case of the woman who cut off her husband's penis has evoked more bad double entendres than anything in recent memory.
No, none of that is why I've avoided the Bobbitts.
It's because of feminism.
It's because, three decades after the movement for women's equality began, the Bobbitt case is what naysayers truly believe it is all about: cutting it off.


Harding Stands Firm In 9-Hour Meeting
Tonya Harding met with investigators for more than nine hours today, insisting she played no part in the Jan. 6 assault that left her skating rival, Nancy Kerrigan, unable to perform.
An investigator with knowledge of the interview said that Harding consistently held to the position that she knew nothing of the attack in which Kerrigan was struck on the right knee at the national championships in Detroit.
Harding won the event and a spot on the United States Olympic team.


President Plans a Tour Of the Earthquake Site
The White House announced today that President Clinton planned to travel to Los Angeles on Wednesday and view the earthquake damage sustained by the city.
The President plans to tour the area, meet with state and local officials and visit an emergency aid site to speak with victims, officials said.


Market Place; The best offer for Paramount? They're too close to tell.
THE newest Viacom offer for Paramount Communications Inc. still appears to be worth less than the competing QVC Network offer.
But it is getting close, and a lot depends on very subjective judgments about how much esoteric securities are worth.
It is no longer clear which offer a rational owner of Paramount Communications should pick.
It will be interesting to see whether QVC, confronted with such a close range, will raise its offer.
If QVC chooses to stand fast, a big part of the argument will be about the eventual chances for market success of a combined QVC-Paramount versus a combined Viacom-Paramount.


Why N.A.A.C.P. Won't Disown Nation of Islam; Tenacious African Link
To the Editor:
I was distressed to see, accompanying your sensitively written Jan. 5 front-page article on black dialect, the misleading box headlined "Some Features of a Black Dialect."


Warning: Winespeak Can Often Intoxicate
"A red wine, sir? Would you like it dark and brooding, or would you prefer something positively hedonistic, with loads of unbridled delicious fruit?
"And you, madam, would you rather a white wine? Are you thinking of something rich, ripe and generous, buzzing with honey, pear and vanilla aromas and flavors? Or a wine that towers over others in its category and keeps pumping out the apricot, pineapple and pepper flavors on its extremely long, classy finish?"


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Parks; Parks Are Transformed Into Temporary Homes for the Displaced
North Hollywood Park, usually a quiet 58 acres of eucalyptus, pine and ash trees frequented by joggers and tennis players, was transformed into a bustling tent city this morning.
Hundreds of people, some homeless and others still in shock from the earthquake that struck Los Angeles on Monday, chose to sleep under the stars rather than risk being indoors while tremors continued to rattle the city.
The night had been brisk, with temperatures falling into the 40's, and at dawn the ground was soaked with a chilly dew.
But as people emerged from cars, tents and makeshift shelters, they rubbed their eyes and smiled.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Right Knee and Left Knee, Knicks Need Smith in Lineup
Charles Smith is back. Or is he?
"I think right now I'm just about there," said the 6-foot-10-inch Knicks forward who has missed most of the season with knee problems.
"It's on God and on my knee. It all depends on how it feels tomorrow. I'll let you know in the morning."


Molex Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A New Winery Quickly Makes Its Mark
IN the 17 months since it opened, Lamoreaux Landing, a tiny Finger Lakes winery named for a 19th-century steamboat dock, has become the talk of upstate white-wine country.
The judges in nine wine contests have awarded the boutique winery's dry and semidry rieslings and regular and reserve chardonnays a total of 15 gold and silver medals.
New York City stores will not see bottles for a year or more, but customers can order wine from Lamoreaux Landing directly.
Mark J. Wagner, the 37-year-old owner, said he was not ready for the big time.
"If we opened a lot of new markets, we'd run out of wine soon, and I don't want that to happen," he said.


Transcript of the Statement by Inman on His Decision to Withdraw
Following is a transcript of remarks today by Bobby Ray Inman in announcing his decision not to pursue confirmation as Secretary of Defense, and excerpts from the question-and-answer session, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company, and the C-Span cable television network:  For those of you who aren't residents of Austin, welcome to Austin.


Theater in Review
Boy's Life  Samuel Beckett Theater 410 West 42d Street Clinton  Closes Sunday  By Howard Korder; directed by Vincent Bossone; sets by Nick Falco; lighting and sound by Melanie S. Armer; stage manager, Janet Escourt.
Presented by the Big League Theater Company.


INMAN WITHDRAWS AS CLINTON CHOICE FOR DEFENSE CHIEF
Bobby Ray Inman withdrew today as President Clinton's nominee for Defense Secretary, accusing critics of indulging in "modern McCarthyism" in an attempt to besmirch his reputation.
A retired admiral with wide experience in intelligence work, Mr.
Inman accused William Safire, a columnist for The New York Times, and Senator Bob Dole, the Republican minority leader, of plotting against him.
Both denied the accusations, and Mr.
Dole added, "He's probably not qualified to be Secretary of Defense if he has fantasies like that."


Suspect Charged in '88 Killing of Bronx Boy, 10
At 1 P.M. yesterday, Tina Byrd picked up the telephone at Headquarters for Hair, where she is a stylist, and took another step in the long goodbye to her son, Sherif.
After almost five and a half years, the police called to tell her that they had arrested someone in the murder of the 10-year-old Bronx choirboy, who was shot to death on a summer day as he played in the spray of a fire hydrant.
"It was a sigh of relief but it won't bring him back," Ms.
Byrd said with composure but sadness as she worked at the shop in the Highbridge section of the Bronx.
Her voice was soft, her words deliberate.
"It doesn't put my mind at rest because I'll always miss him."


World-Class Titles and Resumes Don't Add Up to Holiday on Ice
What was supposed to be a memorable Olympic showdown between two Russian couples with gold medals and world titles is looking increasingly like a mismatch in the pairs competition at the European championships here.
And what was supposed to be a waltz for the British team of Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean has suddenly become rough sledding in the ice-dancing.
Performing the compulsory dances, the first phase of three, Torvill and Dean, who are competing in their first major international event since the 1984 world championships, failed to make the same impression on the judges as the defending world champions Maya Usova and Aleksandr Zhulin of Russia.


THE IRAN-CONTRA REPORT: The Cast; Soldiers, Secretaries and Politicians, Now United in Bitterness
The glare of the Iran-contra affair ultimately made OLIVER L. NORTH rich, famous and potentially powerful.
But for many of the officials, spies and subordinates caught up in the scandal, the last seven years have brought little but bitterness.
Some charged with crimes pleaded guilty.
Some fought the law and lost.
Some won Presidential pardons.
Almost all are unrepentant.


THE EARTHQUAKE: Coping; Aftershocks in Paradise: Hearts Are Trembling Too
A few days ago, Diana and Morrie Eisenman were Rollerblading along the beach here in perfect sunshine, smug about living the California dream while their East Coast friends shivered and shoveled.
Today was another beautiful day in paradise in this beach-front city, where the urban thoroughfares meet the shining sea, so Mr. and Mrs.
Eisenman again put on shorts, T-shirts and sunglasses and pedaled along the promenade.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Black &amp; Decker Corp., Towson, Md., is selling $250 million of 7 percent notes due in 2006 priced at 99.717 to yield 7.035 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated Ba-1 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


THE IRAN-CONTRA REPORT: The Overview; WALSH CRITICIZES REAGAN AND BUSH OVER IRAN-CONTRA
After a seven-year legal odyssey, the Iran-contra independent prosecutor published his final report today, finding no credible evidence that President Ronald Reagan had broken the law but concluding that Mr.
Reagan had "knowingly participated or at least acquiesced" in covering up the scandal.
The report represented the last official word on the $37.6 million investigation by the prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, who seemed to be trying to shape history's judgment on President Reagan's actions and the role his senior aides had played in the tangled arms-for-hostages affair.


Japan Airlines Will Cut 5,000 Jobs in Revamping
In the days of Japan's economic boom, the nation's corporate warriors would fly off to their latest conquest in the lavish first-class or business-class sections of Japan Airlines.
But in tight economic times, Japan's humbled businessmen are flying coach.
Or even worse, as far as Japan Airlines is concerned, they are flying on United.


We Minimize Lyme Disease at Our Peril; Cooperation Needed
To the Editor:
Now that the controversy within the medical profession about Lyme disease and the dilemma facing patients concerning its diagnosis and treatment have been aired on your Jan. 4 front page, perhaps something constructive can come of all this.


Chung Il Kwon, Korean General And Premier, 76
Chung Il Kwon, the chief of staff of the South Korean Army who became a national hero at the age of 32 while commanding forces at the start of the Korean War in 1950, died on Monday at a hospital in Hawaii.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Israel Wants P.L.O. To Act Responsibly
To the Editor:
In "Mideast Talks: What Happened?" (editorial, Jan. 10), you conclude that because "the P.L.O., flawed as it is, is Israel's best available negotiating partner . . . Israel's responsibility now is to see through the deal it made with Mr. Arafat."


Rabin Says Peace With Syria May Require a 'Painful Price'
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin warned Israelis today that peace with Syria may require them to pay a more "painful price" than they expect in territorial concessions on the Golan Heights.
Mr.
Rabin offered no hint about what might qualify as a painful price on the Golan, the strategic plateau that Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 Middle East war, but he said a "significant withdrawal" could mean uprooting some of the three dozen Jewish settlements there.


C. K. Yen, 90, Is Dead; Ex-Leader of Taiwan
Yen Chia-kan, President of Taiwan from 1975 to 1978, died on Dec. 24in Taipei Veterans General Hospital in Taipei, the Chinese Information and Culture Center in New York announced yesterday.
His age was given as 90.
The cause was heart failure, Taiwan's Foreign Ministry said.
The French news agency Agence France-Press had reported that Mr.
Yen suffered a brain hemorrhage that left him bedridden more than seven years ago and that his condition had worsened after a second hemorrhage in 1992.


Mr. Walsh's Summing Up
Former President Reagan calls it "an encyclopedia of old information." His Vice President and successor, George Bush, says it "offers nothing new." In large part they're correct; the final report of the Iran-contra scandal produced by Lawrence Walsh, the independent investigator, consists largely of information that the public has already absorbed.
Still, the report is an invaluable summary of a scandalous chapter in the long history of official misbehavior.
It reaffirms, further, the wisdom of appointing a special prosecutor to investigate activity that the Government itself cannot examine without crippling bias.


Dresden Journal; A German Crash Course: It's Public Etiquette 101
After his roller-coaster ride from obscurity to fame and back again, Steffen Heitmann can claim to be an expert on the taboos of German politics.
Mr.
Heitmann, the Justice Minister in the eastern state of Saxony, was little known when he was nominated last September to become Germany's next President.
Because the man who nominated him was Chancellor Helmut Kohl, he seemed almost certain of victory.


Long Island Woman Arrested In Death of 22-Month-Old Son
A Long Island woman was arrested last night in the death of her ailing 22-month-old son, whom the police said she had fatally poisoned on Dec. 16 at Schneider Children's Hospital of the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.
The woman, Margie Yoslowitz, 34, was arrested late last night at the 105th Precinct Station House in Queens Village, after being taken in for questioning from her home in Oceanside, L.I.


Accounts
*
Las Vegas Hilton, Las Vegas, Nev., to Di Zinno &amp; Partners, San Diego, to handle its account, previously in house.
Billings were estimated at $3 million. *
York Luggage Co., Lambertville, N.J., to Gigante Vaz &amp; Partners, New York, to handle its account, previously at Cox Advertising, New York.
Billings were estimated at $1 million to $2 million.


Grand Jury Indicts Suspect on 93 Counts in Attack That Killed 6 on Long Island Rail Road
A grand jury has handed up a 93-count indictment against Colin Ferguson, the 36-year-old Brooklyn man accused of killing 6 people and wounding 19 aboard a Long Island Rail Road commuter train last month, the authorities announced today.
The charges could bring a total sentence of 175 years in prison, officials said.


8 Aidid Supporters, Arrested in Troop Attacks, Are Freed by U.N.


THE EARTHQUAKE: A Long Way Back; Officials Are Warning, There Is No Quick Fix
Officials assessing the devastation caused by the earthquake in the nation's second-largest city warned that there would be no quick fixes for the damaged highways, water mains and aqueducts, and gas and electric lines.
While it is still far too early to make a good estimate of the dollar-amount of the damage caused by the quake early Monday morning, some officials have tossed around figures as high as $7 billion as the cost of all the rebuilding.


Corrections
The Weather Report on 15 days in December -- between Dec. 5 and Dec. 31 -- misstated the total amount of precipitation that is considered normal for a year in Central Park.
The Weather Service says its most recent calculation put the figure at 47.25 inches a year. (In previous years, it was 44.12 inches.)


Excerpts From Whitman's Address on Leadership, Taxes and Schools
Following are excerpts from Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's inauguration speech, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Today's inauguration marks not a victory of partisanship, but a test of our democracy, of our ability to govern ourselves.
As a people we face a crisis of confidence.
Many have lost faith in the ability of government to deliver services efficiently, to lend a helping hand when needed and to get out of the way when it is not.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  HOSPITALS UNIT PROPOSES CUTBACKS
Ordered by Mayor Giuliani to close a budget gap of $160 million, New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation submitted a plan that would impose a hiring freeze, cut contributions to affiliated medical schools and delay a number of health initiatives.
B3.


Perhaps a New Era, But Note the Asterisk
From the beginning, it was clear that the battle for revenue sharing in baseball was all about George Steinbrenner's money.
And Fred Wilpon's and Nelson Doubleday's, and how the have-nots could get the fortunes of such men and their big-market clubs.
It took a year and a half, thousands of hours of negotiations and out-and-out trauma, as the interim commissioner, Bud Selig, likes to say.
But it got done.
The Milwaukees, Cincinnatis and San Diegos have found a way to cut into the fortunes of the teams like the Yankees and the Mets, with the unanimous consent of their bigger, richer cousins.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Viacom made a new offer for Paramount Communications that included more cash plus some assurance that the stock portion of its bid would retain its value after a merger.  [ Page D1. ]  The bids by QVC Network and Viacom may be closely matched.
But when it comes to advanced technology, Viacom appears to have an edge, whether it wins Paramount or not.  [ D5. ]


Governor Whitman's Smart Start
Christine Todd Whitman's first big move as Governor of New Jersey was a smart modification of her campaign promise to start slashing personal income taxes July 1.
She proposed yesterday to start cutting sooner, but with a smaller first cut.
This wouldn't affect a taxpayer's ultimate liability for 1994, but it eases the severity of spending cuts she must put forth for next year's budget.
Given her limited experience in government, the fumbling that marked her election campaign and the tumult over her campaign manager's braggadocio about playing dirty tricks with "street money," her modified tax gambit was a sign the new Governor is gaining a grasp of political reality.


Personal Health; Health alarm for a sleep-deprived society
AS you read this, about 100 million sleep-deprived Americans are driving cars and trucks, operating hazardous machinery, administering medical care, monitoring nuclear power plants and even piloting commercial jets.
Chances are, every one of those sleep-deprived people is less than fully alert and is performing below par.
Many are so sleepy that they are likely to nod off at the drop of a hat -- while reading, listening to a lecture, driving on a monotonous road, flying on autopilot.


THE IRAN-CONTRA REPORT: Chronology; After 13 Years of Hide-and-Seek, a Bitter Chapter of U.S. History Ends
1981  AUG. 4 Oliver L. North, a Marine major, is assigned to the National Security Council at the White House.
DECEMBER President Ronald Reagan signs an executive order that authorizes a covert operation by the C.I.A. to support the contras, rebels who are fighting the leftist Government of Nicaragua.
The money comes from private contributions, all secret.
By keeping the source of the money private, the White House is able to squeeze through a loophole in the Boland Amendment and maintain that this arms supply is legal.
SUMMER News accounts link Colonel North to a private network supplying military aid to the contras.
The reports prompt questions from Congress, and Mr.
North helps Robert C. McFarlane, the President's national security adviser, prepare a denial.
JULY Israeli Government officials, who long viewed Iran as a counterweight to Iraq and other Arab enemies of Israel, tell Mr.
McFarlane that the Iranians want to open a "political discourse" with Washington.
Although the United States publicly views the Teheran Government as terrorist and has outlawed arms sales to it, this overture soon leads to the first shipment of American weapons to Iran, without legal authorization.
The shipment, in turn, brought the release of one of seven Americans held hostage in Lebanon by Islamic militants.
NOV. 19 Colonel North is appointed by Mr.
McFarlane to handle logistics for a second arms shipment, of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles, to Iran.  1986  APRIL 4 In a memo to John M. Poindexter, who has succeeded Mr.
McFarlane as national security adviser, Colonel North proposes diverting to the contras $12 million of the proceeds from the sale to Iran.
The memo, Colonel North will later testify, was intended for President Reagan.
MAY 25 Mr.
McFarlane, who has formally left the Government but remains a consultant to the White House, flies secretly to Teheran with Colonel North and other officials, carrying spare parts for missiles.
AUG. 6 Meeting with 11 members of the House Intelligence Committee, Colonel North denies raising money for the contras or offering them military advice.
As he later testified, this was a lie.
OCT. 5 Carrying arms to the contras, a cargo plane is shot down over Nicaragua.
Three crewmen are killed, and a fourth, Eugene Hasenfus, is captured by the Nicaraguan Army.
NOV. 22 Justice Department investigators discover in Colonel North's office his April memo proposing the diversion of arms-sale money to the contras.
NOV. 23 Colonel North meets privately with Mr.
McFarlane and tells him that the diversion was approved by White House superiors.
The colonel also meets with Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and informs him.
NOV. 24 Mr.
Meese tells the President of the diversion.
NOV. 25 Mr.
Meese discloses the Iran-contra connection.
Mr.
Reagan announces Mr.
Poindexter's resignation and Colonel North's dismissal.  1987  JAN. 6-7 Special committees of the Senate and the House are created.
FEB. 26A Presidential commission led by former Senator John G. Tower blames the President's top advisers for a chaotic environment that, the commission says, led to the Iran-contra affair.
The panel says the President was largely out of touch with the operations of the N.S.C.
JULY 7 Appearing before the Congressional committees, Colonel North begins six days of frequently fervent testimony.
He says that he does not know if Mr.
Reagan was aware of the diversion of arms-sales money to the contras but that William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, had approved it.
Mr.
Casey had recently died.


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Pop Life
Hall of Fame
The Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame will stitch a new cluster of stars into its tapestry of the great tonight at its ninth annual awards ceremony, at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
Meanwhile, its monument to the music, being built on the shore of Lake Erie in Cleveland, is ready for steel and memorabilia.
The performers to be honored tonight suggest rock-and-roll's rich diversity: the Animals, the Band, Duane Eddy, the Grateful Dead, Elton John, John Lennon, Bob Marley and Rod Stewart.
To be inducted in the nonperformer category is Johnny Otis, a band leader, record producer, songwriter and one of the leading innovators in rhythm-and-blues throughout the 1950's.
Willie Dixon, the legendary songwriter, bassist and band leader who was a leading architect of the Chicago blues, will be inducted posthumously in the pre-rock category.


Northern Trust Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


City Opera to Tour In 'Madama Butterfly'
The New York City Opera National Company, the touring division of City Opera, is to begin a 10-week tour of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" on Friday in Hershey, Pa.
The tour, to 28 states and Canada, is to include 60 performances in 51 cities.
Maryanne Telese, Michele Boucher, Oksana Krovytska and Geraldine McMillian will share the title role, and Michael Hayes, Patrick Denniston, Allan Glassman and Dennis McNeil will rotate in the role of Pinkerton.
Helen Yu and Zheng Cao will alternate as Suzuki, and Robert Perry and Charles Huddleston will take turns as Sharpless.
Joseph Colaneri and Steven Mosteller will share the conducting.


Patrolling South Africa's Hardest Beat
They pass through the dark township like sailors in an urban submarine.
Inside their armored shell, the only sounds are the cough and twitter of the police radio, the soft whoosh of air conditioning, and an edgy banter in Afrikaans, the Dutch patois that has been since its invention South Africa's voice of white authority.
The men of the Police Internal Stability Unit clutch their automatic rifles and peer out at South Africa's most war-shattered black township, scanning the trash heaps for fresh corpses, trying to ignore the smoldering glares that mark them among the most reviled white men in South Africa.


Borland International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Theater in Review
Son of an Engineer  Here, Stage 1 145 Avenue of the Americas, south of Spring Street SoHo Through Sunday Written and directed by David Greenspan; sets by Alan Glovsky; lighting by John Lewis; costumes by Mary Myers; sound by Edward Cosla; production stage manager, James Kroll.
Presented by Home for Contemporary Theater and Art, Randy Rollison, artistic director; Barbara Busachino, producing director.
WITH: Chuck Coggins, Karen Levitas, Thomas Pasley and Lisa Welti.
There actually is no place like home in David Greenspan's "Son of an Engineer," that is to say, home as a fixed institution doesn't exist.
The story of a young man who returns to the suburban house of his childhood to discover his parents have "moved on," this labored fable presents the nuclear family as a sinister disappearing act.
And when a character turns on the radio, a voice announces, with comically frantic desperation, "All these people come and go from our lives, and we don't know them anymore."
This is not very surprising news.
Nor are the devices Mr.
Greenspan employs -- a jumble of classic Albee-esque absurdism and imagery drawn from fairy tales, the Bible, Shakespeare, 1950's domestic sit-coms and apocalyptic science fiction -- particularly original.
As a result, "Son of an Engineer," which has received a fairly skeletal production at the Here arts center in SoHo, often feels like a flat-footed, catch-all parody of vintage, symbol-laden avant-garde theater.
It is unclear as to just how ironic Mr.
Greenspan, who achieved a certain notoriety for his work with the New York Shakespeare Festival, is in his manipulation of this material.
But there seems to be an agonizingly personal sense of anomie behind it.
The play's passive hero, identified only as the Killian Boy (Chuck Coggins), finds his old home inhabited by Tom (Thomas Pasley), a shaggy bear with a goofy, Disneyesque voice; Tom's wife, Phoebe (Karin Levitas), who dresses like Donna Reed and speaks with velvety ominousness; and Phoebe's mostly invisible daughter (Lisa Wells).
Directed with a cloudy mix of archness and anguished earnestness by Mr.
Greenspan, "Son of an Engineer" includes a scene in which the naked son performs fellatio on the monstrously endowed paternal bear, while Phoebe ruefully washes her breasts in a Martian wilderness.
It is that sort of evening.
BEN BRANTLEY


Calvin Klein Underwear Being Sold
Like it or not, Linda J. Wachner is coming between you and your Calvins.
The Warnaco Group Inc., which Ms.
Wachner runs as chairman and chief executive, announced yesterday that it had bought Calvin Klein Inc.'s highly profitable men's underwear business for $64 million plus fees that were characterized as "ongoing."


Fred Snowden, Basketball Coach And Black Pioneer, Is Dead at 57
Fred Snowden, the first black coach of a major college basketball team, died in Washington on Monday.
He was 57.
Mr.
Snowden, who had been head coach at the University of Arizona, died at George Washington Hospital after being stricken, apparently with a heart attack at a convenience store, said Bob Elliott, a former Arizona player who became a close friend of his former coach.


Theater in Review
Old New York: False Dawn  Old Merchant's House Museum 29 East Fourth Street East Village By Edith Wharton; adapted and directed by Donald T. Sanders; designed by Vanessa James.
Presented by New York Art Theater Institute.
WITH: John Anson, Ed Romanoff, Nathan Smith, Andrea Weber and Karin Wolfe.


Reduced Real Estate Losses Bolster Big New York Banks
Three of the largest New York banks said yesterday that losses from bad loans fell sharply in the last three months of 1993 as they renegotiated troubled real estate loans and sold properties they had repossessed.
The reduced losses, along with continued strong trading results, led Citicorp and the Chemical Banking and Chase Manhattan corporations to report sharply increased profits for the fourth quarter.
All three said profits for 1993 were at record levels.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Hockey East
Boston University swept two games from Boston College -- the Terriers' eighth and ninth straight over the Eagles -- to pass Maine and take over first place.
It was about time for the talented Terriers, the consensus preseason selection for the national championship.


Wilkins Presses Hawks For New Contract Soon
DOMINIQUE WILKINS says the Atlanta Hawks may risk losing him if they wait until the end of the season to negotiate a new contract.
"It's like playing Russian roulette," Wilkins said yesterday.
"No matter what they offer, I can still go somewhere else. My options are a lot more open." Wilkins, 34, is in the final year of a contract that pays him more than $3 million annually.


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Explaining Tax Stance on Maid, Inman Says She Was 'Contractor'
Bobby Ray Inman, who today withdrew as President Clinton's choice for Defense Secretary, said he had not paid Social Security taxes for a housekeeper he employed for several years because he thought she was an independent contractor.
After Administration officials approached him to succeed Secretary Les Aspin, Mr.
Inman said he re-examined his records and agreed to pay $6,000 to the Internal Revenue Service to clear his record.


A Hint of Peace From Syria
In his Geneva meeting with Syria's leader, Hafez al-Assad, President Clinton assumed the role of a matchmaker between two wary suitors.
Mr.
Clinton teased some important words from the implacable Syrian President.
Mr.
Assad finally said out loud that there could be a new era in which "normal peaceful relations among all shall dawn anew." A welcome signal perhaps, but a long way from the assurances that Israel seeks.
Syria wants Israel to withdraw from the Golan Heights, which Israel seized in 1967 and subsequently annexed.
But Israel's asking price for considering a withdrawal is a Syrian commitment to total peace, meaning full diplomatic relations and open frontiers.
Negotiations have foundered for two years on a shared unwillingness to spell out the details, and on Syria's insistence on settling all Arab-Israeli differences.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Apartments; With 16th Body Found, Grim Vigil Is Complete
Most of them were elderly, and from the windows of their apartments, they liked to watch the bubbling stream in the courtyard and listen to its soothing whisper.
One was a retired plumber, a man so proud of his craft that he showed off his ancient union card whenever a maintenance man came around, and then tipped for the work.


Mexico Backing Social Changes Urged by Rebels
The Government today endorsed broad political and social changes to address the conditions that gave rise to the peasant uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, but offered to negotiate with the rebels only about the terms by which they might disarm.
Outlining the Government's strategy for the first time, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's special envoy to Chiapas, Manuel Camacho Solis, pressed for formal talks with the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army and echoed its calls for greater democracy, civil rights and aid to Indian communities in the state.


In Inman's Wake, Astonishment, and a Scramble
As the White House scrambled today to replace Bobby Ray Inman as President Clinton's nominee for Defense Secretary, military and Administration officials expressed astonishment at Mr.
Inman's abrupt decision to step aside.
Aides said an informal search for a possible replacement began last week after President Clinton "had an inkling" of Mr.
Inman's plans.
But Pentagon officials said the withdrawal left them in a difficult position: having to reopen the question of how to strengthen the Administration's foreign policy lineup a month after Mr.
Inman's selection was supposed to have settled it.


We Minimize Lyme Disease at Our Peril
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 4 front-page article on Lyme disease touches on the outdated thinking that Lyme is "obsessively" overdiagnosed, or that it is treatable with only a few weeks of oral antibiotics.
You make no mention of the Senate committee hearing last August that listened to another school prove that Lyme, the infectious disease that is second only to AIDS, is underdiagnosed, undertreated and underreported.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy called it the "silent epidemic." Children who may be forever in wheelchairs were among the victims who packed the hearing room.


NATIONSBANK CORP. (N)
The Nationsbank Corporation, the country's third-largest banking com pany, said its profit in the fourth quarter was $373 million, up 59 percent from the comparable period a year earlier.
The company, which is based in Charlotte, N.C., earned $1.37 a share, slightly above estimates of $1.31.
For the year, it earned $1.5 billion, up 31 percent from 1992.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-6  ISRAELIS WARNED ON SYRIAN PEACE  Yitzhak Rabin told Israelis that peace with Syria might require them to pay a more "painful price" than they expect in territorial concessions on the Golan Heights.
A1  TOWNSHIPS TO LOSE POLICE UNITS  South Africa is withdrawing its security units from the townships and squatter camps east of Johannesburg that are the center of the country's worst factional violence.
A3


Lilly to Sell or Spin Off Most Non-Drug Lines
Moving to strengthen profits and competitiveness in a difficult period for drug makers, Eli Lilly &amp; Company announced plans yesterday to leave all but its core pharmaceutical and animal health businesses.
Lilly, based in Indianapolis, said it planned to sell or spin off nine medical-device and diagnostic units with about $1.2 billion in 1993 sales, or 18.7 percent of the company's total sales of $6.4 billion.


Breaking the Grip of New York G.O.P. Bosses
To the Editor:
You report Jan. 8 on efforts by New York State Republicans to choose a candidate for governor to oppose Mario M. Cuomo in November.
You quote Richard M. Rosenbaum, a former state Republican chairman and one of those who wants to run, saying "it's almost becoming comical" that party leaders are trying to dictate who the candidate will be.
Rank-and-file Republicans aren't laughing.


THE EARTHQUAKE: Show Business; Movie and Museum Worlds Are Suffering With the Rest
The sets of "Murphy Brown," "Murder, She Wrote" and "N.Y.P.D. Blue" were damaged.
The sleek offices of Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, and other top executives were flooded.
At the J. Paul Getty Museum, the irreplaceable marble bust of a Roman pugilist tumbled to the floor and sustained a small chip on its shoulder.
"It's easily repairable," John Walsh, director of the museum overlooking the Pacific, said with a sigh of relief.


Executive Changes
CMS ENHANCE INC., Irvine, Calif., appointed Peter D. Lytle senior vice president for operations.
COGNITRONICS CORP., Danbury, Conn., a maker of voice-processing equipment, appointed Brian J. Kelley president and chief executive.


Review/Rock; Visions of the Apocalypse With a Touch of Melody
After two decades as the lead singer of Judas Priest, Rob Halford left last year to start a new band, Fight, which performed on Sunday night at the jam-packed Limelight.
Mr.
Halford, who writes all of Fight's songs, didn't change groups to try artistic experiments.
Fight gears its music for commercial acceptance, giving every song a short, catchy chorus and keeping everything concise.
Like the final versions of Judas Priest, Fight plays stomping metal, at slow and fast tempos, to carry Mr.
Halford's long-suffering words.
There's some variety in the music, from the bluesy slide guitar of "Little Crazy" to the new-wave bounce of "Vicious" to the hard riffing of "Contortion," but Fight doesn't flex formulas very far.


No Headline


Food Notes
New Carryout Shop
Pamela Morgan, who has owned Flavors, a catering company in New York, for 10 years, has just opened Flavors Catering and Carryout, at 8 West 18th Street.
The shop, which has cafe tables, is bright and white, with an excellent salad bar ($5.95 a pound) that has a selection of pasta, grain and vegetable salads, all seasoned with authority.
Sandwich choices, which vary daily, are uniformly good and cost between $3.50 and $6.50.
There are also buttery pastries and cookies and an array of packaged foods; (212) 647-1234.
For Wine Lovers
The Wine School at Windows on the World, displaced from the restaurant after the bombing of the World Trade Center last year, is back at 1 World Trade Center, though on a lower floor.
Spring, summer and fall classes will be held on the 43d floor and led by Kevin Zraly.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Overview; Tallying Losses From Quake, Los Angeles Stirs and Hopes
A day after the deadliest earthquake in two decades struck the city, the people of Los Angeles began to tally the devastation around them today, even as they struggled to calm the tremors within themselves.
After rescuers found several more bodies overnight and the deaths of several fatal heart attacks were attributed tonight to the quake, pushing the death toll to 38, the coroner's office said.
State and local officials surveyed the city, declaring hundreds of homes uninhabitable and predicting that the damage would equal the $7 billion in losses caused by the 1989 earthquake in San Francisco.
Construction crews tore into shattered roads and buildings, making way for repairs that officials said could take months or years.


THE IRAN-CONTRA REPORT: Reaction; REPORT IS DIVIDING THE PARTIES AGAIN
Rather than ending eight years of partisan sniping, the release of the Iran-contra report today gave the combatants one last shot.
Republicans sought to keep the focus on Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel who produced the report, saying his effort was a waste of time and money.
Democrats declared that the report was the most convincing evidence yet of improper conduct at the highest levels of the Reagan Administration.


Honeywell Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Escoffier: The Name's Alive and Cooking
IN the food world, the name Escoffier resonates, like DiMaggio in baseball or Bernhardt on stage, as a legend that defined the craft, set standards and lives on.
Escoffier-style cooking, with elaborate dishes like pheasant Souvaroff or tournedos Rossini layered with truffles and foie gras, may seem hopelessly out of date.
But Georges Auguste Escoffier, who began his career as a chef at age 13 in 1859 and is credited as one of the creators of what is now considered classical French cooking, was far ahead of his times in surprising ways.


Fed Official Will Resign
Wayne D. Angell has submitted his resignation as a governor of the Federal Reserve Board, effective on Feb. 9, a spokesman for the Fed said today.
Mr.
Angell's term expires on Jan. 31, but unless he resigned he would remain in office until the installation of his successor, not yet nominated by President Clinton.


Southwestern Dish With an Italian Start
COOK some onions and peppers together, and you have the beginnings of an Italian meal.
But add black beans, jalapeno and cilantro, and the dish becomes Southwestern.
Served with strips of grilled lamb and a piece of crusty bread, the meal is complete.
Grilled Lamb With Peppers and Onions
8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces julienned, ready-cut onion (1 2/3 cups)  2 teaspoons olive oil  1 clove garlic  14 ounces whole red and yellow bell peppers or 12 ounces julienned, ready-cut peppers (3 cups)  1/2 to 1 jalapeno pepper  8 ounces boneless leg of lamb  1 cup no-salt-added canned black beans  1/4 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  2 tablespoons chopped cilantro.
1. Heat broiler, if using.
2. Cut the whole onion into julienne strips, and saute in hot oil in nonstick pan.
3. Mince garlic, and add to onion.
4. Wash, trim, seed and julienne the bell peppers, and add to onions.
5. Wash, trim, seed and mince the jalapeno, and add to vegetables.
6.
Wash, dry and trim the lamb, and cut into inch-wide slices about one-quarter inch thick.
Prepare stove-top grill if using.
Grill or broil lamb until pink, about 5 minutes.
7.
Drain and rinse the beans.
Stir into vegetables with salt and pepper, and cook a couple of minutes.
8.
Wash, dry and chop cilantro.
Arrange vegetables on plate and top with strips of lamb.
Sprinkle with cilantro, and serve with bread.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 415 calories, 11 grams fat, 60 milligrams cholesterol, 655 milligrams sodium, 30 grams protein, 50 grams carbohydrate.


Intel's Earnings Jump 38% Amid Demand for Its Chips
Buoyed by strong demand for personal computers using its microprocessor chips, the Intel Corporation reported today that its profits rose 38 percent in the fourth quarter and more than doubled for the year.
Still, price cuts and increased operating costs squeezed the company's profit margins in the fourth quarter compared with a year earlier.
Intel said the growth in its fourth-quarter results was also restrained by heavier-than-usual start-up costs for chip factories in California and Ireland.


Parker Hannifin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mets Still Seek a Shortstop
Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, went trawling for a shortstop again today.
But even the presence of about a third of baseball's general managers did not produce many trade possibilities.
McIlvaine, in Fort Lauderdale to attend an owners' meeting along with a handful of other general managers, said that of the clubs he would wish to deal with, only one team's general manager -- the Cleveland Indians' -- was present; the Red Sox' and the Cardinals', the other people McIlvaine wants to talk to, were not.


Sullivan Goes to Nascar
DANNY SULLIVAN, who last week lost his Indy-car ride, said yesterday that he expected to drive in five Nascar Winston Cup events this year with the hope that he will have a full-time stock-car ride in 1995.
Sullivan, a former Formula One driver who won 17 Indy-car races between 1982 and 1993, parted company with Galles Racing last week after the primary sponsor, Molson, pulled out.


Boy, 12, Stabbed At Brooklyn School
A 12-year-old boy was in stable condition yesterday after he was stabbed four times in a Brooklyn junior high school by a 13-year-old classmate who pulled an eight-inch butcher knife during a dispute, school officials and the police said.
The police arrested the 13-year-student who used the knife, charging him with second-degree assault, a felony, the officials said.


Esiason Says News Media Spurred Coslet's Dismissal
Quarterback Boomer Esiason said yesterday that he thought Bruce Coslet, dismissed as Jets coach 12 days ago, was done in by a news media campaign and that the real story behind Coslet's departure has not come out.
"I really don't know what the real story is," Esiason said.
"It lives in the head of Bruce and Dick Steinberg. I wasn't privvy to the decision that was made. But I can't imagine Bruce not wanting to hire an offensive coordinator if the ultimatum was made to him. I don't even know if there ever was an ultimatum made."


St. John's Slide Deepens
St.
John's played well but not well enough tonight against Syracuse, and a star player, Lawrence Moten, who scored and scored.
The result was a fifth straight loss for the Redmen, four of them against Big East opposition.
The Orangemen, ranked 16th in the Associated Press poll this week, won, 92-82, as Moten scored 31 points, 22 in the second half.


Bowater Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Theater in Review
Edith Stein  Playhouse 91 316 East 91st Street Upper East Side  Through Jan. 30 By Arthur Giron; directed by Lee Sankowich; sets by Ursula Belden; costumes by Laura Crow; lighting by Betsy Finston; sound by James Capenos; production stage manager, D. C. Rosenberg; general manager, Steven M. Levy.
Presented by the Jewish Repertory Theater, Ran Avni, artistic director; Edward M. Cohen, associate director, in association with Harriet Newman Leve and the 92d Street Y.


Bosnian Peace Talks Appear Near Failure Again
The latest round of peace talks on ending the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina appeared to be heading toward another failure today as leaders of Bosnia's rival Serbs, Muslims and Croats met with the international mediators, Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg.
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia demanded that the Muslim-led Bosnian Government of President Alija Izetbegovic accept the agreed peace plan, which divides Bosnia and Herzegovina into three ethnic states.


Cowboys Going From a 'Headache' to the 'Flu'
If the Dallas Cowboys are to beat the San Francisco 49ers Sunday for the National Conference championship and a Super Bowl berth -- and the Cowboys are favored -- they must control the 49ers' passing game.
And that means putting the reins on Jerry Rice, perhaps the best receiver in National Football League history; John Taylor, perhaps the most underrated wide receiver in pro football; Steve Young, perhaps the best quarterback going; a wise, veteran offensive line and a few other assets.
Did we forget Ricky Watters's running?
The Cowboys' defense faces a big task.
But that same quick and aggressive secondary handled Sterling Sharpe, the Green Bay Packers' marvelous receiver, when it counted last Sunday.
"Playing the 49ers," said Larry Brown, the Cowboys' cornerback, "is like going from a headache with Sterling Sharpe to the flu with Jerry Rice." Mirror, Mirror
Kevin Smith, the Cowboys' other cornerback, said the Cowboys were familiar enough with the 49ers because they played them early this season.
And the Packers' offense that the Cowboys faced Sunday operates much like that of the 49ers.


Keystone Financial Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; An Author's Life Reflects 19th-Century America
Harriet Beecher Stowe
A Life
By Joan D. Hedrick 507 pages. Oxford. $35.
I bought a cheap paperback edition of "Uncle Tom's Cabin" at a secondhand bookstore in 1969, expecting to sneer my way through its racial sophistries and female pieties.
Instead, like Eliza crossing the ice, I found myself leaping from piety and sophistry to something much grander and landing, by means too varied and contradictory to recount, on the side of moral and narrative freedom.


Record Profit For Chrysler In 4th Quarter
The Chrysler Corporation reported today that its earnings almost doubled to a record $777 million in the fourth quarter of 1993, beating even the rosiest predictions by Wall Street analysts.
A recovering North American automobile market and Chrysler's revived line of cars and trucks contributed to a year of record earnings over all for the company, before taxes and charges for accounting changes.


First Tennessee National Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Music; An Image Is Refined By a Recital Debut
Given the opera world's appetite for promising new singers, it was surprising to see Alice Tully Hall only two-thirds full on Sunday evening, when Francoise Pollet gave her New York debut recital.
But circumstances seem to have worked against her.
Besides weather that encouraged all but the most devoted to stay home, there was competition earlier in the day from Marilyn Horne, who celebrated her 60th birthday at Carnegie Hall with an all-star benefit for her new foundation.
And Miss Pollet's uneven performance as Cassandra in the Metropolitan Opera's production of "Les Troyens" may have eroded her potential audience somewhat.
Some of the problems one noticed at the Met were apparent on Sunday as well, but what came more clearly into focus was this French soprano's musicianship and versatility, which made for a rewarding evening of German, French and Italian art songs and arias.


Change at Ailey Foundation
Barbara Hauptman has been named executive director of Dance Theater Foundation Inc., which administers the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and the Ailey school and junior company.
Ms.
Hauptman was formerly director of the Bardavon 1869 Opera House in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She was also director of the Twyla Tharp Dance Foundation and worked with the Theater Development Fund, New York State Council on the Arts, the Williamstown Theater Festival and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Compton Inc.
She succeeds Michael M. Kaiser, who will return to Kaiser Planning Group, a consulting firm.


Psychiatrist Says Years of Abuse Led Woman to Cut Husband
A defense psychiatrist testified today that an amalgam of mental illnesses, brought on by years of battering, had left Lorena L. Bobbitt poised for a complete psychotic breakdown.
Mrs.
Bobbitt's breakdown came, the psychiatrist said, after her husband, John W. Bobbitt, raped her, and it explained both why she struck back at her husband as she did and why she could not remember the attack afterward.
Bringing an end to Mrs.
Bobbitt's defense, the psychiatrist, Dr.
Susan Feister of the Psychiatric Institute of Washington, sought to provide a clinical underpinning for Mrs.
Bobbitt's principle claim in the case: that she was overcome by an "irresistible impulse," one that robbed her of any self-control, when she sliced off her husband's penis with a kitchen knife in the early morning of last June 23.


Broken Hip Weather
Night after night the weather report is the same.
New York City is about to suffer "precip," promptly followed by yet another freeze.
The result is ice, so much ice that anyone who wants to get through this winter without a broken hip, a wrenched back or a sprained ankle would be well advised to stay home.
Only problem is, most New Yorkers have to go to work or school.
So they're slipping and sliding and, all too often, falling.
Because the Sanitation Department's de-icers are less effective when the temperature is under 20 degrees, the department is now adding liquid calcium chloride to the mix.
It has hired 1,000 day laborers to open crosswalks and storm drains and has reminded all city agencies to clear the paths in front of their buildings.
The department has also promised at least to sand all secondary roadways.


Two Promotions At Backer Spielvogel
Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. of New York has promoted two top executives to additional positions to oversee the agency's management and creative operations in the United States.
Frank Assumma, 40, president of Backer Spielvogel's New York office, was named to the new position of president and was also named chief executive.
Michael Bungey, who had been chief executive, continues as chairman of the Americas region as well as chief executive of the parent, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.


Some Give Each Month To Neediest
Richard P. Bellusci of Manhattan does it every time he sits down to pay his bills.
John Ronan of Brooklyn started doing it when he moved back to his childhood home in Bay Ridge after working in Washington for several years.
A woman in Louisville, Ky., who has never even lived in New York, does it simply because she reads the stories of poverty, illness and abuse that define the lives of so many in a city where 1 million people depend on public assistance.


Testimony in Bomb Case Links Loose Ends
Six weeks ago, prosecutors in the World Trade Center trial brought out testimony about a man who wore a checked lumberjack shirt and was often seen using a pay telephone at the corner of Pamrapo Avenue and Old Bergen Road in Jersey City.
Then that pay phone was dropped, left dangling like an exposed wire -- until yesterday when, in its typically methodical fashion, the prosecutors attached it to the overall case.
The nearly forgotten telephone came up as prosecutors questioned an F.B.I. witness, Michael Patkus, who spent an entire afternoon on the stand going over two thick volumes of analyses of telephone calls placed to and from addresses where the various defendants in the case lived in the months when the bomb attack was presumably being planned.


38 Deaths in the Earthquake
Officials say 38 people died as a result of the earthquake on Monday morning in Los Angeles.
Following is a summary of some of the deaths, with names provided where available:
Sixteen were killed when the Northridge Meadows apartment complex collapsed.
Victims include Bea Reskin, 71, and Darla Enos, 43.


Viacom Revises Its Offer
Determined to stay in the fight for Paramount Communications, Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, made a new offer yesterday that included more cash per share plus some assurance that the volatile stock portion of Viacom's bid would retain its value if a merger was completed.
Based on closing prices in yesterday's stock trading, the overall value of Viacom Inc.'s new bid was still lower than the pending offer from QVC Network Inc.: about $82.50 a share, compared with QVC's $84 a share.
Yet many Wall Street analysts and traders said the higher cash portion of Viacom's offer, plus the protection against future declines in Viacom's stock, might force QVC to alter its own bid.


Giuliani Meets With Caucus
Continuing efforts to improve relations with minority groups, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani met yesterday with four members of the City Council's black and Hispanic caucus, including one who criticized him last week in the aftermath of a melee between the police and members of a Harlem mosque.
Although neither Mr.
Giuliani nor the Council members discussed the talks in detail, they said the hourlong session in the Mayor's office was productive and would be the first in a series of sessions focused on what the legislators see as issues of concern to black and Hispanic New Yorkers.


Corrections
A picture in some copies yesterday with an article about the demise of a dinner theater in Darien, Conn., was published in error.
It showed an apartment building in Greenwich, Conn., photographed for an unrelated article that appeared on Sunday.


Hospitals Unit Proposes A Reduction in Services
Ordered by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to close an unexpected budget gap of $160 million, New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation submitted a plan yesterday that would impose a hiring freeze, cut contributions to affiliated medical schools and delay a number of new health initiatives.
The proposals, which must be approved by the agency's 16-member board, would affect several initiatives that former Mayor David N. Dinkins considered among his core accomplishments, including the opening of another community health clinic and an expansion of health care services for women.


The Final 4 Emerge Through Hard Work
It is a one-shot deal now, a shoot-for-the-top, all-or-nothing battle in each conference championship game on Sunday.
It is where all 28 National Football League teams hoped to be when they dived into free agency during the off season seeking the right mix, began grueling training camps back in July and then embarked on the regular season.
In the American Football Conference, Kansas City and Buffalo survived.
In the N.F.C., it is San Francisco and Dallas.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $250 million of notes due in 2004 priced at 100 to yield 6.27 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in three years. *
First Chicago Corp., is selling $200 million of 6.375 percent subordinated notes due in 2009 priced at 98.886 to yield 6.492 percent through CS First Boston Corp.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-1 by Moody's, A- by Standard &amp; Poor's and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Modine Manufacturing Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Pepsi-Cola to Open Its First Plant in Czech Republic


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Digital Loss In 2d Quarter Stuns Market
The Digital Equipment Corporation is finding that the road to recovery is longer and more painful than it had expected.
Surprising analysts, many of whom had expected a small profit, the computer maker today reported a net loss of $72.1 million for its fiscal second quarter.
The loss, along with a 12 percent revenue decline, indicated that the company's turnaround effort was being hindered by the computer market's slowness to embrace machines using Digital's Alpha microprocessor chips.


Events: Treasured Volumes
The Real First Printing  Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street; (212) 685-0008.
Johann Gutenberg invented the first printing press with movable type around 1455, and the world has never been the same.
The library has opened "Gutenberg and the Genesis of Printing," an exhibition that explores the cultural and artistic revolution that accompanied the early days of printing.
The show, which continues through April 17, features three Gutenberg Bibles.


Prevention and Punishment
Last year Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York appointed a special commission to study youth crime and violence.
Its chairman is Andrew Stein, former president of the New York City Council; the vice chairman is Leonard Dunston, director of the state's Division for Youth.
Its first public hearings were held last week, and the commission's 15 members heard some smart testimony on prevention from Ronald Mincy of the Ford Foundation.
In New York State, arrests of juveniles for violent crimes have risen 80 percent and arrests for weapons possession have increased 66 percent in the last five years.
Homicide is the leading cause of death in New York City for those under the age of 25.


Poll Finds Increasing Confidence In Economy, and in the President
For the first time since the onset of the recession in mid-1990, the number of Americans expressing confidence in the economy has caught up to those with negative views about it, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The shift has helped restore President Clinton's public approval rating to the higher level he enjoyed when he first took office.
After one year of Mr.
Clinton's Presidency, 54 percent of the public approve of the way he is handling his job, a striking rebound from last summer, when Americans were more critical of him than they had been of any new President since World War II.


INSIDE
Bentsen Warns China
Treasury Secretary Bentsen told officials in Beijing at the start of four days of talks that China must make more progress on human rights to maintain its trade status.
Page A6.
Another Guggenheim Gift
Ronald Perelman, the chairman of Revlon, donated $10 million to the Guggenheim Museum, the second such gift in a month.
Page C15.
Jobs for Welfare Recipients
Reflecting a campaign promise to get more welfare recipients to work, Mayor Giuliani said New York would begin paying a company to find jobs for people on welfare.
Page B4.


Rock Greats Hail, Hail Their Own At Spirited Hall of Fame Ceremony
A star-packed audience at the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame heard Bob Weir of the Grateful Dead reveal, "I've hated tie-dye all my life."
Unlike their many fans, who are known for wearing tie-dye, the Dead wore tuxedos to take their place among other rock legends at the Hall's ninth annual induction ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
The head Dead, Jerry Garcia, did not attend, but a life-size cardboard cutout of him served as a stand-in.


Crime Issue Spurs Giving To Neediest
In late December, a 34-year-old bond trader for Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company sat down to mail off his annual contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, dedicating his $500 gift to the memory "of all the victims of crime in 1993."
It was an issue, he said, that had weighed heavily on his mind since an acquaintance and his son were attacked last year at Yankee Stadium by a man who tried to steal their car.


Luminous Art That Softens a Subway
IT'S not the subway station to heaven.
But the Matissean blues of the stained-glass triptych recently installed at a station in the Bronx may make many commuters think they've entered one.
"When I saw it at the station, I thought of an explosion of jazz," said Benoit Gilsoul, who with Helmut Schardt transformed a maquette by the late Romare Bearden into an artwork as luminous and calming as the sunlit windows of a church.


Essay; Inman Out
Why did Adm.
Bobby Ray Inman, sailing toward easy Senate confirmation as Secretary of Defense, suddenly flinch and withdraw his name?
We do not yet know, but I suspect it was not for the reason given in the therapy session that was his departing news conference.
Is one good pop by a columnist, along with anticipated light flak about nanny-tax problems, enough to drive a smooth Washington operator out of a cabinet post? (If he had been confirmed, and North Korea said "Boo!" would the Pentagon have sued for terms?) Thanks, but no pundit is that powerful.


No Headline
"My cabdriver told me that he has been taking fares two or three blocks this morning. Nobody wants to walk." -- J. STEPHEN SHEPPARD, New York City lawyer.  [ B6:5. ]


Witness Says Lorena Bobbitt Earlier Threatened to Maim Husband
A woman who once worked with Lorena L. Bobbitt testified today that three years before Mrs.
Bobbitt cut off her husband's penis, she had declared that she would do so if Mr.
Bobbitt was ever unfaithful.
The witness, Connie James, who worked with Mrs.
Bobbitt at a Stafford, Va., nail salon and aerobics studio called Fit and Pretty, said Mrs.
Bobbitt made the remark during a 1990 conversation in which the two women pondered what they should do if their husbands cheated on them.
"I made a joke and I said, 'We'd probably kill them,' and I said, 'I'm just kidding, I'd probably take everything and leave him,' " Mrs.
James testified.
"And then I asked Lorena what would she do."


Antiques Row Thrives Anew On East 60th
IT couldn't have worked out better if someone had planned it.
If there are natural laws governing the creation of a full-fledged antiques district, they have certainly been at work on East 60th Street between Second and Third avenues.
Since last January, the number of antiques stores on the block has grown from a core of four or five long-established shops to a current total of 21 -- and counting.


Zairians Strike Over Plan to Close Parliament
Hundreds of thousands of Zairians stayed away from work today to protest President Mobutu Sese Seko's decision to dissolve the Parliament and name a new prime minister.
The general strike, which local analysts called by far the most effective of several efforts in recent months to shut down this country's biggest city, was called by Mr.
Mobutu's opponent, Etienne Tshisekedi, who heads a rival government that the President has refused to recognize.


Bam, Crunch, Thwack: Madden to NBC?
The John Madden Speculation Sweepstakes yesterday swept toward NBC, where he is said to be negotiating to become the network's No. 1 football analyst and a spokesman for General Electric, NBC's parent company.
Madden's future became a source of constant industry chatter last month when CBS lost the rights to National Football Conference games to the Fox Network, making him a broadcasting free agent.


Olympic Aura at Vermont Mom-Pop Resort
When it comes to ski resorts, bigger is not always better.
Take the Cochran Ski Area in Richmond, Vt.
With only six trails and not a chairlift in sight, ski areas don't come much smaller.
But measured in terms of stature, the place gets bigger.
It has four former World Cup skiers on its staff, including an Olympic gold medalist.
And the area's founder was head coach in 1973 for the United States Ski Team.


Allegheny Power System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John Blair Linn Goodwin; Writer and Poet, 81
John Blair Linn Goodwin, a writer and poet, died last Wednesday at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 81 and had homes in Manhattan, West Palm Beach, Fla., and the Netherlands Antilles.
He had suffered a long illness, said Anthony Russo, a friend.


Bell Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pennzoil Challenged On Taxes
The Internal Revenue Service is preparing to demand nearly $1 billion in back taxes and interest from Pennzoil on the company's $3 billion legal settlement with Texaco Inc. in 1988, the company said today.
The I.R.S. position, though not final, opens yet another chapter in one of the highest-stakes legal battles of the takeover era.


AMERITECH CORP. (N)
The Ameritech Corporation, the regional phone company for the Midwest, reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 18.7 percent from a year earlier on a 6.1 percent gain in revenues.
Ameritech's earnings of $398.2 million, or 73 cents a share, were far stronger than analysts' expectations.
Daniel Reingold of Merrill Lynch had expected a quarterly profit of 67 cents a share, adjusting for a recent 2-for-1 stock split.


Cortines Says Bad Schools Are Facing Takeovers
New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that in a series of recent surprise visits to some of the city's most troubled schools he has discovered stunning educational mismanagement, including teachers without teaching plans and libraries without books.
Mr.
Cortines said that if the performance of a dozen of the worst schools did not improve quickly he would recommend that they be closed or reorganized.


Gallagher (Arthur J.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE EARTHQUAKE: Schools; With 150 Buildings Unusable, Education Waits
At Van Nuys Junior High School, a 70-foot chimney leaned precariously toward a courtyard that would normally be full of children.
At Reseda High School rubble was strewn throughout the auditorium and jagged holes in the ceiling let in the clear blue winter sky of Los Angeles.
A few miles away, at Kennedy High School the earthquake centered in the San Fernando Valley gouged huge holes in the school's concrete walls, exposing twisted steel bars and cracked piping.
The courtyard clock stopped on Monday at exactly 4:31.


DHL Worldwide To Goodby, Berlin
DHL Worldwide Express, the international air express company, said yesterday that it had selected Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco to handle its account, which had been at Ketchum Advertising San Francisco for almost five years until they parted ways three months ago over financial issues.
Billings were estimated at $7 million to $8 million.


WLTW-FM finds success with an ever-evolving definition of 'soft' adult contemporary music.
ERIC CLAPTON, Sting, Phil Collins and Bruce Springsteen, whose music has saturated American radio for several decades, are also:
a) Candidates for the geriatric wing of the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame.


Elco Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHASE OFFERS STOCK OPTIONS TO ALL EMPLOYEES
The Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that it had granted long-term stock options to its 33,500 full-time and part-time employees.
Every full-time employee will receive options on 400 shares of Chase stock.
Part-time employees receive options on 200 shares.
If Chase's stock, which closed at $33.375 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, reaches $60 a share within three years, employees will be able to exercise all the options; if it reaches $52, they will be able to exercise half of them.
If the share price stays below that, the options vest in nine years.
The program, a one-time offer for the duration of the three years, will be offered to new employees on a prorated basis.


Italy's Christian Democrats, Renamed, Seek Popularity
With little more than two months before national elections, the Christian Democratic Party has yielded to the political changes sweeping Italy and given itself a new name, new leaders and, it hopes, a new chance to salvage some of its former power base after the scandals of the last two years.
The leadership of the party, which effectively controlled Italian politics since the country's emergence from World War II, said it would now be called the Italian Popular Party.


First Security (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Net inc 10,195,000 9,180,000


Corrections
A headline on Tuesday about an official inquiry into the export of arms-making equipment from Britain before the Persian Gulf war misidentified the country to which the equipment was sent.
It was Iraq, not Iran.


Colleagues Are as Much Baffled by the Way Inman Withdrew
In the end, Bobby Ray Inman simply did not want to be Secretary of Defense badly enough.
Beneath his attack of his critics on Tuesday for trying to ruin his reputation in a frenzy of "modern Mccarthyism," the retired four-star admiral and former deputy intelligence chief made it clear that he did not have the stomach for the high-publicity bureaucratic battles fought from the Secretary's third-floor office at the Pentagon.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Mississippi State Still Perfect in S.E.C.
In Starkville, Miss., T. J. Honore hit two free throws in the final 33 seconds as Mississippi State beat No. 3 Arkansas, 72-71, last night and remained unbeaten in the Southeastern Conference.
The Bulldogs (11-2 over all, 5-0 S.E.C.) overcame a 10-point, first-half deficit in taking a two-game lead over second-place Arkansas (12-2, 3-2) in the S.E.C.'s Western Division. (AP) Michigan St. 70, Wisconsin 60: In East Lansing, Mich., Michigan State dealt No. 14 Wisconsin its second straight road loss as Shawn Respert scored 16 of his 20 points in the second half of the Spartans' Big Ten victory.
Before their visit to Breslin Center, the Badgers (12-2, 3-2 Big Ten) rebounded from a 90-53 loss at Minnesota with a 75-69 victory over previously unbeaten Purdue in Madison.
But the Badgers missed 15 of their first 20 shots, fell behind 23-11, and really never recovered. (AP)


Ex-Sabre Wins in Court
The former Buffalo Sabres star RICK MARTIN was awarded $2.5 million Wednesday in a medical malpractice lawsuit against a surgeon Martin blames for cutting his career short.
Martin wept as a New York Supreme Court jury in Buffalo announced the verdict against the estate of Dr.
Peter Casagrande, a former orthopedic surgeon for the Sabres who operated on Martin's knee.


U.S. Calls 7 Countries Backers of Terrorism
Administration officials said today that they had made no change in the Government's list of countries deemed to support terrorism: Cuba, Iraq, Iran, Libya, North Korea, the Sudan and Syria.
The Commerce Department is to submit the annual update to Congress on Thursday.
Such countries face restrictions in American aid and exports.


New Study Links Gene to Risk of Bone Disease
Heredity has long been known to play an important role in determining who will get osteoporosis, the bone-thinning disease that afflicts some 20 million Americans and results in costly, debilitating and sometimes life-threatening fractures in older women and, to a lesser extent, men.
Now, in what has been called the most important finding in the field in a decade, an Australian research team has shown that a single gene is the main hereditary culprit, accounting for about a third of a person's overall risk of developing osteoporosis.


Review/Jazz; Regional Idiosyncrasies And Playing With Pitch
One of the greatest losses jazz has suffered over the years is a sense of regional identity.
With the advent of music schools and the easy access to recordings, young musicians tend to gravitate to the same sources and the same ideas; idiosyncrasy is a long-forgotten notion.
Von Freeman, the 71-year-old tenor saxophonist now at the Village Vanguard, is exactly that, idiosyncratic.
He has lived in Chicago most of his life, and he sounds like it.
His playing clearly has precedents, but in its distinctiveness, it can only have come from a place where jazz orthodoxy wasn't everything, where musicians had the time to experiment.
If the best jazz musicians have generally been able to muster the most resources, to bring the greatest rhetoric to bear on expression, then Mr.
Freeman is a master.
A solo of his, on up-tempo material, careens.
He crams ideas into a short time then stops.
The most noticeable element of his style is his manipulation of pitch, and he runs lines that seem to be paraphrasing some otherworldly harmony, dark sounds technically out of tune that slip quietly back into the normalcy of a tune's harmony.
He pinches and squeezes notes, and lets them be soft for a minute, or hard for another.
Sometimes he has notes run up his horn then lets squeals take over, howls that meander back into the realm of notes.
And at times, he seems to be forcing three or four notes through his horn at once, a woolly mass that appears less as a pitch than just plain sound.


New League in Works
Talk about deja vu all over again.
There were BOWIE KUHN and BOB WIRZ at a New York news conference yesterday, discussing franchises, rules and the relative appeal of strikeouts and home runs.
They did not, to be sure, appear in their former roles as commissioner of baseball and major league baseball's chief spokesman but on behalf of a new commercial ball and bat venture, the National Fastpitch Association.


Poles Seize Half Ton of Cocaine on U.S. Tip
Acting on a tip from American customs officials, Polish customs seized more than half a ton of cocaine on Tuesday.
It had an estimated wholesale value of $20 million.
Polish officials said it was the largest quantity of cocaine intercepted since Eastern Europe became a transit point for drug traffic from South America about four years ago.


Minority Members on Council Give Giuliani List of Concerns
Responding to criticism that he had not reached out sufficiently to minority officials, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani met yesterday with black and Hispanic members of the New York City Council in discussions that the Mayor and Council members called productive.
"This was a useful meeting, and we discussed a wide range of issues," said Mr.
Giuliani, standing with the Council members before reporters and photographers after the hourlong session.
"On these issues we will work very closely. Not only in the next couple of weeks, but hopefully over the next four years."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many children who were home on Monday for the observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and unable to play outside because of unusually cold weather, television was an obvious source of entertainment.
But what they found on many stations was not the usual cartoons, soap operas and game shows, but live coverage of the earthquake in Los Angeles.
While children in Southern California are directly affected by the disaster, others who are hundreds or even thousands of miles away may be struggling to come to terms with what they saw on the screen.
For many children, this is a healthy process, allowing them to feel empathy and even to be part of an effort to help.


MBNA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lennar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Ollie's Coast-to-Coast In Last 0:02.8 Wins It
Connecticut's march through the Big East continued tonight with another victory, the sixth without a defeat, over a difficult opponent in a difficult place.
The Huskies snatched the decision from the Providence Friars on an improbable basket by Kevin Ollie with 2.8 seconds left for a 79-78 victory.
The site was the Civic Center, where the Friars had taken 23 of their last 27 games and where they had most of the capacity crowd of 13,106 on their side here.


Johnson Controls reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A celebration of classic couture


American Maize-Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
The Cap Volmac World Top tournament, which begins today in the Hague, the Netherlands, will be one of the strongest events ever played anywhere.
Among those invited are the three Dutch pairs who won the world team title in Chile four months ago and two French pairs who won a different world title a year earlier.
The American representation could hardly be stronger: Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell; Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman; and David Berkowitz and Larry Cohen.
Another American, Chip Martel, will play with Zia Mahmood, who will be trying for a third victory with a third partner.


Iran-Contra Isn't Over for Oliver North
The independent counsel's final Iran-contra report revealed nothing significantly new about Oliver L. North's involvement in the scandal, leading the former Marine officer and White House adviser to pronounce, "It's over."
But from a political standpoint, it is not over for Mr.
North, whose televised Congressional testimony and defiant court appearances in the late 1980's made him the most visible of the Iran-contra figures and propelled him into a place in American history as hero or villain, depending on the judgment of the beholder.


CBS Says It Should Break Even On Nagano
CBS officials yesterday defended their decision to spend $375 million on the television rights to the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, saying the network will not lose money on the expenditure, the steepest price ever for a Winter Olympics.
"This is a fair number, a number we can live with, for an event that fits our programming schedule and that's growing in audience," said Laurence Tisch, the chairman and chief executive of CBS.
"The number we negotiated is a number we're happy with. If we do a fair accounting, it's just about break even."


American Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Robert Corroon, 71, Insurance Executive
Robert F. Corroon, a Manhattan insurance executive for 44 years, died on Monday in Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 71 and lived in Greenwich.
The cause was chronic pulmonary disease, said his wife, Helen.


Nixon Library Receiving Gift of $5 Million
The Annenberg Foundation is giving $5 million to the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace and a new center the library is creating on foreign and domestic policy issues, library officials said.
The gift is scheduled to be formally announced today in a ceremony at the library in Yorba Linda, Calif., where plans for the new institution, the Center for Peace and Freedom, will also be unveiled.


A Decision: No New Commissioner
Major league club owners decided today not to name a new commissioner.
Instead, Bud Selig, the man who has said for 16 months that he doesn't want to be commissioner, will continue to be exactly that with no end of his expanding non-term in sight.
The decision to anoint Selig again, instead of electing a permanent commissioner, was only one of a series of developments emerging from the last day of the three-day owners meeting.


Giuliani Announces Plan For Jobs for Welfare Clients
In his first step toward delivering on a campaign promise to get more welfare recipients to work, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that the city would begin paying a private company to find jobs for people on welfare.
It is the first time the city has agreed to pay a commercial business to help in its welfare-to-work efforts.


Sports of The Times; The Rush To Judge Harding
AS the web of suspicion draws tighter around Tonya Harding, there is a point that must not be dismissed lightly.
Harding has repeatedly said she's innocent of any wrongdoing in the Nancy Kerrigan case.
And she said it, again, through more than 10 hours of grilling Tuesday in front of the authorities in her hometown of Portland, Ore.
At this moment, the most that anyone has been able to pin on her is guilt by association.
If nothing else changes, it ought not to be enough to keep her from competing on the United States figure skating team in the Olympics next month in Norway.


Bomb Scare Halts PATH Service at Trade Center


State of Emergency Declared in Kentucky As Bitter Cold Closes Interstate Highways
The Winter of '94 is just a few weeks old, but the people of Kentucky will no doubt remember it for a long time.
Today, for the third day in a row, a state of emergency was in effect for the state, hit hard by a crippling combination of freezing rain, heavy snow and subzero temperatures.


Architecture for, and With, Children
THE skyscraper of the future may end up having a mini-rain forest and a glass-encased subway system.
The architects of the future may end up knowing what a dormer window and rotunda are at much younger ages than their parents.
Architecture is moving onto more children's agendas, from books for preschoolers to urban-design workshops for teen-agers.


Topics of The Times; Fur Piece
There is a mystery bookstore in New York City that has as its featured attraction not a reading nook, not coffee on the house, not a remainder rack but a cat.
This cat is the color of ginger and the size of a house.
Weigh this baby and we're talking two digits.
During the day, and possibly during the night as well, this cat can usually be found lazing on the counter.
Often he can be found sitting on top of the cash register.
Even more often, he can be found sitting on top of a customer.


Bitter Cold Disrupts Power, Travel, and Life in General
Record-breaking cold imposed an icy disorder on the New York region and along the East Coast yesterday, from power shortages to disrupted school days, from frozen railroad track switches to scuttled dinner plans.
The temperature was 2 degrees below 0 in Central Park at 6 A.M., the lowest ever recorded for the date, and rose to 10 degrees later in the day, making it one of the coldest days in the last half-century.
A dozen cities in the Midwest and East recorded their lowest temperatures ever, though gradual easing of temperatures is expected today and Friday as the Arctic cold front that moved in last weekend begins heading north.


Where Have All the Shovels Gone?
Well before the first snowflake fell, most tool makers shifted production from snow shovels to rakes, hoes and trowels.
Little did they count on the fierce weather that has unfolded this winter.
Soaring demand for shovels and rock salt has cleaned out home improvement centers and hardware stores from the Midwest through the East.
While some tool companies are scrambling to turn up their assembly lines, others say there is nothing more they can do.


R.S.V.P., Please!
To The Home Section:
You will no doubt be awash with letters thanking Enid Nemy for "From Guests, No R.S.V.P., No Regrets" (Dec. 30), and may I add my voice to the grateful chorus.


After Admiral Inman
There is no point in piling on.
By withdrawing his nomination for Secretary of Defense, Bobby Ray Inman wrote a sad, puzzling end to a useful career in the Navy and the intelligence agencies.
There was no politician or commentator so contrarian as to believe his improbable parting charge of a conspiracy between Senator Robert Dole and our colleague, the columnist William Safire.
Admiral Inman and his critics are today experiencing a shared sense of release that he will not be in charge of the Pentagon.
Strain had lingered from the day that he appeared in the Rose Garden with President Clinton and asserted that he had had a hard time finding a "comfort level" with his new boss as Commander in Chief.


Ex-Husband of Harding Arrested in Skating Attack
Federal authorities today arrested Jeff Gillooly, the former husband of Tonya Harding, and said they had grounds to believe he has implicated her in planning the Jan. 6 assault on her figure-skating rival, Nancy Kerrigan.
Mr.
Gillooly, a 26-year-old unemployed former warehouse worker, was the fourth person to be arrested in the case but not necessarily the last.
Norman W. Frink, a deputy district attorney, said that the investigation was continuing and more arrests were possible.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
California businesses disrupted by Monday's earthquake began cleaning up and assessing damage.  [ Page A1. ]
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll showed confidence that the economy would grow.
Thirty-one percent said the economy was "getting better," compared with 19 percent in November.  [ A1. ]


BANKAMERICA CORP. (N)
Profits at the BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's second-largest banking company, rose by 4.9 percent in the fourth quarter, to $496 million.
The company earned $1.21 a share for the quarter, slightly less than the $1.23 a share that analysts had expected.


Synoptics Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Scene; The two faces of Clinton's trade policy, one a frown for Japan.
IS there more at the root of the Clinton Administration's trade policy than an urge to demonstrate that Americans are mad as heck and aren't going to take it any more?
Free traders, worried by the Administration's tough words and occasionally tough deeds on issues ranging from European Airbuses to Chinese apparel, took solace in the White House's bravura performance in completing both the Nafta and GATT agreements.
This proved, they reassured themselves, that Mr.
Clinton really is a free trader who believes in settling trade disputes by the closest thing around to international law.


Oakwood Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


O'Neal's 40 Points Lift Magic
Magic 108, Clippers 96
Shaquille O'Neal had his fourth 40-point game of the season and Anfernee Hardaway added 21 points, 8 rebounds and 8 assists as the Orlando Magic defeated the visiting Los Angeles Clippers, 108-96, last night.
O'Neal shot 17 of 27 from the field and converted 6 of 11 free throws.
The league's leading scorer also grabbed 19 rebounds and blocked 4 shots.
Hardaway, who like O'Neal played a season-high 47 minutes, led the Magic in assists for the third straight game.


Living Centers of America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Victory Runs Gamut From Coleman To 12th Man
When many in the crowd of 9,158 began to chant, "We want Rex," calling for the rookie Rex Walters with 2 minutes 25 seconds left in the third quarter at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, you had to suspect this was the Nets' night.
And how.
New Jersey was up by 21 points on Minnesota when the Walters chant began, and the Nets went on to romp, 112-91, extending their winning streak to three games, a season high.


Carroll Hires a Coach
The Jets appointed BRAD SEELY special teams coach yesterday, replacing AL ROBERTS, who had been special teams coordinator for three years.
Seely joins the Jets from the Indianapolis Colts, where he coached special teams and tight ends for six seasons.
Before that, he spent five seasons as offensive line coach at Oklahoma State.
He is the first assistant hired by PETE CARROLL, who replaced BRUCE COSLET as the Jets' head coach on Jan. 7.
Roberts was dismissed with Coslet. (AP)


Bentsen Says China Isn't Doing Enough on Rights
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said Wednesday after meetings with China's leaders that the Clinton Administration was still not satisfied with the measures Beijing was taking to improve its human rights practices and that it must do more if it hopes to win renewed American trade benefits.
But Treasury Department officials said today that they were negotiating with the Chinese over a new agreement for restrictions on the use of Chinese prison labor to make export products, and that it was likely to be announced while Mr.
Bentsen was here.


A NOMINEE'S WITHDRAWAL: Washington Memo; Even Washington Insiders Are Bashers Nowadays
It has been a long time since Washington got any respect, but the last year has been particularly hard on the old capital.
The town had barely recovered from being labeled "a mess" by Ross Perot when the Clinton crowd started in.
Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, the Hollywood producer and First Family friend, called Washington an "incestuous insane asylum," and began preparing a new television comedy lampooning the capital.


Review/Dance; Brazen Feminine Rage Amid a Flow of Energy
The Altogether Different series at the Joyce Theater entered its final week on Tuesday night with Donna Uchizono, a choreographer who ended her program by pressing a red rose to her bare chest before chewing on the flower's petals.
Visceral, mysterious, surprising, it was the kind of image that showed Ms.
Uchizono at her best in the three pieces she presented with her dancers.
Rage, mainly feminine, was a recurring leitmotif, and this solo, "Desiree" was its brazen embodiment.


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Revlon's Chairman Donates $10 Million To the Guggenheim
Barely four weeks after announcing that its landmark Frank Lloyd Wright building would be named in honor of the developer Samuel J. LeFrak and his wife, Ethel, the donors of $10 million, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum said yesterday that it had received another gift of $10 million, from the financier Ronald O. Perelman.
Part of the gift from Mr.
Perelman, who is the chairman of Revlon, will go to commission a sculpture by Roy Lichtenstein that will be placed on or above the sculpture terrace on the exterior of the Fifth Avenue museum's new tower building.
The remainder of the gift is an unrestricted cash donation.
With its announcement of the gift, the museum formally kicked off a $100 million capital campaign; about $50 million of that amount has now been raised, said Thomas Krens, the Guggenheim's director.


Winnipeg Official Out
The Winnipeg Jets dropped General Manager MIKE SMITH yesterday and replaced him with their head coach, JOHN PADDOCK.
The Jets' president, BARRY SHENKAROW, said Paddock would hold the dual roles of coach and general manager until the end of the season.


Serbs and Croats in Accord; Threat to Muslims Is Feared
Another round of talks between Bosnia's warring factions ended in deadlock today despite a last-minute effort by Serbia and Croatia to step up pressure on the Muslim-led Government by signing a separate accord to improve their relations.
Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, the international mediators, said the Bosnian Government had rejected the latest plan to carve Bosnia into a loose federation of ethnically based states, on the ground that the Muslims needed more towns and access to the sea to make their state viable.


AMR, Citing Strike, Posts $253 Million Loss
The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, said yesterday that a strike by its flight attendants last fall cost the carrier $190 million and led to a fourth-quarter net loss of $253 million.
The five-day strike in November also wiped out a profit AMR would have otherwise reported for the entire year, leading instead to a loss of $110 million in 1993.


Knicks Ransack Mr. Robinson's Neighborhood
The outcome was no surprise.
The San Antonio Spurs were without their best player, and the Knicks were without mercy.
With David Robinson (sore right knee) watching helplessly from the Spurs' bench, Patrick Ewing and John Starks powered the Knicks to their sixth consecutive victory, 120-108, last night at Madison Square Garden.
The All-Star center matchup between Robinson and Ewing usually highlights any contest between these teams.
But with Robinson sitting this one out, the Knicks rolled to a 20-point halftime lead, and San Antonio never got closer than 12 points thereafter.


FirstFed Michigan Corp.(NMS


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about Eleanor Holm, the swimmer who was thrown off the 1936 Olympic team for drinking champagne on the trip to Berlin, misspelled her married name.
It is Eleanor Holm Whalen.


Ruble Sinks Further in a Whirl of Political Rumors
Negotiations over a new Russian Government continued in secret today, aggravating confusion and panic over the value of the ruble, which plunged another 6.5 percent in record trading, to a low of 1,607 to the dollar.
In a brief report this evening, Interfax news agency said Finance Minister Boris G. Fyodorov, who has come to symbolize the future of economic reform, was reappointed Finance Minister in a partial agreement between President Boris N. Yeltsin and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DRESSER INDUSTRIES, Dallas, said its shareholders had approved its $900 million purchase of Baroid Corp., Houston.
KERR GROUP INC., Los Angeles, will close its Chicago home-canning and lid manufacturing plant and move the operations to Jackson, Tenn., by year's end.


Egypt Seizes 60 Militants
Police and security forces raided a string of fundamentalist strongholds here in southern Cairo today, arresting at least 60 suspects in the biggest security dragnet in more than a year.
In a gun battle after commandos stormed an apartment seeking fugitives, Interior Ministry officials said, a police officer and one militant were killed and one militant was wounded.


Fleet Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Burnett Picks Team For Asia Operations
Leo Burnett Worldwide, the overseas operation of the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, said yesterday that it had formed an Asia-Pacific regional management group of three senior executives to oversee offices in 13 countries.
Jeff Fergus, 44, the regional managing director of Burnett's Europe-Middle East region in London, will lead the group, effective April 15, as regional managing director of Asia-Pacific, based in Hong Kong.
He will succeed Malcolm Glenn, 51, who recently announced plans to retire in June.
Mr.
Fergus will report to James G. Oates, 50, the group president of Asia-Pacific, based in Chicago.


Teachers and Parents File Suit Over School Repairs
Frustrated by the telltale signs of decades of neglect in public schools, from leaky roofs to cracked walls and broken toilets, some teachers and parents did what any New Yorker might do -- they sued the landlord yesterday.
The suit filed yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan did not raise lofty constitutional issues but instead sought to compel the City Buildings Department to inspect and enforce its codes in public schools, issue violations and get the building's owner, the Board of Education, to make repairs.


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Frank Carpenter, 91, Expert on Fossil Insects
Dr.
Frank M. Carpenter, a Harvard University zoologist whose life's work was the study of insects, died on Tuesday at the Pine Knoll Nursing Home in Lexington, Mass.
He was 91 and lived in Lexington.
His wife, Ruth, said he had a heart attack.


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cuomo School Plan Seizes the Middle of the Road
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's plan for distributing $9.3 billion in aid to local schools walks the middle ground between urban and suburban districts, insuring that poorer districts receive a slightly larger share of the total while most wealthier districts lose nothing, statistics released today show.
The plan for the fiscal year beginning April 1 is in contrast to Mr.
Cuomo's school aid proposal last year, which called for drastically shifting state money away from relatively affluent districts to poorer ones, including New York City.
That proposal was rejected by the Legislature.


Inman Faced Scrutiny On Jailed Arms Dealer
While Bobby Ray Inman's confirmation as Defense Secretary by the Senate Armed Services Committee next week was considered a foregone conclusion, he faced potentially embarrassing questions about his work as a member of an outside board for a corrupt arms company.
His connection with the company, International Signal and Control, was reported by the press in 1991 and was raised again by several newspaper columnists in the last month.
Their columns so irked Mr.
Inman that he cited them on Tuesday as a major reason for his withdrawal.


Memo About Phar-Mor Destroyed, Report Says
A confidential May 31, 1991, memorandum that raised questions about apparent irregularities in the way Phar-Mor Inc. was conducting its business was ordered destroyed by Phar-Mor's chairman and chief executive, David Shapira, only days after it was drafted, a report released yesterday shows.
The report comes after a 10-month inquiry into the collapse of Phar-Mor, a discount drug company based in Youngstown, Ohio.
It was prepared for Judge William T. Bodoh of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Cleveland by the bank examiner, Jay Alix, head of a Jay Alix Associates in Southfield, Mich.


Lamson &amp; Sessions Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


TALKING WITH: Bernice King; Shaping Her Own Dream
A FEW days before the nation celebrated her father's life Monday, Bernice King was talking about coming to terms with his death.
"I was 16, with our church youth group in the north Georgia mountains, and we had just finished watching, 'Montgomery to Memphis,' a documentary on the civil rights movement," said Miss King, 30, now a minister and law school graduate in Atlanta, and the youngest of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s four children.
"When they did the funeral portion, I broke out in tears and left the cabin and went out into the woods, crying and asking God, 'Why? Why? Why?' It was shortly after that time I decided I was through with the church and God."


Lam Research (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rosemary Glyde, 46, Violist and Composer
Rosemary Glyde, a violist who performed frequently as a recitalist and was a founder and president of the New York Viola Society, died on Tuesday at the Northern Westchester Medical Center in Mount Kisco.
She was 46 and lived in Golden's Bridge, N.Y.
The cause was cancer, said Joan Ryan, her publicity agent.


Call the Government On Winter Depression
To the Editor:
At a press briefing sponsored by the National Instutite of Mental Health's D/ART campaign (for depression awareness, recognition and treatment), Norman Rosenthal, a seasonal affective disorder researcher and expert, reported that 35 million Americans suffer from some form of winter depression, an undue sensitivity to shortage of daylight.


Designed by Women, Made for Everyone
IN 1981, Nancy Perkins of Chicago helped design the case for the Diehard Incredicell car battery (below) for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
In the late 1950's, Suzanne Vanderbilt was one of the first women to design car interiors (like the one at right) -- but never the dashboards -- for General Motors.
And in 1987, Hedda Beese, the owner of Design Drei, a company in Hanover, Germany, created a sleek, minimalist watering-can prototype that reflected her ability to meld technology with style.
These women and 20 other female industrial designers are the focus of "Goddess in the Details: Product Design by Women," an exhibition at the Pratt Manhattan Gallery, at 295 Lafayette Street (Houston Street) in Manhattan.


North Korea Buying Old Russian Subs
North Korea has quietly begun purchasing 40 aging attack submarines from Russia's Pacific Fleet through a small Japanese trading company, according to Japanese, South Korean and American officials tracking the movements of the subs through the North Pacific.
Military and intelligence experts have offered conflicting explanations for why North Korea would want leftover hulks of the Russian Navy.
Some experts raised the possibility that North Korea could try to restore the submarines to bolster its fleet, or cannibalize them for spare parts; Russian officials insist that the vessels are being sold to the Communist Government of President Kim Il Sung solely for use as scrap metal.


Let's Take the Crime Out of the Drugs
To the Editor:
In "New Careers for Criminals" (Op-Ed, Jan. 4), Senator Arlen Specter emphasizes the pressing need to rehabilitate first-time and second-time offenders before they become career criminals, especially since most of their offenses are drug-related.
However, he fails to mention the most urgent aspect of addressing drug-related crimes: We must somehow figure out how to decriminalize the entire business of drugs, since interdiction and prosecution have been a colossal waste of money, effort and creative energy.


Books of The Times; A Toast to Love and a Literary Family
The Partisan  By Benjamin Cheever 261 pages. Atheneum/Macmillan. $21.
The plot is hard to take seriously in Benjamin Cheever's engagingly funny new novel, "The Partisan," even as satirical comedy.
The narrator, Nelson (after Viscount Horatio) Ballard, is a New York University student on summer vacation working for the Westchester Commons, "a weekly giveaway, a shopper, a book of advertisements."


Student, 18, Killed In Shooting on Bus
An after-school confrontation between students from rival high schools aboard a city bus in the Bronx ended yesterday in the fatal shooting of one of the students, the police said.
The gunman apparently missed his intended victim but hit another youth, an 18-year-old who attended Harry S. Truman High School, officials said.
The police withheld his name until his family could be notified.


Torkham Journal; On the Khyber Road, the Afghans Shall Not Pass
"It breaks our heart," the Pakistani Army captain said. "They're our own people."
But he and the major in charge, watched by the Khyber Rifles' regimental commander from a discreet distance, continued to urge their men to push back through the gate into Afghanistan the swarms of refugees, jostling, ducking and dodging as they sought safety here from the new wave of warfare that broke out in Kabul, the Afghan capital, on Jan. 1.


Teen-Agers and Pregnancy
To The Home Section:
It is one thing to stop discriminating against teen-agers who become pregnant and to provide services for them and their babies.
It is quite another to regard them, by virtue of their pregnancies and not other leadership qualities, as role models.
This crucial distinction never came across in your article "Pregnant Teen-Agers Are Outcasts No Longer" (Dec. 2).
We know from our daily contact with pregnant teen-agers that most became pregnant accidentally, not because they emulated any role model.
Rates of sexual activity among teen-agers in many European nations are comparable to our own.
But the proportion of teen-agers getting pregnant is a tiny fraction of what we see here.
Something in those countries is making a very significant difference, or rather, a number of somethings.


Here Sheep Count, Day and Night
THE cast-iron doorstop is in the shape of a ram.
The hooked wool seat pads on the dining room chairs depict woolly sheep.
There are fleecy sheepskins over the sofa, and a brochure on the desk touts "Herbal Moth Repellents."
The publications around the house include Sheep!
Magazine and National Lamb and Wool Grower.
And most of the door frames of the 18th-century farmhouse near Milan (pronounced MY-len), about 100 miles north of Manhattan in Dutchess County, New York, are decorated with an array of best-of-show ribbons.


Frozen Out of Fuel, Utilities Impose Scattered Blackouts
In an extraordinary emergency action, electric companies cut service to millions of people through all of New Jersey and southward as far as Virginia for up to an hour yesterday because cold weather had created high demand for power while making it impossible for some generating stations to obtain fuel.
In Washington, the Federal Government sent nonessential employees home at 3 P.M. so building thermostats could be turned down and told them to stay home today too.
Essential workers were told to plan to wear their overcoats in the office.
The Governor of Pennsylvania declared a state of emergency at noon yesterday and sent state employees home; a spokesman for Philadelphia Electric said that by mid-afternoon most businesses in that city were closed.
In New Jersey, state workers were sent home an hour early.


A Region of Crystal Beauty, or Weariness, or Fear
Off the frozen banks of the Hudson, a few hardy ferries slogged through the ice that cluttered the Manhattan shoreline like thousands of fractured panes of milky glass swept eastward by some gigantic broom.
The ice parted, churned softly in the wake, then regrouped in conspiracy with the cold, sealing itself over the thin channel of greenish water.
This was New York at 2 below, 500 feet above.
At this height, from a helicopter sweeping over the city like a whimsical angel, the ice-locked city looked almost pastoral.
The mansions of Riverdale peeked through a latticework of bare trees.
A solitary figure walked his dogs along Orchard Beach.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The President; Clinton Visits Quake Area And Feels the Earth Rumble
President Clinton rode out a strong aftershock here today and pronounced the damage from Monday's earthquake "amazing." He promised "unusual and unprecedented" steps to help the region recover after Gov.
Pete Wilson told him the disaster might be one of the most expensive in American history.
Gazing at a collapsed section of the Simi Valley Freeway, a few miles from the epicenter of the earthquake, the President said, "There's a difference in seeing this, actually standing here and looking at it."


Integra Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


If the Shoe Fits, Sell It (and Another Pair); With Brannock Device and Order Book, Foot Soldier of Footwear Stays on the Move
It grates on him.
Here he sells people something that they wear every day and yet they usually don't really know their size and, anyway, there is no right size since every make and style are different.
No matter how hard he toils to insure an ideal fit, too many intemperate people belittle him.
He's just a clerk.
He's a nobody.
He's the bottom of the pit.
He's a shoe salesman.


First of America Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Houghton Mifflin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
DAVID N. DINKINS took a lot of heat during his mayoralty from critics who said that his support for Israel sprang out of his concern for the "Jewish vote."
So when he spoke at a reception on Tuesday commemorating the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday at the East Side apartment of Colette Avital, the Consul General of Israel, he seized the opportunity to reaffirm his support for Israel, even though he no longer needs to court any block of voters.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Victims; The Unthinkable Occurs: Homelessness
Elizabeth Thomas has watched the homeless walk the streets of this city, carrying everything they own in a plastic bag.
Never did she think she would be among them.
But before dawn on Monday the ground shook beneath the building she called home.
Cracks filled the walls of her apartment in Tarzana, five miles south of the Northridge area of the San Fernando Valley, where the quake was centered.
Her building slid off its foundation.
And she knew that she and her four children could no longer stay there.


A Region of Crystal Beauty, or Weariness, or Fear; Another Day at the Beach
In Coney Island yesterday, summer seemed unimaginable.
The sea breeze stung like a million needles, and the howls of the guard dogs around the moribund rides were the only sound.
The deserted roller coaster, the Cyclone, hovered like an outsize Brontosaurus skeleton.
On 10th Avenue, a car was parked with the motor running.
Inside, a couple were generating enough heat to stay warm on colder days than this.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.97
3.56
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.99
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.15
3.11
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.23
5.21
6.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.29
6.26
7.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.23
8.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.52
6.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Crown Crafts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Signet Banking Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Long Bonds Down on Profit Taking
Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with the longer maturities down on profit taking after Tuesday's price gains and a concern over when the Federal Reserve might raise short-term interest rates.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond dropped three-eighths of a point, to 9914/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 6.29 percent, from 6.26 percent on Tuesday.
Short-term rates were slightly mixed, with the three-month bill rate at 2.96 percent and a six-month bill at 3.10 percent, down 1 and 2 basis points, respectively.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percent.


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carpenter Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Howard S. Browne; Broker, 89
Howard S. Browne, a New York investment broker and founding partner in the securities firm of Tweedy Browne Company, died on Sunday at his home in Morristown, N.J.
He was 89.
He had a brief illness, his family said.


Colonial Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE EARTHQUAKE: Why Buildings Collapsed; Quake Revealed Flaws in 'Safe' Structures' Design
The earthquake that battered this city on Monday inflicted heavy damage on a small number of modern, wood-frame apartment buildings that were supposed to be able to withstand moderate shaking, officials said today.
The Northridge Meadows Apartments, where 16 people died, was just this kind of building.
It stood near the center of the earthquake, and its top two floors fell through the first floor.


WHERE TO FIND IT
WHEN people ask Alex Shahgholi what he does for a living, he can show them a videotape of his daughter Tina's third-birthday party.
Mr.
Shahgholi's video-photo album, compiled by his company, International Video Services, features family slides of Tina punctuated by special effects and a soundtrack.
For years, videotape and film editing companies like Mr.
Shahgholi's dealt mainly with professional clients in television and advertising.
But as the use of videocassette recorders, camcorders and other home-video tools has increased, more nonprofessionals are requesting the services of studios to compile and edit home videos, transfer vintage 8-millimeter movies to videotape and create video-photo albums.


Giuliani Plans to Find Jobs for People on Welfare


No Bother, No Worries, But Still No Rings
It bothers Jim Kelly.
It bothers him in ways that do not always show and that he does not always articulate.
But in the week he is preparing to face the symbol of unsurpassed Super Bowl success, the Buffalo quarterback has to deal with the memory of Super Bowl failure.


Market Place; Bracing for Northwest Air's Issue
Watching the frequent surges and drops in airline fortunes is enough to give even the most limber investor neck cramps.
So, a restraining collar may be appropriate while considering the bid by Northwest Airlines to go public again.
Just months after narrowly averting a bankruptcy filing, the airline said on Tuesday that it wanted to raise $460 million through a stock offering, its first trip to the markets since it was taken private in a $3.6 billion buyout in 1989.


Review/Music; A Pianist Whose Intense Subjectivity Turns Listeners Into Eavesdroppers
It wasn't until Radu Lupu played two encores in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night that this intriguing pianist's goals became clear.
In those two pieces -- a Brahms Intermezzo (Op. 118, No. 2) and a Mozart Fantasy (K. 397) -- every phrase was articulate and refined; the pianissimos had a tactile presence.
The runs and cadenzas of the Mozart were as lyrically played as the Adagio theme with its premonitory chromatic structure.
Brahms's expressive lines and autumnal harmonies pulled at the ear.
It felt as if the audience was eavesdropping on Mr.
Lupu's private fantasies.
At his best, Mr.
Lupu, a Romanian who first attracted attention when he won the 1969 Leeds Piano Competition, is capable of this kind of nocturnal yet crisp playing.
He doesn't really seem to care if anybody is listening; he is playing as if for himself, giving the music an unusual immediacy.
Mr.
Lupu's stage persona reinforces the impression of solitude.
He strides deliberately on stage, sits down at a straight-backed chair and gets down to work as if there were nobody else in the room.
There is no showmanship, no courtship of the audience, no display.


A Salute to Black Women 'Who Made a Difference'


Whitman and Cuomo Seek to Cut Different Taxes for Same Reasons
In trying to make their states better places to do business, Mario M. Cuomo, the long-time Governor of New York, and Christine Todd Whitman, the new Governor of New Jersey, may be talking the same talk but they're not walking the same walk.
While the rhetoric from both governors is remarkably similar, New York and New Jersey are emerging as tests of two strikingly different approaches to stimulating economic growth.
With the Northeast just beginning to shake off a long and painful recession, Governor Whitman is placing her bets on sharp cuts in personal income taxes.
By contrast, Governor Cuomo is pursuing his plan to ease business taxes directly. 'An Important Factor'
"There is growing evidence that higher state and local taxes are an important factor in discouraging business," said James R. Hines, a professor of public policy at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.
But the jury is still out, Mr.
Hines added, on "whether personal or business taxes have a more powerful effect."


Mr. Cuomo's Election-Year Budget
All government budgets are political documents, and election-year budgets even more so.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo's plan for the coming year in New York State was clearly -- critics say cynically -- written with an eye on the campaign.
In its optimism, therefore, it is a far cry from the sharp cutbacks of recent recession years.
Inspired by a glimmer of recovery in New York's economy and his newly declared hunger for a fourth term, Mr.
Cuomo has sprinkled his proposals with small tax cuts and modest hikes in spending -- a lot of things to please a lot of New Yorkers.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Wild Geraniums
Q.
I've heard that the wild geranium is recommended for naturalizing.
Is this the same flower used in window boxes?
And do you agree with this use? -- Anne Rosenzweig, Harrisburg, Pa.


Man Is Killed as 2 Are Wounded
One man was killed and two others were in stable condition after a shooting at a cab-leasing business in an Upper East Side apartment building yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The three men and a suspect were "observed in some type of dispute prior to the shooting," said Sgt.
Thomas Moroney.
The police were still looking for the suspect last night.


THE EARTHQUAKE: The Work Force; 2 Days After Quake, a Taste of Traffic to Come
Los Angeles went back to work today, and the city's businesses concentrated on cleaning and coping.
Their employees, reporting to the job in large numbers for the first time since the Monday morning earthquake, created some of the worst traffic tie-ups in recent memory.
Offices and plants close to the quake's epicenter in the San Fernando Valley sustained the worst damage, and many businesses there remained closed because they were uninhabitable or because collapsed freeways prevented employees from coming in.


How to Achieve Economies in City Services
To the Editor:
We support New York's efforts to reduce city service costs by opening them to competition with for-profit and not-for-profit service providers as you report Jan. 9.
However, administering and monitoring existing contracts can also save money.


Japan's Chief Says U.S. Economists Oppose Trade Targets
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan, in a reply to an open letter from American economists, has reiterated his opposition to setting targets for opening Japan's markets.
"I was very gratified and encouraged to note in your open letter that your opposition to managed trade coincides with our views," the Prime Minister wrote in his letter, dated Dec. 27.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


House Proud
A TANNED woman backs away, hands put out to stop, as gently as a Bermudian traffic cop's, but alarm is closing in on her face.
Seated on steps, a man with his eyes closed opens his mouth to speak.
A young girl, head bowed, stands caught, before them, like a breath in the throat.
It is the pause between a child's excuses and the parents' rebuke, when the great secret lesson of adolescence begins: you may be right; they may be wrong.
The scene is a photograph, "The Conversation," by Tina Barney.
Across the room, a bare-torsoed boy in makeup and jewelry leans casually across the brown back of a friend, looking frankly into the camera, growing up less important than coming out: "Jimmy Paulette and Taboo! in the Bathroom, N.Y.C." by Nan Goldin, also a color photograph.


Electric Fields
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 6 news article about concern on Long Island over possible health risks of exposure to electromagnetic fields mentions in only the briefest terms the studies of two Swedish epidemiologists.
The studies of Maria Feychting and Anders Ahlbom show a fourfold increase in the risk of leukemia among children who live near power lines.


A Japanese Star of the 80's Implodes
The Hanwa Company, a once-unknown Japanese steel-trading house that became a high-flying financial speculator, came crashing to earth today when it announced that it would report more than $1 billion in securities losses and that its aggressive president was resigning.
Given Hanwa's once-breathtaking forays into the stock, bond and foreign currency markets, and unrepentant attitude even after Japanese markets began to crash four years ago, today's announcement was regarded as a jarring symbol that those days of excess were past.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with the text of the Iran-contra report misidentified a man shown with President Bush as he defended his pardon of Caspar W. Weinberger.
The man, fourth from the left at the rear, was Ronald F. Lehman 2d, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, not John F. Lehman Jr., Secretary of the Navy.


President Is Named By Biogen
Biogen yesterday named as president and chief operating officer James R. Tobin, who left Baxter International Inc. in a surprise resignation last month.
Wall Street had long considered him a leading candidate to become Baxter's chief executive.
His appointment is the latest of several executive changes meant to prepare Biogen for the transition to an operating pharmaceuticals company.
Although it is one of just a handful of biotechnology companies that have become profitable, Biogen, which has $150 million a year in revenues, has in the past licensed out all its products and derived revenues from royalties, not sales.


Sybron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Norwest Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Prosecution Evidence, Bombing Defendant Finds an Alibi
It was the turn of the defense lawyers in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday to cross-examine a Government specialist on telephone records, and one of them found a way to use testimony introduced by the prosecution the day before to fashion a partial alibi for his client.
On Tuesday, Government prosecutors led an F.B.I. expert, Michael Patkus, through a lengthy examination of telephone records that showed numerous calls made among the addresses of three of the four defendants as well as many calls from their telephones to chemical companies, fertilizer supply companies and car rental agencies, all of which figure in the Government's reconstruction of the crime.


Comdisco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Justices Weigh States' Tactic Of Using Tax to Fight Drugs
A new state tactic in the war on drugs -- taxation -- received a critical examination in a Supreme Court argument today as the Justices questioned whether the Constitution permitted a state to levy a special tax on the same drugs it prosecuted someone for possessing.
The case, an unusual double-jeopardy one from Montana, potentially casts doubt on the laws of 27 states that both tax and prosecute people for the same act, possessing illegal drugs.
A Federal appeals court ruled last year that Montana's "dangerous drug tax" of $100 for every ounce of marijuana violated the constitutional protection against double jeopardy when assessed against someone who had already been prosecuted.


Haggar Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Compass Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hunt Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


CHRONICLE
It's not often that Senator DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, Democrat of New York, speaks for Senator ALFONSE M. D'AMATO, his Republican counterpart, but he took it upon himself Tuesday to account for the sling on Senator D'Amato's right arm.
"I'd like to explain my colleague's condition," Senator Moynihan said, speaking at a symposium on health care at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, at which the two senators appeared.
"I don't mean to cast any suspicion on his stability. He'd be perfectly capable of being Secretary of Defense as far as I'm concerned, but not knowing how to ski, he got into a skiing competition in Utah on behalf of a children's hospital. You can see the results on his right shoulder."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  BITTER COLD DISRUPTS POWER AND TRAVEL Record-breaking cold imposed an icy disorder on New York and the rest of the East Coast, from power shortages to disrupted school days, from frozen railroad track switches to scuttled dinner plans.
The temperature was 2 degrees below 0 in Central Park at 6 A.M., the lowest ever recorded for the date, and rose to 10 degrees later in the day, making it one of the coldest days in the last half-century.
A1.
Electric companies cut service to millions of people from New Jersey to Virginia for up to an hour because the cold weather had created a high demand for power.
B6.


A Region of Crystal Beauty, or Weariness, or Fear; Icy Mountain Rescue
The urgent calls from the state police went out to three villages in western New Jersey between 1:15 and 1:30 A.M. yesterday: Find snowmobiles to rescue dozens of motorists trapped in sub-zero temperatures on either side of an ice-encrusted hill on Interstate 78.
Within half an hour in the dead of night, fire chiefs and emergency management officials in the little towns had roused two dozen emergency workers from the warmth of their homes, including volunteer firemen, their friends, and ambulance squad members.
They rounded up six snowmobiles and four three-wheel all-terrain vehicles and dispatched them into the bitter cold to canvass the long lines of cars and trailer trucks that had been stuck, unable to climb the icy highway for hours on both sides of Jugtown Mountain.


Dispute Grows Over U.N.'s Troops in Bosnia
A bitter dispute between the United Nations Secretary General and the general commanding United Nations forces in the former Yugoslavia has drawn attention to the widening gulf between United Nations peacekeeping troops on the ground in Bosnia and the unwieldy bureaucracy that controls their mission.
A French Government official said today that Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali had expressed "outrage and anger" at meetings here last week over criticism from Gen.
Jean Cot, the French commander of the 26,000 United Nations soldiers in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia.


Meridian Bancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whitman's Tax Pledge: A Bold, Risky Surprise
In her first hours in office, Christine Todd Whitman has used a surprise announcement about a retroactive tax cut and two executive orders to build herself a political cushion against some of the blows that landed on her during the governor's race.
The Governor, who was inaugurated Tuesday, has also bought time for many of the ambitious goals she set for herself, including her pledge to cut the income tax by 30 percent in her first three years in office.


Man Charged Over Melee At a Mosque
A 29-year-old follower of the Nation of Islam was arrested yesterday and accused of taking part in a melee between New York City police officers and members of a Harlem mosque, the police said.
One official said that the arrest, the first stemming from a brawl in which eight officers were injured, was made based on information gathered without cooperation from mosque officials.
Investigators identified and located the suspect, Anthony Hollis, by tracing license plates from cars that were parked near the mosque on the day of the brawl, said a law-enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Mr.
Hollis, an unmarried draftsman, who police said lives in Valhalla, in Westchester County, was arrested yesterday afternoon at his workplace in Valhalla, said his lawyer, C. Vernon Mason.
A Cautious Response
The Jan. 9 incident at Muhammad's Mosque No. 7 became the first serious test of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's relationship with black residents, leading to testy exchanges between the new Mayor, who won just 5 percent of the black vote, and black leaders.
From the outset, Mr.
Giuliani insisted that an arrest should be made, that the officers were the only victims of the incident, and that race ought not to enter into the matter.


Mets Sign Shortstop And Free-Agent Pitcher
The Mets signed the former Boston Red Sox infielder LUIS RIVERA to a nonguaranteed major league contract yesterday, which was fitting, since Rivera is now the Mets' nonguaranteed starting shortstop.
Falling short in their quest for a front-line shortstop, the Mets have gone to a tandem system intended to find a veteran partner for the young incumbent shortstop, TIM BOGAR.
Rivera, 30, who was a free agent, is that partner.
The Mets say Bogar will have the opportunity to win the job outright in spring training.
But they expect Rivera to start two-thirds of their 162 games.
Rivera, once the Red Sox starter, was slowed by injuries last year and played in only 62 games.
He batted .208 with 7 runs batted in and 13 runs scored.
The one-year deal with the Mets is worth $425,000, plus $100,000 in performance bonuses.


Review/Theater; Kushner's Adaptation Of a French Classic
You could describe "The Illusion" as a new 20th-century comedy with a 17th-century accent.
But then you could also call it a new 17th-century comedy with a 20th-century accent.
Either way, the strange hybrid that opened last night at the Classic Stage Company will appeal primarily to collectors of theatrical oddities.
At the root of the enterprise is "L'Illusion Comique," a fanciful comedy written in 1636 by the French playwright Pierre Corneille, before such heroic tragedies as "The Cid" and "Horace" had secured his fame.
The very loose English adaptation was undertaken several years ago by one Tony Kushner, before "Angels in America" had assured his considerable celebrity.
If Corneille gets the short end, he is so rarely performed in English these days that charges of literary manhandling are probably beside the point.


Agent Points to Cultist as Attacker And Creates Rift in Defense Team
Despite repeated efforts by the defense to shake his testimony, a Federal agent today identified Livingston Fagan, a 34-year-old member of the Branch Davidian sect, as the man who shot him twice during a botched raid on the sect's compound last Feb. 28.
Tactics used in cross-examining the agent by one defense lawyer, Steven Rosen, created a schism in the defense team representing the 11 Branch Davidians charged with killing four Federal agents, prompting a motion by five of the lawyers to separate their clients from the group.


Rebels in Colombia Kidnap 2 U.S. Missionaries
Left-wing guerrillas have kidnapped two American Protestant pastors from their rural mission 50 miles southeast of here, apparently in protest against United States military aid to Colombia.
About 30 members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia broke into a ranch on Sunday and kidnapped the two pastors, Stephen Welsh and Timothy Van Dyke, who belong to the Florida-based New Tribes Mission.
Mr.
Welsh is from North Platte, Neb., and Mr.
Van Dyke from Towanda, Pa.


Topics of The Times; Immortalizing Dallas
The Chisholm Trail came to Fort Worth, not Dallas, but that doesn't faze Trammell Crow, a real estate developer who plans to adorn his hometown with a life-size bronze cattle drive -- 70 longhorns and three cowboys on 4.2 acres in the heart of downtown Dallas.
Too bad, say the project's detractors, that Mr.
Crow felt he had to invent a phony cowtown heritage when Dallas has so many other things and people just crying out to be immortalized.
With all that bronze, you could populate 4.2 acres with an impressive amount of civic statuary that really had something to do with Dallas.


Review/Music; Spotlight on Women As Composers of Yore
Feminism has made an interesting mark on the musical world.
On one hand there has been an effort to shine a spotlight on women who are composing now, of which there are many, some quite successful.
But there is a concurrent movement to show that female composers are by no means only a modern phenomenon.
The rediscovery in the mid-1980's of music by the 12th-century abbess Hildegarde of Bingen was a start in that direction, and in recent years, women who worked in the 17th century, most notably Barbara Strozzi, have slowly been drawn out of the shadows.
Christine Brandes, a soprano who specializes in early music, drew on some of this literature on Tuesday evening when she presented "Voices of Women" at the Drawing Center in SoHo.
The recital was part of the Music Before 1800 series, which has lately been expanding its activities beyond its headquarters at Corpus Christi Church in Morningside Heights.


A Cowboy Stamp That Wasn't Is Recalled
Persuaded that an eagerly awaited new stamp does not depict a dashing black rodeo star but his portly back-office brother, the Postal Service has taken the bull by the horns and ordered the stamp's entire press run -- 20 million sheets in all -- stopped, recalled and destroyed.
But the order -- the first in post office history -- came after at least one post office, in Oregon, had sold several of the stamps by mistake, postal officials said today.


Laclede Steel Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Samuel Steward, 84, A Writer About Stein
Samuel M. Steward, a writer who was a friend of Gertrude Stein, died on Dec. 31 in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 84 and lived in Berkeley.
The cause, reported in The San Francisco Chronicle, was chronic pulmonary disease.


Human Rights Activist Disappears in Cairo
To the Editor:
Last Dec. 10, Mansour Kikhia, former Libyan Foreign Minister and twice Libya's United Nations representative, disappeared while in Cairo for the annual meeting of the Arab Organization of Human Rights, of which he was a founder and director.
The evidence suggests he was abducted and is alive but detained in Libya.


Review/Fashion; Classically Couture
Back in the old days when Yves Saint Laurent's show closed each couture season here, the signals were easy to follow.
He presented his styles with such vigor and insight that he established the direction in which fashion was going.
The performance was just as polished this morning, but the direction can best be described as classic.
"Classic Saint Laurent," he agreed when he was asked for a comment after the show.


Rhinoceros Heads for Wide Open Spaces


Earnings Dip At Pfizer; Stock Dives
Battered by competition in drug prices and an unexpected slowing in buying by wholesalers, Pfizer Inc. reported disappointing fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, news that sent its stock reeling.
Pfizer shares dropped $5, to $62.875, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The report pushed down stock prices of other drug companies more modestly, amid concern that their earnings might also fall.
Merck &amp; Company was down 75 cents a share, to $35.875; Bristol-Myers Squibb lost 12.5 cents, to $58.75, and Glaxo Holdings fell 25 cents, to $20.125.


Legg Mason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Raymond Sabinsky, Violist, 80, Is Dead
Raymond Sabinsky, a violist in the New York Philharmonic for 40 years, died on Jan. 9 in San Francisco.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, said A. Ina Block, a friend.


QVC Weighs Revising Its Paramount Bid
Neither side appears ready to quit in the takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc.
Now, faced with Viacom Inc.'s improved rival offer, QVC Network Inc. is seriously considering altering its bid for Paramount, according to an executive close to the QVC camp.
But, this executive said, QVC's chairman, Barry Diller, was determined not to raise the overall value of its offer.


Special Counsel Picked by Reno
Attorney General Reno has settled on Robert B. Fiske Jr., a 63-year-old partner in the Wall Street law firm of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardwell and a former United States Attorney in Manhattan, to be the special counsel to investigate the Clintons' real estate investments in Arkansas, an Administration official said.


A Moscow Agency Joins Ad Federation
The American Advertising Federation has accepted its first corporate member from Russia, a Moscow agency called Aurora.
"This is their link to Western trends," Jeff Custer, a spokesman for the organization in Washington, said yesterday.
He added that Aurora executives sought membership after the agency sponsored a student advertising team from Moscow State University in the organization's National Student Advertising competition in 1993.
The first Russian member of the federation was a student chapter at the university.


Smith Corona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 1
Jan. 7
Jan. 15
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.4
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.3
2.9
Gasoline stocks
229.6
228.1
226.5
Distillate stocks
137.1
141.9
141.7
Crude imports, daily
5.9
6.4
6.4
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.5
1.7
Crude stocks
333.5
334.0
328.1
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
91.4
89.6
84.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Central Divisions Are Added to Baseball's Lineup
The major league owners, continuing their attempt to change the nature of how baseball is run, redrew another part of the game today.
They reached agreement with the players association on the realignment of the leagues from two divisions to three and the addition of an extra tier of playoffs.
Although the changes are guaranteed for only the coming season, the agreement is as historic as the new revenue-sharing plan hammered out between the large- and small-market clubs the night before.
For the first time, baseball, heretofore the professional sport with the narrowest, most discriminating playoff field, will allow its two leagues to increase the number of playoff teams from two to four and include baseball's first wild-card berth.


In South African Vote, Blacks Still Face a Battle
To the Editor:
"South African Election Is Campaign of Paradoxes" (news article, Jan. 9) states that there "is little suspense about the outcome" of the first nonracial South African elections.
Yet you note that the African National Congress's task of converting the extensive good will it enjoys into votes in the ballot box may be more difficult than anyone imagined.


No Flowers for Russians: Pair Make Do With Gold
No roses were tossed onto the ice tonight for Yekaterina Gordeyeva and Sergei Grinkov.
The few fans with the good fortune to be in the Brondby Arena already had used up all their flowers on a mediocre Danish skater dressed to resemble an electric cowboy.
But if ever a performance deserved a shower of bouquets, Gordeyeva's and Grinkov's freestyle program at the European championships was it.


How to Aid Los Angeles Quake Victims
Interaction, a coalition of more that 150 not-for-profit American humanitarian aid groups, has issued this list of agencies to which money may be sent to help earthquake victims in the Los Angeles area:
Adventist Development and Relief Agency, Los Angeles Earthquake Victims, P.O.
Box 4289, Silver Spring, Md. 20904.
Telephone: (800) 424-2372.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  NORTH KOREA BUYING SUBMARINES  North Korea has arranged to buy 40 Russian submarines through a Japanese company.
The news is unsettling North Korea's neighbors, though Russia says the submarines will be used for scrap metal.
A6


Law on Cuba Trade Starves the Babies
To the Editor:
I write you as president of the Cuban American Committee for Peace, which has a membership of more than 17,000 Cubans residing in the United States, South America, Spain and Canada.
All of us still have family in Cuba.


School Showcase Set for St. John's
Twenty of the best high school basketball players in the United States will play each other on April 3 in an East-West All-Star game at Alumni Hall on the St.
John's campus in Jamaica, Queens, the game's organizers announced yesterday.
It will be the first time that the 17-year-old event, known as the McDonald's All American High School Basketball Game, will be held in New York City.
The game will be broadcast by CBS.


In the Mutual Fund Industry, New Worries About Trading
Putnam Investments,, a Boston-based mutual funds group, suspended Donald V. Dougherty, a securities analyst, in late September in a move related to his buying private stock for his own account.
On Jan. 5, Mr.
Dougherty began a new job at Boston's Essex Investment Management, the concern that handles the portfolio of President Clinton, among others.
Joseph McNay, chairman of Essex, declined to comment.
Mr.
Dougherty said yesterday that Essex was aware of the suspension.


Journal; Tonya Trashed
Spud City: Those haunting words began to make me feel sorry for Tonya Harding.
Spud City is the mall food outlet where Miss Harding, already 19 and a top figure skater, sold potatoes each afternoon to scrape up cash for her rink fees the next morning.


Allen Not Only Endures, He Prevails
For four years Marcus Allen was locked away in football's version of a cryogenic chamber.
Al Davis, the Raiders' owner, put Allen in a deep freeze after Davis became upset with the running back over a contract dispute in 1989.
Allen, a Heisman Trophy winner at Southern Cal and 11th on the National Football League's career rushing list, was relegated to playing second fiddle and third-down back behind, first, Bo Jackson, and later, Eric Dickerson.
Allen's numbers took a nose dive.


Brinker International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Prudential Securities Case Gets Its First Public Hearing
The cost to Prudential Securities of settling the largest class action stemming from its limited partnership fraud scandal has dropped from $120 million to about $90 million, a lawyer in the case said today.
In a hearing in Federal District Court here on the fairness of the settlement involving the Prudential- Bache Energy Income partnerships, Edward Grossmann, the lead class-action lawyer in the case, said the total cost of the deal had dropped because a number of the 130,000 investors had decided not to participate.
Under the original settlement reached in October, the size of the final award would be reduced based on the percentage holdings of those investors.


Grounds May Exist To Remove Harding
The United States Figure Skating Association may have grounds to remove Tonya Harding from the Olympic team, even though she has not been charged in the attack on Nancy Kerrigan, legal experts said yesterday.
A decision to remove Harding would be a civil or administrative matter, and the burden of proof for the skating association would be less than in a criminal case, the experts said.
In a criminal case, guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Generally, in a civil matter, the burden of proof is a preponderance of evidence that some misdeed has occurred.


New Publishers Selected For Fortune and Money
Time Inc. named new publishers for Fortune and Money yesterday to replace publishers who are retiring.
Stuart Arnold, advertising sales director of Fortune since 1991, was named publisher of Fortune, replacing James B. Hayes.
And Betsy Martin, associate publisher and advertising sales director of Money, was named publisher of Money, replacing William S. Myers.


M.G. Guerreiro, 69, Family Court Judge In New York, Is Dead
Manuel Gomez Guerreiro, a retired judge of the Family Court of New York City, died on Tuesday at Clinica Las Americas in San Juan, P.R.
He was 69 and had homes in San Juan, Middletown, N.Y., and Hudson, N.Y.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Reno Is Said to Choose New Yorker as Counsel
Attorney General Janet Reno has settled on Robert B. Fiske Jr., a New York lawyer and a Republican, to be the special counsel who will investigate the Arkansas real estate investments of President Clinton, a senior Administration official said today.
Ms.
Reno and other senior Justice Department officials were described today as completing their work on the appointment and going through a final background check on the selection before making the announcement.


Central &amp; South West Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington Mutual Savings Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Microsoft Has 22% Rise In Earnings
The Microsoft Corporation reported today that it had a 22 percent gain in fiscal second-quarter earnings, which it attributed to strong sales of Microsoft Office, its "suite" of programs including word processing, data base, spreadsheet and graphics.
The earnings met or exceeded most analysts' estimates.


Nunn Spurned A Clinton Offer Of Defense Job
The White House asked Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia last week if he would take the job of Defense Secretary, but he refused, Administration officials said today.
While Bobby Ray Inman, who was nominated for the post by the President a month ago, formally withdrew his nomination on Tuesday, White House officials said they were given an inkling of his decision last week.


Restaurants
If Dix et Sept were a person, it would be your most amiable friend.
It would be the comfortable kind with no edge and few ambitions.
It would be the person you can drop in on when you're feeling blue, the person who somehow always manages to make you feel better.


After Arrest, Police Seek 2 Others in Mosque Clash
A day after making an arrest in the confrontation at a Harlem mosque, police officials yesterday identified two other suspects being sought in the clash that injured eight officers.
The officials said security guards at the Nation of Islam mosque on Fifth Avenue at 125th Street may have been tipped off to the arrival of the police, possibly by the same caller who phoned in the bogus robbery report that sent officers there on Jan. 9.


First Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why Condoms Decision Needs to Be Appealed; To My Daughters
To the Editor:
"Parental Veto in New York" (editorial, Jan. 10) states that the Board of Education has "little choice but to allow a parental 'opt-out' " because a "court ruling upholds the right of parents to say no."


The Fed's Not Broken, So Don't Fix It
To the Editor:
It is ironic that the Federal Reserve System, having maintained a stable price level, should come under essentially political attacks.


Cuomo Pays Visit to Manhattan Aerospace Company


Davis and Birden: Chiefs' Great Unknowns
The moment quarterback Joe Montana came to Kansas City in a trade with San Francisco last April, the lives of J. J. Birden and Willie Davis changed -- for better and worse.
After playing in relative obscurity in a run first, second and always offense the previous season, Birden and Davis were elevated to prime-time players in the Chiefs' new multiple offense, installed this season just for Montana.


Harris Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COUNSEL GRANTED A BROAD MANDATE IN CLINTON INQUIRY
The special prosecutor chosen to investigate President Clinton's Arkansas land dealings said today that he planned a broad inquiry that would include questioning the President and his wife, Hillary, under oath and an examination of any possible links to the suicide of a senior White House aide.
The prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., is a New York lawyer and former Republican United States Attorney in Manhattan.
Speaking with reporters today after Attorney General Janet Reno announced the selection, he said Ms.
Reno had given him a wide grant of authority to conduct "a thorough, complete and impartial" criminal investigation.


LEADING REFORMER RESIGNS AS YELTSIN PICKS NEW CABINET
Russia's Finance Minister, who has come to represent Moscow's commitment to rapid economic reform, announced tonight that he was quitting the Government after President Boris N. Yeltsin named a new Cabinet that is expected to put higher priority on protecting industrial jobs than in fighting inflation.
After four days of intense negotiations and financial panic that sent the ruble to new lows, Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, announced the new Cabinet and declared, "the period of market romanticism is now over."


Loral Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At Center Of Storm With Cars In Tow
Through a blur of 12-and 16-hour days this week, Dave Sandstrom has witnessed just about every variation of what arctic air and ice can do to the internal combustion engine and the human spirit.
He's seen people deliriously grateful to see him and his green-and-white tow-truck, and others so angry or cold that they'll yell even at their would-be savior.
He's jump-started an array of batteries, fixed flats while the owner cowered indoors, opened and closed ice-fused door locks, and learned to diagnose a frozen fuel line with the first sputtering cough of the engine.


Midlantic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Children
'Rain or Shine'
The Paper Bag Players  The Kaye Playhouse  68th Street (between Park and Lexington Avenues)  (212) 772-4448  Recommended ages: 4 to 9  Through March 6
When Donald Ashwander of the Paper Bag Players starts playing his electric harpsichord at the beginning of the show, the audience automatically starts giggling (maybe it's Mr. Ashwander's white bucks).
Then all the children clap and perch themselves at the edge of their seats, where they remain for the entire show.


Gonaives Journal; The Bogeyman's Back, Striking Fear Into Haitians
Michel Francois, the local leader of a far-right group that is Haiti's fastest growing political movement, sat in a rocking chair in the backyard of his home here, regaling two young women with war stories, when a foreign visitor interrupted.
A man so feared that neighbors showing the way to his home hesitated to touch the iron gate outside, worried about setting off tear-gas bombs, Mr.
Francois was asked if, as rumored, he had been a member of the Tontons Macoute, the private militia of the former Duvalier family dictatorship.


Lee Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Sea of Wealth, Homeless Defy the Cold
In the bitter cold of night, the lights in the windows of Leggiadro, a boutique on the fancy upper reaches of Madison Avenue, cast their glow on $40 tights, cashmere leggings and on Fred Nardella, a man wrapped in a green Army surplus blanket who was trying to get some sleep in a cardboard box.
Mr.
Nardella motioned to a cardboard box and a tangle of blankets next to him in the doorway of Suzanne's Millinery.
"That's a guy I know," he said.
And then he pointed down Madison Avenue.
"There's two more down there and two more on the other side." Silk Ties Amid Despair
With the deep-freeze across the East having made venturing outside painful, and even driven many homeless people who usually live on the streets into shelters, Mr.
Nardella and others asleep along Madison Avenue just after midnight Thursday morning were a remarkable sight.


Georgia Gulf Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Icon Without Honor in Russia


Canwest Global reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Victims of China's Birth-Control Policy Are Entitled to Asylum, a U.S. Judge Says
A Federal judge ruled today that victims of China's coercive population control policies were eligible for asylum in the United States, despite the Clinton Administration's efforts to expel some of them.
The case involved a passenger on the Golden Venture, a vessel that ran aground on a sand bar in New York Harbor on June 6.
The 28-year-old passenger, Guo Chundi (pronounced Gwo JUN-dee), said he had fled China because he and his wife were resisting sterilization orders.
He also said they feared persecution because of their opposition to China's policy limiting them to only one child.


At the Bar; After a beer commercial lassos lawyers, a lawyer replies in kind.
There was much ire among lawyers last summer when the Miller Brewing Company tried to prove that bashing one kind of bar could produce business at another.
At issue was a beer advertisement depicting "the big lawyer roundup." In it, a porcine man in a three-piece suit, identified as a divorce lawyer who has profited handsomely from human misery, is lassoed at a rodeo.
Lawyers of all pin-stripes fumed.
A few went further, putting together a piecemeal and rather ineffective boycott.
The head of the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers, Arthur Balbirer of Westport, Conn., complained to Warren H. Dunn of the Miller Brewing Company.
Mr.
Balbirer wrote, "Miller can certainly come up with advertising that, like its beer, displays great taste while leaving the matrimonial bar less filled with animosity toward your company."


Seventeen's New Editor
Caroline E. Miller, editor in chief of Lear's, has been named editor of Seventeen magazine, K-III Magazines announced yesterday.
She replaces Midge Richardson, who was named editor at large of K-III Magazines in September after 18 years as editor of Seventeen.
Ms.
Miller, 41, was executive editor of Variety from 1988 until 1992, when she went to Lear's.
She has also held a variety of senior positions at New York Newsday.
Seventeen is the leader among teen-age publications in advertising pages and circulation.
Its ad pages were up 7 percent last year, and its circulation, 1.9 million, was up 1 percent.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Named Ted Thompson director of pro personnel and John Schneider assistant to the director of pro personnel.


In Consolidation, Cortines Gives New Aide Broad Powers
Carrying out a sweeping bureaucratic consolidation, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday placed control of the city's high schools, special education programs and all other centrally controlled instructional programs under a single Board of Education executive and appointed a Queens district superintendent to the job.
Mr.
Cortines named Dr.
Beverly L. Hall, the superintendent of Brooklyn's community School District 27, to the newly created post of chief executive for instructional and student support services.
It is his first senior appointment since he assumed the Chancellorship in September.


Books of The Times; A Marital Split Amid French Chic
Separation  By Dan Franck  Translated by Jon Rothschild. 227 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
Dan Franck's novel "Separation" was first published in France in 1991 to enormous critical and popular acclaim, winning the prestigious Prix Renaudot and selling some 350,000 copies, a record that can be compared with that of Marguerite Duras's huge 1985 best seller, "The Lover."


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dashing Toward Olympics at 90 Miles an Hour
From the top of old Canada Olympic Park, a mountain at the foothills of the Rockies, strange cries were heard this morning from people in weird garb.
In the brittle, blue-sky cold, these people wore black rubberized suits, sneakers and red helmets like race-car drivers.
There were five teams of them, four at a time, and they surrounded a sled, sometimes red, sometimes black -- one to a team -- that was shaped more like a torpedo than Rosebud.
And what they shouted, among other things, were: "Woo!" "Dig in, dig in!" and "C'mon, baby!"
These were the five team finalists for the three spots that compose the four-man United States bobsled entries at the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, next month.


Apple's Earnings Plungs as Revenues Rise
In the midst of a delicate product transition involving its decade-old Macintosh line of computers, Apple Computer said today that its revenues increased 23 percent for the first quarter, but earnings fell 75 percent.
After a big revamping in July, Apple has been struggling.
The company, based in Cupertino, Calif., has had difficulty differentiating its computers from the Intel-based systems that run Windows software developed by Microsoft.
Apple plans to introduce new versions of its Macintosh products in March, based on a new microprocessor chip called the Power PC, as part of an alliance with the International Business Machines Corporation and Motorola Inc.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Michael O'Rourke, executive vice president and general manager at the Portland, Ore., office of Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander, was promoted to president, succeeding Bill Borders, who continues as director of creative services.
Also, Mike Jaglois, senior vice president and general manager of the Seattle office, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president. *
Kenneth G. Trantowski was named to the new position of executive vice president at Porter/Novelli, Chicago.
He previously held a similar position at Burson-Marsteller, Chicago. *
Dan Dawson was named to the new position of marketing director at Aka Communications Inc., Los Angeles.
He previously held a similar post at Frontiers Newsmagazine, Los Angeles.


TV Weekend; Alan Bates, Cast Adrift On the Atlantic's 2 Sides
Alan Bates as a playwright in the throes of alcoholic angst is entertaining company for almost an hour as he suffers indignities and causes havoc on two continents.
The problem is that Simon Gray's play "Unnatural Pursuits" lasts for two and a half hours, veering crazily as though there were a drunk in the driver's seat as well as in the passenger's seat.
Mr.
Bates, attached to cigarette and whisky glass, plays Hamish Partt (invariably mispronounced Pratt), a man obsessed with perfecting Act I, Scene 2 of his new play (also titled "Unnatural Pursuits") in the face of a universe of people with nothing better to do than drive him crazy, not that he isn't getting there well enough on his own.
From the opening in the off West End, play and creator career along to Los Angeles, Dallas, New York and finally back to London.


Whitman Debating Sale Of the Sports Authority
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman opened the door today to selling off the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, owner of the Byrne Arena and Giants Stadium among other things, as a way of reducing the state's liability for debt and curbing the power of one of the state's most far-reaching independent authorities.
She added that her administration had already begun preliminary talks with potential buyers.


Art in Review
Jennifer Bartlett
Paula Cooper Gallery  149 Wooster Street, at Houston Street  SoHo  Through Jan. 29
Jennifer Bartlett has gone back to basics, and to the time before "Rhapsody," her magnum opus, put her on the art map.
Having spent much of the last 15 years executing elaborate works on canvas and sometimes in sculpture, she has returned to the idiosyncratic painting surface on which she established her reputation: the 12-inch-square white-enameled steel plates silk-screened with a pale gray quarter-inch grid that she fills with little dots of color.
As with Bartlett's early plate paintings, the colors are the primaries and the designs are abstract.
As with all her work, a system, or at least a rigorously followed program, is implied.


Advest Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crowds Besiege U.S. Agency for Earthquake Aid
An angry, tearful crowd pushed against the doors of a Federal disaster-relief center today as it was opening at the epicenter of Monday's earthquake.
Thousands more ringed the block on a day when an urgent need for food, water and shelter clashed with bureaucratic procedures.
The Federal Emergency Management had just opened the center in Northridge at 1 P.M. when 15 people without appointments shoved their way in for interviews.
Outside, about 4,000 other applicants for assistance were growing increasingly restless.


Becton, Dickinson reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; What to Do About Jordan And Baseball
CAN we turn away from America's favorite sport, figure skating, for a few minutes and give a little public-service scrutiny to the downtrodden old pastime of baseball?
This is a brief window of opportunity before Montana-mania strikes with full force and before some of us hit the dawn patrol to watch Nancy Kerrigan practice, eat breakfast and brush her teeth over in Norway and others of us hit the legal trail to watch Tonya Harding struggle to hold her place on the Olympic team.
We are all going to be terribly, terribly busy.
Let's straighten out baseball while we can.


Finding Jobs for Welfare Clients
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani announced a plan this week to pay a commercial company to find jobs for welfare recipients in New York City.
The plan, which had been rejected by the Dinkins administration, is a promising approach to boosting at least a few hundred people off the welfare rolls, with little risk of becoming a costly failure.
Under the contract the city will pay America Works, a New York corporation formed for this purpose, most of its $5,300 fee for placing a welfare recipient in private sector work for four months.
The city will pay the balance only if the recipient keeps the job for at least seven months.
Paying the full fee only for welfare recipients who succeed in holding permanent jobs distinguishes the program from other welfare-to-work experiments.


Quaker Oats Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan's Premier Presses Coalition To Back Electoral System Reform
The six-month-old Government of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa struggled today to put down a rebellion in the Socialist Party, the largest in his ruling coalition, that threatened to scuttle his effort to pass a restructuring of Japan's electoral system and to tighten restrictions on political donations.
But by this morning, members of Mr.
Hosokawa's coalition seemed increasingly confident that they could contain the revolt among the Socialists and said the bills might squeak by later today by a handful of votes when the upper house of Parliament votes on them.
Even some leaders of the Liberal Democratic Party, which was ousted from power last year and opposes the reform bills, appeared resigned today to their passage in some form.


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Corrections
A sports article and a picture caption in some editions yesterday about the Nets' game against Minnesota misidentified the category in which Kenny Anderson of the Nets approached a career total of 1,000.
He had 9 assists, not rebounds, leaving him 1 assist short of 1,000.


Greece Finds Itself Obsessed By Unmentionable Neighbor
As Greece contemplates the morass of the Balkans to the north with some trepidation, it has sunk into a swamp of its own: the name of the problem is -- or, depending on the viewpoint, is not -- Macedonia.
And, like any swamp, it is clinging messily, even as the new Socialist Government seeks prestige and respect from its current presidency of the European Union.
Ever since the breakup of Yugoslavia, Greece has been fighting and gradually losing the battle to prevent the world from recognizing the former Communist wedge of land on its northern border by the name it has chosen for itself -- Macedonia.


Commerce Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP. (N)
Unusually strong trading revenues led Bankers Trust New York Corporation to report profits for the fourth quarter that were sharply higher than expected.
The bank earned $270 million for the quarter, an increase of 110 percent from the comparable period a year ago.
That represents $3.26 a share, much higher than the $2.49 a share that analysts had expected.


Seles Attacker to Face a New Trial
The man who stabbed MONICA SELES is likely to go on trial again but no date for the proceedings has been set, judicial sources in Hamburg, Germany, said yesterday.
GUNTER PARCHE, an unemployed lathe operator from eastern Germany, was given a two-year suspended sentence in October for stabbing Seles in the back during a tournament in April.
The former No. 1 female tennis player in the world has not played since.
Parche spent six months in jail before the verdict.
The state prosecutor appealed the mild sentence immediately after the verdict.


Chittenden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Stage, and Off
Scott Ellis Joins the Nederlanders
Following in the footsteps of its chief competitors, the Nederlander Organization, owner of nine Broadway theaters, has cut a deal with the director Scott Ellis to serve as a developer of new projects.
Mr.
Ellis, who is 36, is the director of "She Loves Me," the musical revival now at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, and the coming revival of William Inge's "Picnic" at the Roundabout.
Similar to the agreements between Jujamcyn Theaters and Jerry Zaks, and the Shubert Organization with James Lapine, the deal, which is nonexclusive, pays Mr.
Ellis a stipend and provides him with office space.
The Nederlanders will also support Mr.
Ellis's other projects and his relationship with the Roundabout, which is where "She Loves Me" began.
They have agreed to contribute an undetermined amount to the production of "Picnic," for instance, which Mr.
Ellis said he would use to commission original music and to realize Tony Walton's set design.
Mr.
Ellis said he was setting the show in the 1930's, not in the 1950's, as the playwright did.


Executive Changes
BROWN BROTHERS HARRIMAN &amp; CO. , New York, has named two new general partners: Hampton S. Lynch Jr. and A. Heaton Robertson.
CHYRON CORP., Melville, L.I., appointed Mark C. Gray president and chief operating officer.


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Social-Service Efforts Imperiled as Donations to Neediest Lag
While individual donors have reached deep this season to give more to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, fewer people have contributed than last year at this time, resulting in a shortfall of more than $100,000 as the appeal enters its final five weeks.
Unless the trend reverses, seven of the city's largest social-service organizations will be forced to curtail programs that depend wholly on the fund's assistance as well as many more programs for which the government and other sources provide only a portion of what is needed.


Sounds Around Town
Laughing With an Edge
Loudon Wainwright 3d, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
This serious clown, who was mistakenly hailed as a "new Bob Dylan" more than 20 years ago, has aged more gracefully than almost any other folk-song writer of his generation.
The comic edge of his autobiographical songs has grown more acute, with the humor barely outweighing the poignancy of songs describing an two-and-a-half-decade odyssey from brilliant brat to middle-aged sage and father of teen-agers.
As his songs have deepened, his singing has strengthened.
No one these days speaks more clearly and sharply for a certain class of privileged baby boomers.
Show times are tomorrow at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $17.50. &lt;&gt;STEPHEN HOLDEN Chinese History
Music from China, featuring Tang Liangxing, Washington Square United Methodist Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 545-7536.
This seven-member ensemble was founded 10 years ago by Susan Cheng and Wang Tien-Juo, a bass guitarist and a fiddler from China, to propagate public awareness of traditional Chinese music.
They are joined by Tang Liangxing, a master of the pipa, an ancient four-stringed lute.
Other members of the ensemble include Wu Man, on pipa and guitar; Wei-Laigen, from the Shanghai Symphony Orchestra, on flute; Yang-Yi, a zither soloist, and Helen Yee playing hammered dulcimer.
The far-ranging program will include everything from solo works for the pipa and ensemble versions of ancient music to regional folk music and modern composed music.
Show time is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $12.
S.
H.
Sufi Sounds
Cinucen Tanrikorur Ensemble, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, (212) 362-8719.
A renowned Turkish lute player, composer and improviser born in Istanbul, Cinucen Tanrikorur plays Sufi and Turkish classical music with an ensemble that includes some of Turkey's most prominent musicians.
They include B. Reha Sagbas on zither, Fahreddin Cimenii on lute and Dr.
Mural Salim Tokac on flute.
Joining them will be Hafiz Ahmet Calisir, a Koranic chanter and singer of Sufi hymns.
The program will feature two closely related styles of Turkish music.
One is the classical music associated with West Asian court life.
The other is the Sufi music of the Mevlevi brotherhood, known in the West as the whirling dervishes.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $16.
S.
H.


Houston Rockets President Resigns
The Houston Rockets' president, TOD LEIWEKE, on the job just four-and-a-half months, quit yesterday to take a position with the Golden State Warriors.
Leiweke, 33, will be president of the Warriors Arena Development Co., a division of the team working to build a 21,500-seat sports and entertainment facility in the San Francisco area. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
After Monday's earthquake, support is growing in Congress for a bill that would require homeowners in California and other earthquake-prone areas to buy earthquake insurance.  [ Page D1. ]


Review/Art; A Confluence of Old Masters, Made Better by Their Company
New York's art scene often goes into a deep freeze for a few weeks after the holidays.
But this January is turning out to be unusually lively thanks to high-quality gallery shows of Old Master works in Manhattan, mounted to coincide with recent auctions of European art at Sotheby's and Christie's and last week's opening of the Metropolitan Museum of Art's starry "16th-Century Italian Drawings in New York Collections."
Some of the galleries, like Colnaghi and Paul Drey, routinely welcome casual visitors.
Others, like Piero Corsini, which looks more like a home than a gallery, are essentially by appointment only but have opened their doors to the public for a while this winter.
And still others, like Flavia Ormond Fine Arts of London and Thomas le Claire of Hamburg, are visitors in temporary quarters.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington Talk; The House Is Grappling With Itself On Crime
Even though crime and drugs have moved to the forefront of the public's concerns, the House is in no rush to take up the broad, $23 billion Federal crime bill that the Senate passed last fall.
But the general political appeal of the issue, which about one American in five ranks as the nation's most important problem, according to recent CBS News polls, dictates that the House will try to fashion a measure comparable to the Senate's.


Cable Ratings on Violence
The cable television industry is completing an agreement to develop a rating system for violence that would include measures stricter than parental advisory notices adopted last year by the major broadcast networks, an industry official said tonight.
The plan comes amid growing pressure from Congress about the amount of graphic violence depicted in popular programming, and it is in part an attempt to forestall legislation that would regulate program content on cable television.


Coleman Catches Flu; Anderson Gets Augmon
One day after he successfully returned from a two-game absence because of back spasms to score a game-high 24 points and lead New Jersey to a 112-91 victory over Minnesota at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Derrick Coleman didn't report today.
He called in sick with the flu.
The Nets, however, were expecting Coleman to make the trip to Atlanta for Friday night's game with the Hawks at the Omni along with the team's other All-Star candidate, Kenny Anderson.


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PACIFIC AND READING IN THEATER PARTNERSHIP
The Pacific Theaters Corporation and Reading Cinemas Inc., a unit of the Reading Company of Philadelphia, have formed a partnership to provide more than $100 million for the acquisition and construction of megaplex theaters in California and Hawaii.
Reading and Pacific will be equal partners in the venture, and the theaters will be operated under the names Pacific Theaters and Consolidated Amusements under a management agreement with Pacific.
Construction is expected to start before summer on two projects in each state.
Pacific Theaters and its affiliates have more than 300 screens in California and Hawaii.


Global Marine reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hospital Sought Out Prenatal Drug Abuse
A university hospital in South Carolina has been accused of testing pregnant women for drug use without their consent.
The hospital is also accused of collecting confidential information from the women when they came to the hospital for prenatal care and turning it over to the police without their knowledge.


White Reportedly Is Ready to Leave as N.L. Chief
Already in office for nearly a year beyond the end of his term, Bill White is leaving his position as National League president, a club official said yesterday.
Another club official attributed White's sudden decision to events that unfolded at the owners' meeting in Florida earlier this week.
"I don't know anything about that," White said when reached by telephone at his Manhattan apartment.
"I said somewhere around March 31, 1993, I would leave at some point and obviously I would have to get on with my life."


Lesson From Bay Area Quake: Need for Fathomless Patience
If the experience of this area after the 1989 earthquake offers any indication of what lies ahead for Angelenos, patience may prove to be the survival tool of necessity, if not of choice.
San Francisco's quake lasted only 15 seconds, but its effects are still being felt by those who drive along the elevated freeways.
Seismic surgery is ongoing and painful.
Radio traffic reports often warn of "retrofitting projects" that can bring a morning commute to a crawl.
Some freeways lead nowhere.
For many, what was once a detour is now the regular way home.


U.S. and China Widen Accords On Civil Rights
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said today that China and the United States had agreed to reopen Chinese prisons to American customs officers to insure that their factories are not making products for export to the United States.
The accord gives some fresh momentum to the Administration's drive to get China to loosen up on human rights so that President Clinton can justify to Congress a renewal of China's preferential trade status in June.
Chinese movement on the prison labor issue is one of the key conditions President Clinton has laid down.


Kimberly-Clark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Closed Roads Forcing Drivers to Try Trains
In Southern California, where automobiles are almost second homes, thousands of wary people this week stepped onto commuter trains and buses for the first time in their lives.
Parts of several crucial freeways were destroyed by Monday's earthquake, leaving the city with monumental traffic jams.
As a result, civilized confusion reigned at bus stops and train stations as people tried to find their way to work.


MCN Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  RUSSIA LOSES 2D TOP REFORMER  A Finance Minister who has come to represent Russia's commitment to rapid economic reform announced he was resigning.
The decision came after President Yeltsin named a new Cabinet that is expected to put higher priority on protecting industrial jobs than fighting inflation.
A1  The United States voiced concern about Boris Fyodorov's exit.
A10


Bitter Cold Blamed in Gas Explosion in a Long Island Home


Cold Wave Hits Bottom; A Slow Climb Out Begins
The cold set records across the Northeast yesterday, and forecasters said that this morning could be even colder in many places.
But the weather will get warmer soon, they promise; the New York City area could be in the relatively balmy 40's by Sunday.
Power companies in the Middle Atlantic states were hoping to scrape by today without repeating Wednesday's rolling blackouts.
They made it through yesterday only because so many businesses and institutions were closed, including most Federal offices in Washington and most state offices in Pennsylvania.


Serbia Sanctions Make West Feel Better
To the Editor:
In "Strangling Serbia's Democrats" (Op-Ed Jan. 11), Veran Matic argues that the West's economic sanctions against Serbia have undermined the educated elites in Belgrade and so strengthened, not weakened, Slobodan Milosevic's political base.
He ignores three crucial facts.


For Red Meat and a Sense of History
IF you are a native New Yorker, steak is in your blood.
Long before there were egg creams or Coney Island hot dogs, there were beefsteaks.
The beefsteak was not a food, it was an event.
This New York institution began, as far as anyone knows, around the middle of the last century.
It was an orgy of eating in which men sat in large halls, unhindered by such niceties as knives, forks or napkins, devouring massive amounts of meat and washing it down with pitchers of beer.


Despite Assurances, Complex Factors Drive Up Tax Bills
Westchester County property owners, who were assured just before the November election that county taxes would not go up this year, were jolted this week by the news that their tax bills would indeed be rising -- by as much as 11.6 percent in one town.
To be sure, many realized there would be something of an increase.
The day before New Year's Day, property owners had learned that as a result of the Board of Legislators' adjustments in County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke's budget, the overall county property tax would rise by 2.8 percent, to $337.7 million.


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Testing Giuliani's Single Standard; In Two Cases, the Mayor Takes His View to Black Audiences
When he campaigned for Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani often told his supporters that he favored "one standard" of justice in the city, a message that resonated strongly with those who believed Mayor David N. Dinkins had been too slow to enforce the law against blacks picketing Korean-owned grocery stores in Flatbush or black youths rampaging in Crown Heights.
This week, in the aftermath of a confrontation at a Harlem mosque that left eight police officers injured and escalated into a political test of his administration, Mr.
Giuliani began bringing the same message to black audiences.





Commercial Federal (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why Condoms Decision Needs to Be Appealed
To the Editor:
"Parental Veto in New York" (editorial, Jan. 10) wisely suggests that, as a public health matter, "condoms be available as widely and freely as possible" to young people in school.
But you erroneously assume that the Appellate Division decision in the condom case, Alfonso v.
Fernandez, leaves the Board of Education no option but to restrict condom availability with a parental veto.
The board appears also to take that view.


Union Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; The Art of Making Lists Vivid
One has never doubted that the magnificent Irene Worth could, in fact, read a telephone directory aloud and make it sound utterly dramatic.
But surely no one would have predicted she would come as close to proving the supposition as she does in segments of her "Portrait of Edith Wharton," which she is performing at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Although the monologue -- which Ms.
Worth herself assembled from pieces of Wharton's autobiography, novels, letters and diaries -- offers some choice examples of the novelist's elegant prose, it also includes a plethora of inherently undramatic details: lengthy catalogues of types of food and furniture; lists of names of people of varying degrees of fame whom Wharton knew; elaborate descriptions of clothing, and what are essentially travel intineraries.


Prices Are Up for Treasury Issues
Prices of Government securities rose yesterday on expectations that the Federal Reserve will not move to tighten credit any time soon.
In December, investors were concerned that the Fed would increase short-term interest rates.
But since the release of December employment data on Jan. 7, the market has increasingly seen near-term Fed tightening of credit as more unlikely.
"Maybe by April, the market will be back on alert," said Matthew F. Alexy, a Government trading specialist at CS First Boston, referring to the swings in investors' expectations.


SPORTS PEOPLE: BASEBALL;
Shortstop OMAR VIZQUEL and the Cleveland Indians agreed yesterday on a one-year contract worth $2.3 million, more than double his 1993 salary of $1,112,500.
The agreement was midway between Vizquel's $2.5 million request in salary arbitration and the team's $2.1 million offer.
Vizquel, 26, hit .255 with 2 home runs and 31 runs batted in in 158 games last season and won his first Gold Glove award. (AP)


Morandini Doubles Salary
Second baseman MICKEY MORANDINI and the Philadelphia Phillies agreed yesterday to a one-year contract worth $750,000, more than twice his $300,000 salary last season.
Morandini, 27, asked for $850,000 in arbitration while the club offered $625,000.
Four Phillies are in arbitration: pitchers CURT SCHILLING, TERRY MULHOLLAND and DAVID WEST and first baseman RICKY JORDAN.  (AP)


CCB Financial Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; Odd Corporate Performance By a Broadway Leading Man
New York knows Robert E. Nederlander as the owner of Broadway theaters -- 10, at last count -- and a piece of the Yankees.
But one of his lesser-known holdings is raising eyebrows along Wall Street, both for what he has and has not done with it.
The company is the Allis-Chalmers Corporation, the once proud maker of heavy equipment named after West Allis, Wis., the Milwaukee suburb that is its hub.
In 1989, Mr.
Nederlander's investor group paid $3.75 million, or $9.20 a share, for 40 percent of a company that had just divested itself of almost every one of its assets to pay creditors and emerge from bankruptcy.


Bourque, at 33, Is Still Mr. Defense
Ray Bourque will probably still be a Boston Bruin when the team leaves Boston Garden for its new arena in 1995.
It only seems as if Bourque was playing when the old barn opened in 1928.
Now 33 years old and a 15-year veteran, Bourque is in Manhattan for the National Hockey League All-Star weekend.
He will appear in Madison Square Garden tomorrow in his 13th midseason classic, where he is the career leader in assists with 10.


A New Prosecutor
By choosing Robert Fiske as independent counsel to take over the Whitewater Development Corporation case, Attorney General Janet Reno has finally moved to clean up a mess that has embarrassed her Justice Department and the White House.
Whether she has put Whitewater behind her will depend on whether Mr.
Fiske, a moderate Republican, is perceived as the ruggedly independent lawyer she says he is.
Mr.
Fiske made a promising start as he accepted the appointment yesterday.
He produced his own charter of authority to investigate Arkansas land and banking cases that have raised questions about the dealings of the First Family when President Clinton was Governor of that state.
Mr.
Fiske said he expected to question the Clintons under oath before he was through.


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


North Korea Reported to Balk at Inspection Terms
In a setback for Clinton Administration hopes that inspectors would soon be heading into North Korea's nuclear complex, the International Atomic Energy Agency said today that North Korea had rejected inspection procedures the agency says it must carry out to determine if nuclear weapons are being developed.
The inspections of seven sites were agreed upon in principle last month by the United States and North Korea, and several weeks ago the State Department said it expected a final agreement with the agency in just a few days.
Instead, a standoff has developed over just how extensive an inspection North Korea will allow.


City National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Possible Alliance For Y.&amp; R. London
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. said yesterday that it was considering changes at its troubled British agency operations.
But it declined to comment on a report in Campaign magazine, the British ad trade publication, that it is negotiating an alliance with Gold Greenlees Trott P.L.C. in London.
"We are considering a number of options for Y.&amp; R. in the U.K.," Richard McGowan, a Young &amp; Rubicam spokesman in New York, said, adding, "We don't want to comment any further as to speculation that has arisen in the U.K. media."


Review/Film; Animated Inventiveness
That an animated film can convey the feeling of being pummeled in a boxing ring with a visceral intensity that matches the prizefighting sequences in Martin Scorsese's "Raging Bull" says much about the advanced state of the art of movie animation.
The film that accomplishes this, Daniel Suter's "Square of Light," comes from Switzerland and lasts less than five minutes.
But with splaying crayon flashes, splats and swirls, synchronized with a soundtrack of thuds and crowd noises that vibrates with the dizzying sense of someone going in and out of consciousness, the film evokes brutal physical contact with a startling intimacy.
"The Square of Light" is one of several dazzling short films that make "The 24th International Tournee of Animation," a 14-part survey of artists and styles, well worth a look.
Like previous anthologies in the series, this one, which opens today at the Angelika Film Center in Greenwich Village, casts a wide stylistic net.
You will find everything from latter-day descendants of "The Flintstones" and prehistoric cousins of the dinosaurs in "Jurassic Park" to a thoughtful Eastern European surrealism.
The selections are arranged in an entertaining variety format so that the darker works are often sandwiched between lighter, jauntier cartoons.


Raychem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stillness Along the Potomac
Make no mistake, the Big Chill is serious business.
As the Times headline said yesterday, this week's record-and-bone-breaking cold has disrupted "power, travel, and life in general." Trains have been canceled, stores closed, emergency blackouts ordered.
The one redeeming feature in all this misery is that we may learn to survive with a smaller Federal Government.
Actually, we may even learn to live with fewer lawyers, or at least with lawyers working fewer hours.
The noted firm of Arnold &amp; Porter sent everyone home at 4 P.M.
Wednesday, causing high anxiety.
"It's a major economic decision for an organization that bills by the hour," the firm's managing partner told The Washington Post.


Croat-Serb Pact: The Agenda Is Hiding in Krajina
The agreement signed on Wednesday between Croatia and Serbia, longtime bitter enemies, appears to further complex political and diplomatic goals that could isolate the Muslim-led Bosnian Government.
But in the chaos that is Balkan politics, the Muslims are but one target of the agreement.
It is also aimed at a breakaway pocket of fierce Serbian nationalists who have stuck in the craw not only of President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, but also of the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic.


Computer Gives Odds on Jury Awards
Jury verdicts are supposed to reflect society's values, and a publisher of personal injury verdicts has now translated these societal reflections into dollar figures.
One finding: jurors tend to award women significantly more money than men.
Statisticians at Jury Verdict Research, a 35-year-old legal publishing company in Horsham, Pa., about 20 miles northeast of Philadelphia, have analyzed more than 90,000 jury verdicts in personal injury cases nationwide.
With this computerized data base, they say they can predict the statistical likelihood of a plaintiff's winning any personal injury case as well as the amount of money the jury will award.
The company is the only one nationwide to compile such data.


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sounds Around Town
Audible Explorer
Larry Willis, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Willis, a pianist, moves in and out of the jazz world, but when he's in it, he's one of the best working pianists.
He's fluid and aggressive, and his roots in the 1960's leave him open to exploration.
He'll be joined by another middle-aged, overlooked great musician, the alto saxophonist Gary Bartz, and by the not-so-overlooked bassist Rufus Reid.
They make exciting, swinging music.
Shows are on Sunday night at 10, 12, 2.
There is a $12 cover and a $8 minimum. &lt;&gt;PETER WATROUS Guitar Man
Tal Farlow, Down Beat, 101 Seventh Avenue South, at Grove Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 620-4000.
This will be a rare appearance by one of the great guitarists to come of age in the 1950's.
He has his own sound, and his own rhythmic sense, and the records he made with a trio on the Verve label are marvels, though probably long forgotten.
And when he plays a solo constructed of harmonics, one can hear the mind of a tinkerer, someone who has thought about originality.
Shows tonight through Sunday night are at 8, 10 and 12.
There is a $12 cover and a one-drink minimum.
P.
W.


Advo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Accounts
General Media International, New York, to Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York, to handle consumer and trade advertising for Compute, Longevity, Omni and Penthouse magazines, previously inactive.
Billings have not been determined, but the Penthouse portion was estimated at $2 million to $3 million. *
Nabisco Foods Group, Parsippany, N.J., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding's spot broadcast unit, New York, to handle the local television and network radio media buying portion of its estimated $10 million account, previously at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS, New York.
The unit already handles Nabisco Foods' national television buying.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Double Time for Denver  Reggie Williams and Brian Williams hit baskets in the final minute of the second overtime last night, lifting Denver past the visiting Houston Rockets, 111-106, as the Nuggets snapped a four-game losing streak.
Houston, losing its fourth in a row, rebounded from an 18-point first-quarter deficit to draw into a 92-92 tie at the end of regulation.
The Rockets ran off 7 straight points early in the first overtime, but Denver countered with a 7-0 run of its own.
A tip-in by Dikembe Mutombo with 11.6 seconds left made it 103-103, forcing a second extra session.
After an exchange of turnovers and missed shots early in the second overtime, Mutombo hit a hook shot, and Reggie Williams followed with a layup on a pass from Brian Williams for a 107-103 advantage with 56 seconds left. (AP) Timberwolves 93, Spurs 83: Chris Smith and Thurl Bailey came off the bench to spark a 14-3 second-half run last night as the undermanned Minnesota Timberwolves defeated the San Antonio Spurs, 93-83, in Minneapolis.
Doug West scored 23 points for the Timberwolves.
David Robinson returned to the Spurs' lineup after missing two games with soreness in his right knee and scored 25 points, but he missed 15 of 24 shots as San Antonio shot just 41 percent to Minnesota's 50 percent.
The Timberwolves played without their top reserve, Chuck Person, who checked into a hospital earlier yesterday with an foot infection. (AP) GOLF  Broadcaster Plays, Too  Gary McCord, much better known in recent years as a golf broadcaster, was back in the playing mode yesterday and was one stroke out of the lead of the Northern Telco Open in Tucson.
McCord shot a 7-under-par 65 to finish in a tie with Larry Nelson, one stroke behind Dillard Pruitt.
McCord said he plays a handful of tournaments early to sharpen up for his return to the broadcast booth.
He said playing alongside the game's stars helps him keep from being critical on the air.
"Until you do that -- go down there with the adrenaline flying through -- there's no way to know about that," McCord said.
"It looks easy, because every time we see these guys on TV, they're shooting 64. They're teeing off late on Saturday and Sunday; they're all playing well, and pretty soon it looks like everybody should be playing well." (AP) YACHT RACING  Conner Now Trailing  The tables have turned on Dennis Conner and his Winston crew in the Whitbread Round the World Race.
Having led the 14-boat fleet by as many as 147 miles during the 3,200-mile leg from Fremantle, Australia, to Auckland, New Zealand, Conner now finds himself fighting for third-place.
Nine of the sailboats, including Winston, are expected to arrive in Auckland tomorrow.
Six of the leading boats are bunched within 20 miles of one another.
At the head of the pack are two New Zealand teams: Chris Dickson, skipper of the 60-foot Tokio, and Grant Dalton, skipper of the 80-foot maxi-yacht New Zealand Endeavour.
About 165 miles behind Tokio, in seventh place among the 60-footers, was Heineken.
Dawn Riley of Detroit took over the yacht when it was repossessed from Nance Frank.
Formerly called U.S.
Women's Challenge, the boat was renamed Heineken in Fremantle.


Weprin's Kin Reveal Illness But No Details
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin suffered a stroke on Tuesday, his family and Assembly officials said today, raising doubts about his ability to continue in office and throwing the State Assembly into confusion barely three weeks into its 1994 legislative session.
In a tersely worded statement, Mr.
Weprin's family said the stroke was caused by complications resulting from pancreatic surgery he underwent in November.
But family members declined to name the hospital in which he was being treated or to provide details about his condition, including whether he was able to communicate.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.20
3.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.96
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.10
3.09
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.17
5.23
6.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.26
6.29
7.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.22
7.25
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.52
6.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


GENERAL ELECTRIC CO.
The General Electric Company reported yesterday that its earnings rose a little more than 10 percent in the fourth quarter, to $1.477 billion, or $1.73 a share.
The gains were led by G.E.'s appliance, financial services, plastics and electrical generating equipment divisions, and came despite the loss of income from the aerospace business, which was sold during 1993.
Revenue for the quarter increased 12 percent, to $18.1 billion.


Breed Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Uni-Marts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zombo Gets 10-Game Suspension
Defenseman RICK ZOMBO of the St.
Louis Blue was suspended for 10 games without pay yesterday for shoving a linesman in the back during a Jan. 9 game against Dallas.
Zombo shoved and slashed linesman KEVIN COLLINS after Collins collided with him.
The collision caused Zombo to lose control of the puck, which was retrieved by a Dallas player who scored what proved to be the winning goal. (AP)


Bank South Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Samuel Kaplan; Jewish Historian, 87
Samuel Kaplan, a Jewish historian who conducted a Yiddish-language radio program on WEVD for 42 years, died on Jan. 14 at his home in Far Rockaway, Queens.
He was 87.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


CBS Puts Summerall And Others On Spot
For Pat Summerall, there will be no more CBS football after Sunday's National Football Conference title game.
He will utter his last promotion for "Murder, She Wrote." Then CBS, which lost the National Foootball Conference television rights to the Fox Network through 1997, will leave the football business.
But will Summerall leave football?


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "ITERATIONS: THE NEW IMAGE," International Center of Photography Midtown, 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street.
More than 70 computer-generated images and installations, by 17 artists.
Through today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $2.50; $1 under age 12.
Information: (212) 768-4680.


Ousted Lilly Chairman Joins Investment Bank
Vaughn D. Bryson, the former chairman and chief executive of Eli Lilly &amp; Company who was ousted in a board room coup last June, will become vice chairman of Vector Securities International, a small health care investment bank, on April 1, Vector announced yesterday.
He will work on health care mergers and investment deals at a troubled time for many pharmaceutical, medical-device and biotechnology companies as they struggle under growing pressures from Washington and their customers to hold down costs.


DIALOGUE: The Bobby Inman Show; Who Is He To Wail?
The withdrawal of Bobby Ray Inman will, I suppose, provoke the customary lamentations about the evil wrought by a malevolent press in keeping the "best people" out of government.
There will no doubt be the further suggestion that this press misbehavior is a new and deplorable departure in American politics.
But democracy by definition is based on on disagreement, debate and criticism.
Why should any person appointed or elected to office expect immunity from the process?
Would not such immunity be incompatible with democracy?


U.S. Sees Double Blow to Russia Reform
Clinton Administration officials voiced serious concern today about the announced resignation of Russia's Finance Minister, Boris G. Fyodorov, an advocate of rapid economic reform, fearing his departure could slow Moscow's move to a market economy.
American officials hesitated to express worry when another leading reformer, First Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, resigned last Sunday.
Trying to put the best face on that resignation, which came on the day President Clinton left Moscow after meeting President Boris N. Yeltsin, American officials said they were still confident that reforms would continue to move apace, in part because Mr.
Fyodorov was still in place.


Jeremiah Driscoll, 84; Supplied Fuel to Ships
Capt.
Jeremiah T. Driscoll, whose companies supplied fuel oil to ships and boats in New York City waters for more than 40 years, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
Captain Driscoll, who lived in Manhattan, was 84.
The cause was cancer, said a niece, Anne O'Driscoll.


Pet Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; The Price Of Korea
For Americans, the most dangerous foreign problem of the moment is neither Bosnia, the Mideast nor Russia but the one they are paying the least attention to.
It is playing itself out in Washington, Vienna and a country only a handful of Americans have ever seen, or want to.
If any crisis boils over, the one guaranteed to involve American forces is North Korea's drive for nuclear weapons.
The crossroads for both countries could be four or five weeks away.


Rebellion in Mexico Is Putting the Heat on Salinas
Accustomed to battling inflation, not insurrection, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and the inner circle of advisers who helped him rebuild the economy are struggling to extinguish the rebellion in Chiapas and avoid a political crisis that could imperil his party's hold on Mexico.
The fighting in southern Mexico may have stopped for now, but with 2,000 armed rebels still hidden in the rain forest, newspapers, business people, intellectuals and ordinary citizens are asking why the shooting started and how to keep it from happening again.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about pilots at a United States air base in Italy ready to fly raids in Bosnia and Herzegovina included an incorrect account of Croatian warplane action in the no-flight zone in Bosnia, as provided by a United Nations official in Bosnia.
Croatian aircraft did not attack Muslim-held positions twice in one week.


Sun Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Smith Is Activated by Knicks
When the Knicks' team bus left here after practice this afternoon for the flight that would take them to Orlando, Fla., Charles Smith was on it.
He was activated from the injured list and Gerald Paddio was waived today.
Now, the only question is: Will Smith play against the Magic Friday night?
"I'm day to day," was all the 6-foot-10-inch forward would say about his condition as he hurried past reporters.
Smith, who has played in only four games this season, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left knee on Dec. 7 and has missed the Knicks' last 23 games.


For Clinton's First Year, G.O.P. Offers No Candles


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


David Kirschenbaum Dies at 99; A Leading Dealer of Rare Books
David Kirschenbaum, a dealer in rare books and manuscripts who was regarded as the dean of American booksellers, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 99.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Bernard, a sculptor in New York.
Mr.
Kirschenbaum, who celebrated his 99th birthday at a party at Sotheby's auction house last week, began selling books at the age of 8 from his father's pushcart in lower Manhattan.
He rose to the top of the book trade by helping industrialists, bankers and other businessmen form holdings of American books and manuscripts, especially those written by the Founding Fathers and Abraham Lincoln.
Some of these collections are now in the Library of Congress, the Pierpont Morgan Library, the New-York Historical Society, the Clemens Library at the University of Michigan and the Fales Library at New York University.
The Martin Library
One of Mr.
Kirschenbaum's clients was Henry Bradley Martin, an heir to the steel fortune of Henry Phipps, a partner of Andrew Carnegie.
The 10,000-volume Martin library brought $33 million at auction in 1990.
Mr.
Kirschenbaum sold Mr.
Martin one of the treasures of his collection, George Washington's copy of The Federalist.
Mr.
Kirschenbaum had acquired it in the 1940's from Phoebe Hearst, the mother of William Randolph Hearst, for $5,000.
At the Sotheby's auction of the Martin collection, the copy of The Federalist brought $1.43 million.


Giuliani Tells Hospitals Unit to Reconsider Cuts
The Giuliani administration told New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation yesterday to reconsider its emergency budget plan unveiled this week that would impose a hiring freeze, cut services and delay a number of new health initiatives.
Saying the corporation had been too quick to propose slashing services to close a shortfall of $160 million in its budget this year, Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers asked the corporation, which operates the city's health clinics and 11 municipal hospitals, to look for cuts in its central office and to rely on savings from greater productivity and efficiency.


Text of Regulation on Jurisdiction of the Special Counsel
Following is the Justice Department regulation that will serve as the mandate for Robert B. Fiske, who was appointed today to serve as independent counsel in the investigation into the Clintons' real estate investments.
Mr.
Fiske wrote the text, including the reference to the section of the United States Code on obtaining evidence or testimony from recalcitrant witnesses, and it was issued as a regulation by Attorney General Janet Reno.
(a) The Independent Counsel: In re Madison Guaranty Savings &amp; Loan Association shall have jurisdiction and authority to investigate to the maximum extent authorized by part 600 of this chapter whether any individuals or entities have committed a violation of any Federal criminal law relating in any way to President William Jefferson Clinton's or Mrs.
Hillary Rodham Clinton's relationships with (1) Madison Guaranty Savings &amp; Loan Association, (2) Whitewater Development Corporation, or (3) Capital Management Services.


BancTec Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, is offering $150 million of 6.5 percent subordinated notes due in 2009 at 99.022 to yield 6.604 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation and Duff &amp; Phelps.


U S WEST INC. (N)
U S West Inc. reported slightly higher income from continuing operations in the fourth quarter and for 1993.
Previously announced one-time charges involving among other things accounting changes and the revamping of long-term debt resulted in a loss for the year of $2.81 billion, or $6.69 a share.
Without the charges, which totaled $3.98 billion, net income for 1993 would have risen 6 percent, to $1.1 billion, or $2.72 a share, compared with $1 billion, or $2.61 a share, a year earlier.


Blue Devils Escape In Week Of Upsets
Duke 92, N. Carolina St. 65
Grant Hill scored 19 points as No. 5 Duke avoided a week of top-10 upsets by shooting a season-high 77 percent in the first half en route to a 92-65 victory over North Carolina State last night in Raleigh, N.C.


Vindicating a Lawyer With AIDS, Years Too Late; Bias Battle Over Dismissal Proves Costly Not Only to Worker, but to Law Firm
Toward the end, Geoffrey F. Bowers came to define himself by his work as a lawyer.
His job with the New York office of the world's largest law firm, a friend said, "gave him a sense of belonging, a sense of worth, the fact he could continue his job even though he had this deadly disease."
But in a case similar to the one chronicled in the hit movie "Philadelphia," Mr.
Bowers charged that his star at Baker &amp; McKenzie of Chicago rapidly faded after purplish lesions began appearing on his face.
Although the firm said it dismissed Mr.
Bowers in October 1986 because his performance was lacking, he argued it was because he had AIDS.


Taxi Panel Requires Bullet-Resistant Partitions
Most yellow cabs in New York City will soon be required to have bullet-resistant partitions and emergency warning lights to protect drivers, under rules adopted yesterday by the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission.
Despite the dangers posed by robbers, about half of the 11,787 yellow cabs in the city do not have the partitions.
Last year 42 cabdrivers were slain on New York's streets, seven of them yellow-cab drivers.


Review/Dance; Joe Goode Group in Debut
The advance word on the Joe Goode Performance Group from San Francisco was more than good (no pun intended) and its debut in the Altogether Different series Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater was hardly a disappointment.
Mr.
Goode, an actor and dancer who performed in New York before forming his company in 1986, has the sure hand of an assertive theatrical director and choreographer.
The absolute polish with which he integrates speech and movement in "Convenience Boy," the 75-minute piece on the program, should stand as a model for many others in the dance and performance-art field.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  IN SEA OF WEALTH, HOMELESS DEFY COLD
As the temperature sank to one degree above zero -- a record low for the second straight day in New York City -- a loose community of homeless people along Madison Avenue continued to shun city shelters and instead pitted their survival instincts against the elements.
A1.
EXPERT CAN'T PINPOINT BOMB CONTENTS
A forensic chemist with the F.B.I. said he was unable to form a definite conclusion about the contents of the World Trade Center bomb.
B3. 2 OTHER MEN SOUGHT IN MOSQUE CLASH
A day after making an arrest in the clash at a Harlem mosque, police officials said that they were seeking two other men in the melee.
B4.
TESTING GIULIANI'S SINGLE STANDARD
Mayor Giuliani tries to make his case to black New Yorkers: "It's called the law. Everybody has to follow it. Everybody will be dealt with in precisely the same way if they don't." News Analysis.
B4.
The Schools Chancellor placed control of the city's high schools, special education programs and all other centrally controlled instructional programs under a single executive.
B3.
The Giuliani administration told New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation to reconsider its emergency budget plan that would impose a hiring freeze and cut services.
B3.
The new Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, elevated a relatively junior officer to be the No. 1 uniformed officer of the department.
B4.
REGION  SALE CONSIDERED FOR SPORTS UNIT
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey opened the door to selling off the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, owner of Giants Stadium among other things, as a way to reduce the state's liability for debt.
B5.
DESPITE ASSURANCES, TAX BILLS INCREASE
Westchester County property owners, who had been assured that county taxes would not go up this year, were jolted by the news that their tax bills would indeed be rising -- by as much as 11.6 percent in one town.
B5.
SLOW GROWTH URGED IN FINGERPRINTING
A pilot program in Rockland and Onondaga Counties, which is intended to combat welfare fraud by fingerprinting applicants electronically, could save New York at least $46 million a year if it were extended to the rest of the state, a Cuomo administration study indicates.
But aides to Governor Cuomo said that he favored expanding the program gradually.
B5.
AT CENTER OF STORM, WITH CARS IN TOW
The demand for tow-truck drivers is yet another barometer of the cold snap's grip: cars that decline to go.
B6.
It was Ross Perot's kind of day in the capital of the United States: the Federal Government finally shut down.
And much of the rest of Washington, too.
B7.
Neediest Cases B3
Chronicle B7


Eclipse Winners: Now They're Off for Horse of the Year
Thoroughbred racing crowned its 1993 champions yesterday when it bestowed 10 Eclipse Awards on prime horses and 5 on owners, breeders and jockeys.
And the big winner was Kotashaan, who outpolled Lure for the grass championship and gained the inside track for the honor of Horse of the Year.
The other major winners were led by the juvenile Dehere, who won the closest election by a nose over Brocco and established himself as the horse to beat on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
And one of last year's Derby stars, Prairie Bayou, was voted the best 3-year-old colt, seven months after he fractured a foreleg and did not survive the Belmont Stakes.


Chemist Can't Pinpoint Bomb Contents at Trial
A forensic chemist with the F.B.I. took the stand in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday and said that he had been unable to form a definite conclusion about the contents of the device that shook the trade center on Feb. 26.
The chemist, Steven G. Burmeister, seemed to leave a gap in the chain of evidence the prosecution has painstakingly been building.
Much of the testimony so far had seemed to lay the groundwork for a moment when the prosecution would announce with certainty the contents of the bomb that blew apart several underground floors of the trade center.


Exabyte Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Woman Begins Attending Class At The Citadel
As male cadets looked on with stony displeasure, a young South Carolinian today became the first woman to take classes with the corps of cadets at The Citadel, breaking a 151-year-old tradition at the historic military college and firing a resounding salvo in the nation's battle of the sexes.
Accompanied by three lawyers and escorted to class by designated cadets in their winter blue uniforms, Shannon Faulkner marked her 19th birthday on a frigid morning by showing up for an 8 o'clock biology class, capping a bitter legal battle and raising anew emotional issues of education, equity, tradition and the sexes.


CSX Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Offers Guide for Doctors On Care of Those With H.I.V.
Federal health officials released new guidelines today to help family doctors, pediatricians, nurse practitioners and other non-AIDS specialists diagnose the virus that causes AIDS and treat people infected with it.
Experts said that many of these nonspecialists had had limited contact with people infected with the virus but that the guidelines should help them offer better care to increasing numbers of infected patients, especially at early stages, before symptoms of AIDS develop.


Review/Art; A Raucous Caucus Of Feminists Being Bad
If you approach "Bad Girls," the raucous exhibition of feminist art at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo, as a smorgasbord of feminist expression from various sectors of contemporary culture, you will have a good time.
The show includes drawings for feminist cartoons like Lynda Barry's "God's Gift" and Jennifer Camper's "If Men Got Pregnant." It has a reading area with books like "The Four Elements," by Roz Chast, "Bad Girls Do It: An Encyclopedia of Female Murderers," by Michael Newton, and the comic book anthology "Twisted Sisters: A Collection of Bad Girl Art."
Visitors can sit on chairs designed by the artist Nancy Dwyer, don earphones and listen to an eclectic mix of blues, rock, rap, folk and opera music -- often parodistic and always full of sexual innuendo and feminist subversiveness -- that starts with Bessie Smith's "I Ain't Gonna Play No Second Fiddle" of 1925.
At the show's entrance, "Marge on the Lam," a Thelma-and-Louise-type segment from Matt Groening's popular television show "The Simpsons," plays nonstop on a monitor.
In the final gallery, a selection of generally entertaining videotapes, organized by Cheryl Dunye, treats such subjects as sexual harrassment, lesbianism, the Beatles and even cheerleading with wit and ingenuity.
Viewers may also read wall texts printed with jokes that a stand-up female comic, albeit a not-too-talented one, might use. (Sample: "You're less apt to be a bad girl if . . . you think wrist corsages are O.K.") A sprinkling of work by male artists demonstrates how feminism has infiltrated the art activities of the opposite sex.
And there are even drawings by real girls -- fifth-graders -- to show how bad-girlness looks from the elementary-school level.


A Danish 'Schindler'
To the Editor:
A Danish "Schindler" (letter, Jan. 12) has indeed been made.
"A Day in October" tells the inspiring story of the rescue of 7,200 Danish Jews through the plight of a middle-class Jewish family living in Copenhagen in October 1943.
This low-budget independent feature from the producers of "Babette's Feast," stars two New York actors, Tovah Feldshuh and D. B. Sweeney.
It was released by Castle Hill in New York and Los Angeles in fall 1992 and is available on videocassette (from Academy).


Man in the News; Aggressive Prosecutor: Robert Bishop Fiske Jr.
Robert B. Fiske Jr.'s reputation for integrity and thoroughness is so entrenched that if he finds no wrongdoing during his investigation of the Whitewater affair, his findings could put rumors about Bill and Hillary Clinton's business dealings to rest.
"The choice is one that you simply can't argue with," said former Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, a close friend of former President George Bush and a college classmate of Mr.
Fiske more than 40 years ago.
"He's one of those guys who's always conducted himself with integrity."


McDermott International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
"It's important for the country to get this done, and get it done as quickly and as thoroughly and as fairly as possible." ROBERT B. FISKE JR., who will investigate President Clinton's land dealings.  [ A16:3. ]


How to Help Victims of the Earthquake
Interaction, a coalition of more that 150 humanitarian aid groups, has issued this list of agencies to which money may be sent to help quake victims in the Los Angeles area:
Adventist Development and Relief Agency, Los Angeles Earthquake Victims, P.O.
Box 4289, Silver Spring, Md. 20904.
Telephone: (800) 424-2372.


F.D.A. Expected to Announce Tough Seafood-Safety Rules
The Federal Government is expected to announce this morning that for the first time it will require the seafood industry to keep detailed records of safety procedures and to label all shellfish to show where it comes from.
The new regulations are a major shift in the Government's efforts to insure the safety of seafood.
They are aimed at preventing health problems from occurring rather than reacting to outbreaks of illness, said Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.
In


International Shipholding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stuart Scheftel, 83; Executive Took Part In Many Civic Posts
Stuart Scheftel, a Manhattan businessman who was a politically active civic leader, died yesterday in New York Hospital.
He was 83.
His brother, Herbert Scheftel, said he had apparently suffered a heart attack while they were having lunch.


Home Video
Into the Stores
Of the top dozen movies at the box office in 1993 (not counting "Mrs. Doubtfire" and others still in theaters), only three are not already in video stores.
"In the Line of Fire" will be released on Feb. 9 and "The Fugitive" on March 22.
"Jurassic Park" is likely to be available sometime in the spring, though no plans have been announced.
For the next month or more, the roster of coming releases will be filled by the likes of "Indochine," "Kalifornia," "Son of the Pink Panther" and "The Real McCoy."


First Hawaiian (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Make Wives a Cardiac Risk Factor
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 5 Health page article on the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute's four-decade study of cardiovascular disease among the people of Framingham, Mass.:
As a student of public health, I was startled to read that Dr.
William B. Kannel, one of the researchers in the Framingham study, believes that "men with highly educated wives who work outside the home faced a greater risk of suffering and dying of a heart attack than did men with less educated wives." These women, says Dr.
Kannel, are not nurturing enough and fail to cook dinner every night for their husbands.


U.S. PLANS TALKS ON VIETNAM CLAIMS
Continuing to tiptoe toward ending the trade embargo on Vietnam, the Clinton Administration announced plans today to open talks with Hanoi to settle millions of dollars in financial claims arising from the Communist defeat of the South Vietnamese Government in 1975.
The Administration is leaning toward lifting the embargo, and today's move appears part of orchestrated efforts to clear the way toward ending the embargo and minimizing the political backlash to such a move.


INSIDE
Drug Arrests at Issue In South Carolina Case
In a case involving coercing pregnant women into a drug treatment program, a complaint to a Federal agency charges a hospital with breach of confidentiality and improper human experimentation.
Page A12.
Citadel Sex Barrier Is Broken
As male cadets looked on in displeasure, Shannon Faulkner became the first woman to take regular day classes at The Citadel.
Page A12.
Uncertainty at Bomb Trial
An F.B.I. chemist testified that he was unable to determine definitively what was in the bomb that damaged the World Trade Center.
Page B3.
Safety Measures for Cabbies
The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission will require bullet-resistant partitions and emergency lights for most yellow cabs.
Page B1.


Unexploded Bombs
To the Editor:
Neither "U.S. Can Help Stop the Land-Mine Slaughter" (letters, Jan. 13) nor the admirable Dec. 27 editorial they respond to mention airborne mines, that is, those bomblets dispersed by the cluster bomb, the "workhorse" antipersonnel device.


Musicland Stores Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Come Monday, Islanders Hope to Air Out the Wash
When the New York Islanders reassemble Monday after the National Hockey League All-Star Game break, Coach Al Arbour will be hoping for a transformation of Jekyll and Hyde proportions from his Atlantic Division cellar-dwellers.
Right wing Patrick Flatley thinks he knows what it will take.


Bratton Picks a Chief Known as an Innovator
Signaling a desire to shake up the police hierarchy, the new Commissioner, William J. Bratton, dipped into the ranks yesterday and elevated a relatively junior officer to be the top uniformed officer in the department.
His surprise choice as Chief of Department was Deputy Chief John F. Timoney, the commander of a departmental planning office who is respected as a strong field tactician and also known as an innovative policy maker.


Firstar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prosecutors Weigh Moves After Arrest Of Gillooly
District attorneys from Oregon and Michigan met here today to discuss where and how to proceed against four men charged in the assault on the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan as a Multnomah County grand jury met to hear evidence in the case.
The full extent of the grand jury's work was unclear.
But among those who appeared were Al Harding, the father of Tonya Harding, Kerrigan's skating rival, and Diane Rawlinson, Harding's skating coach.


Support Grows for Earthquake Insurance Bill
Federal legislation that would require homeowners in California and other earthquake-prone areas to buy quake insurance -- and thus reduce the taxpayer funds needed to help victims without insurance -- is gathering support in the wake of the Southern California earthquake.
A bill before Congress has been co-sponsored by nearly 100 legislators, with more expected when Congress reconvenes later this month, according to Jack Weber, director of the Natural Disaster Coalition, a group backed by insurance companies, consumer groups and disaster specialists that supports the bill.


Computer Associates' Net Up; Stock Falls
Computer Associates International Inc., a large computer software supplier, yesterday reported a 55 percent increase in earnings for the third quarter, but the strong performance was not enough to satisfy investors.
The company's shares fell $3.50, to $41, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The increase in profits, to $124 million, or 72 cents a share, was in line with analysts' expectations.
But analysts attributed the drop in the company's shares to a slowing of revenue growth.
Sales grew 15 percent, to $574 million, for the quarter that ended on Dec. 31, less than Wall Street had anticipated.


A Defense By Time Warner
After months of acting nonchalant about the growing stake being acquired by the Seagram Company, the board of Time Warner Inc. adopted defensive measures yesterday intended to prevent Seagram from buying more than 15 percent of Time Warner's stock.
Seagram, a Montreal-based spirits company, has been building a stake since May in Time Warner, a New York-based media and entertainment company.
On Wednesday, Seagram said it had increased its holdings to 11.7 percent from 10.4 percent.
Seagram has said that it intends to buy up to 15 percent of the company as an investment.


To put a human face on high technology, MCI chose an 11-year-old from New Zealand.
IN a snowy forest out of the Brothers Grimm stands a little girl in a large hat and a swirling cape.
She looks directly into the camera.
"Some people call it the Information Superhighway," she says.
"MCI just calls it empowering technology."
It is one of four new television commercials featuring 11-year-old Anna Paquin, now starring as Holly Hunter's daughter in the critically acclaimed film "The Piano." With the stark, almost monochromatic beauty in its color commercials, and Anna's wide eyes and lilting New Zealand accent, the campaign is one of the most engaging in recent months.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABBEY HEALTHCARE GROUP INC., Costa Mesa, Calif., a home health care services company, said it would acquire closely held Protocare Inc., Boston, a regional provider of home infusion therapy and nursing services, for $12 million in cash and an undisclosed amount of stock.
ASEA BROWN BOVERI INC., Stamford, Conn., announced that one of its subsidiaries had recently received a contract worth about $285 million to build 222 rapid transit vehicles for the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority.


Arkansas Best Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
'Drawing on Friendship' 'Portraits of Painters and Poets'
Tibor de Nagy Gallery  41 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Feb. 1
This show of drawings was organized in memory of Tibor de Nagy, the gallery's founder, who died last month at the age of 85.
The 27 works, portraits by artists of their colleagues and loved ones, and sometimes of themselves, span three generations, ranging from Milton Avery's circa-1945 green-crayon sketch of his wife, Sally, to Duncan Hannah's 1993 pencil drawing of the New York poet Eileen Myles.


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Wintry Winter Show of Antiques
THIS year's Winter Antiques Show is definitely the coldest in memory.
The cavernous Seventh Regiment Armory, at Park Avenue and 67th Street, is a drafty space in the best of Januarys, but this week's subzero temperatures and dry atmosphere have made the interior of the armory feel more like the windy Park Avenue corner outside.
And the dry cold has led dealers to worry about possible damage to their delicate antiques.
In spite of the weather, however, the show may be one of the best in years, and is well worth bundling up for.
Now in its 40th year, this annual event, which opens to the public today and runs through Jan. 30, is the granddaddy of all American antiques shows.
Collectors from both sides of the Atlantic make the pilgrimage to the armory; auction houses schedule their important American antiques sales to coincide with the show, and Manhattan dealers who are not participants hold special exhibitions to take advantage of the influx of buyers.
The event has also spawned some smaller antiques shows, held simultaneously in Manhattan.


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article by Reuters on the Company News page of Business Day yesterday, about the profit-sharing payment by the Chrysler Corporation to its unionized workers, misstated the cost to the company.
It is about $280 million, not $28 million.


Violence, Evert Says, Has to Do With No. 1
Tennis's own golden girl, Chris Evert, in town to tout her $400,000 Evert Cup next month in the California desert, where Monica Seles may make her comeback, instead found herself mulling the pattern of violence lately directed against some of the most prominent female athletes in the world.
It's a pattern that has her looking over her shoulder despite being five years' retired.
Evert never played scared, never feared for her life while competing.
Now she's glad she doesn't play anymore.
Rankings, ratings and endorsement dollars "are not all they're cracked up to be," she said.
They aren't worth being stalked, stabbed or clubbed.


The Pentagon's Pterodactyl
Old weapons systems never die -- even after the mission they were designed for vanishes and the service that wanted them changes its mind.
Consider the prohibitively expensive Milstar satellite system, which was created by the Pentagon to relay military orders during a six-month nuclear war against the Soviet Union.
Never mind that a nuclear war lasting six months was always hard to envision or that the Soviet Union no longer exists and the likelihood of war with its successors has all but disappeared.
01-21-94


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington Defeated in This Cold War
This was Ross Perot's kind of day in the capital of the United States.
This was the day the Federal Government finally shut down.
And much of the rest of Washington, too.
For that matter, this was the day that much of the eastern half of the country was shut down because of one of the worst spells of cold to hit in many years.


Anchor Bancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Uncovered Short Sales Rise to Big Board Record
Short-sellers, many of them hoping for lower stock prices, are putting more and more money behind their bets that stock prices will fall.
So far, the bets are mostly showing losses.
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the short interest in stocks traded there rose 3 percent, to a record 1.28 billion shares in the month through Jan. 7.


Review/Film; One Man, Two Women And Scenes Of Vancouver
"Intersection," a film about a man, two women and a traffic accident, could not have been more crazily miscast if those responsible had worn blindfolds and pulled names out of a hat.
Its biggest gaffe -- and, naturally, its biggest drawing card -- is Sharon Stone's appearance in the role of Sally Eastman, a woman so sexually standoffish that she complains when her lover wrinkles her dress.
"What's a girl have to do to get a little action around here?" Ms.
Stone also asks, even though all of her star power is predicated on knowing the answer to that question.
Two smaller but equally unconvincing details are the fact that Sally lives in Vancouver, British Columbia, and that her estranged husband has taken up with a feminist-magazine columnist.
The film's nuttiest scene finds the husband (Richard Gere) and his girlfriend (Lolita Davidovich) using her breasts as clues in a giggly bedroom game.
Yes, that's right: he traded in Sharon Stone for a woman who likes to play topless charades.


Abroad at Home; The Royal President
Edwin Meese, commenting on the Iran-contra report, saw no problem if President Reagan knew about the secret arms shipments to Iran in 1985.
"Quite the contrary," he said.
"The more the President knew, the more he was able to authorize this."
There in a sentence is the reason the Iran-contra affair was such a profound threat to our constitutional system.
A former Attorney General asserts that the President had power to override a law (the Arms Export Control Act) and violate the policy against arming terrorist nations.


German Politics: A Step Forward, a Step Back
At the start of an election year that will decide the fate of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's 12-year-old conservative coalition Government, German politics seems to be staggering around in circles.
Rather than dealing quickly with the larger than expected economic and social problems that followed unification in 1990, German political parties have been debating them endlessly.


Pippen Charged With Gun Possession
The Chicago Bulls star SCOTTIE PIPPEN was charged with unlawful possession of a weapon after the police said they noticed a handgun in his car.
The Chicago police said he was arrested shortly after midnight yesterday after an officer checking out his illegally parked car noticed the loaded semiautomatic weapon.


Tandem Computers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wisconsin Rewards Its Coach
BARRY ALVAREZ, who coached Wisconsin to its first Rose Bowl victory, has reached an agreement that would keep him at the university for 15 years.
"This reflects his commitment and strong feelings that he wants to remain in Madison," Athletic Director PAT RICHTER said Wednesday.
Alvarez, 47, the Big Ten coach of the year, is coming off a 10-1-1 record and 21-16 Rose Bowl victory over U.C.L.A. (AP)


Bank of Boston Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/ Film; Of Russian Rednecks In a Land Gone Mad
Made in 1991, Pavel Lounguine's "Luna Park" now seems eerily prophetic in its depiction of brawny Russian neo-facists, a gang of thugs who may look buffoonish but are capable of causing real danger.
The goons who set this story in motion hold court in an amusement park, where they randomly engage in drunken, violent outbursts.
It's some measure of this film's tumultuousness that Andrei (Andrei Goutine), the brutish central character, takes solitary rides on a roller coaster in order to collect his thoughts and calm down.
The roller coaster is used to suggest the wild, breakneck trajectory of a society gone out of control, which gives "Luna Park" some common ground with Mr.
Lounguine's earlier "Taxi Blues." Once again, the film maker offers a startlingly vivid cross-section of a crumbling Russia, and strikes sparks off the relationship between an angry, musclebound anti-Semite and a dissipated Jewish musician.


Jack H. Mohr, 82, Cosmetics Executive Active in the G.O.P.
Jack H. Mohr, a Manhattan cosmetics executive for 30 years, died last Friday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J.
He was 82 and lived in Upper Montclair.
He had a brief illness, his family said.


New York Vote in '90 Humiliated Governor, Not His Opponent
To the Editor:
I take exception to your description of my campaign against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as resulting in a "humiliating loss" for the Republican Party in 1990 (front page, Jan. 8).
More than 850,000 citizens and residents of New York State voted for me and against Mr.
Cuomo in the 1990 campaign.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
KARL LAGERFELD apologized to Muslims yesterday for inadvertently using passages from the Koran as decoration on three dresses in his spring couture collection for Chanel.
The Indonesian Muslim Scholars Council, an organization of clerics in Jakarta, called for a boycott of Chanel and threatened to file a formal protest with the German Government when it learned that holy words had been used in this way by Mr.
Lagerfeld, who is German.


Diner's Journal
Convincingly Tropical
When you go to a restaurant that proudly calls itself "colonial," you pretty much know what to expect.
And that's exactly what you get at Le Colonial, a new Vietnamese restaurant that looks like a cross between the Magic Pan (which it once was) and Raffles.


Firstbank of Illinois (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; A Surrogate Father In a Mother's Guise
"Celebrate your difference, baby," trills the title character of "Holiday Heart," who has a lot to celebrate.
A black drag queen, he measures about six and a half feet, if you factor in the high heels and the voluminous wig.
With jewelry, he looks to weigh 250 pounds.
His false eyelashes, long as a spider's legs, make his large eyes larger.
His hands rival a lumberjack's.
Most important, he has a heart as big as a football.


Cuomo Urging Caution on Plan To Fingerprint Those on Welfare
A two-county pilot program to combat welfare fraud by fingerprinting applicants electronically could save New York at least $46 million a year if it were extended to the rest of the state, according to a Cuomo administration study released today.
But aides to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said that, despite the results of his own study, the Governor favored expanding the program gradually rather than extending it immediately to the entire state.


First Financial Holdings (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DIALOGUE: The Bobby Inman Show; Who Can Blame Him?
It is easy to dismiss Bobby Ray Inman's abrupt and seemingly petulant withdrawal of his nomination with the truism that of all positions (save perhaps the Presidency), the Secretary of Defense cannot afford the luxury of an eggshell ego.
Or perhaps, as some intimate, there were other reasons that caused him to pull his name.
But many who have left private-sector lives of power, prestige and financial comfort in recent years only to face the ever more brutal costs of serving their country can empathize with the admiral's dilemma.
First, Government service has become largely reactive rather than creative.
Political debate is sharper and commentary often personally vicious in the wake of such divisive issues as Vietnam, Watergate, the civil rights movement, the retreat into ethnocentrism and the multifaceted sexual revolution.
Leaders who dare to take an unambiguous stand on key issues are often battered by intense media and interest group reactions, including ad hominem attacks, from which they never recover.
Many strong-minded people decide they would rather stay out of Government and influence its actions in other ways.


Art in Review
Tanya Marcuse
Yoshii Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 29
A twilight softness suffuses Tanya Marcuse's black-and-white studies of antiquities.
Photographed in archeological museums in Greece last summer, the images record fragments of statues and other artifacts, presented in tightly cropped close-ups.


Demons Replace Dolls and Bicycles In World of Children of the Quake
Justine Vargas's eyes narrowed under her long bangs as she summoned up memories of the earthquake.
Everything tumbled out of the refrigerator, the 6-year-old girl recalled, "and we had tomato sauce and it broke on the floor." The cockatoo's cage was sent crashing to the floor, and the next day the bird died.


And More Today
But a cold front (of all things) promises relief this weekend.
To avert blackouts, the nation's capital simply shut down for a day.
Articles, pages B6-7.


Rudman Declines Top Defense Post
Warren B. Rudman, the former Republican Senator from New Hampshire who was under consideration for the post of Defense Secretary, has asked that his name be withdrawn, White House officials and an associate of Mr.
Rudman said today.
Coming after the abrupt withdrawal on Tuesday of Bobby Ray Inman as the nominee and Senator Sam Nunn's rejection of the job, the decision by Mr.
Rudman further complicated President Clinton's task of finding a replacement for Les Aspin, who was forced to submit his resignation more than a month ago.


3 Partners Leave Botto, Roessner
Botto, Roessner, Horne &amp; Messinger, the health care communications division of Ketchum Communications Inc. in New York, said three of its original partners had left the agency they helped to found 14 years ago.
Herb Messinger, 61, executive vice president and chief financial officer, and Jim Horne, 64, executive vice president and creative director of art, have decided to take early retirement, the agency said, adding that both would serve as consultants.
Susan Roessner, 50, executive vice president and creative director of copy, has resigned to become a freelance copywriter; the agency will be one of her clients.


Jury Begins Deliberating Bobbitt Mutilation Case
A jury began debating this afternoon whether Lorena L. Bobbitt acted deliberately and maliciously when she cut off her husband's penis last June 23, or whether she was temporarily insane.
Mrs.
Bobbitt's case went to the jury about 4:30 P.M. today.
The jurors, who were not sequestered, met until the court adjourned for the day at 5 P.M.; they were to resume at 9 A.M. on Friday.


U.S. Market Is Closed Tighter, Japanese Insurers Argue
The volume in the angry trade dispute between the United States and Japan was turned up another notch today, this time with the Japanese insurance industry vigorously denying that it is closed and countering that the American market goes further in discriminating against foreign competition.
Japan has the second-largest insurance market in the world, but American companies have complained for years that rigid Government regulations and tight links between industrial concerns and financial companies effectively block access for foreign competitors.


Prudential's Investments Called Sound
In hearings on the largest class action stemming from the Prudential Securities scandal, two experts for the brokerage firm testified today that the business operations of its biggest series of energy partnerships were properly run and that the huge losses suffered by investors were the result of declines in oil and gas prices, not fraud.
The testimony in Federal District Court here marked the first time that Prudential had presented evidence in a public hearing defending itself against accusations of widespread fraud in the investments, the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships.
The hearings before Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr. are being held to determine the fairness of a settlement, now valued at $90 million, that was reached in the case in October.


International Rectifier Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
RON D. DANIELS, the former executive director of the National Rainbow Coalition and deputy manager of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's 1988 Presidential campaign, has been named executive director of the Center for Constitutional Rights.
He succeeds Miriam Thompson, who resigned to work as consultant on social justice issues.
The center, which litigates cases on issues like human rights, racial inequality and governmental misconduct, has offices in New York and Greenville, Miss.
It was established in 1966 by lawyers who had worked in the civil rights movement in the South.


Monsanto Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Berlin Spy Trader Is Free on Bail
Dr.
Wolfgang Vogel, a Berlin lawyer who became famous in the cold war for trading spies and political prisoners between East and West, was freed on bail today after six months in jail under suspicion of tax evasion, perjury and other charges brought against him since unification in 1990.
Dr.
Vogel and his wife, Helga, were arrested on July 18, and he is still under suspicion.
The Vogels were held under suspicion of tax evasion to the East German Government, but Mrs.
Vogel was released last year on posting $440,000 bail and $4.2 million bond.


Pair Dance a Rumba to Remember
No matter what happens during Friday's decisive free dance; no matter whether Jayne Torvill, age 36, and Christopher Dean, age 35, do indeed succeed in outsmarting, outdancing and outscoring their younger, slinkier Russian opposition, the reason for their ice-dancing comeback is clear.
It is not about nostalgia.
It is about medals, potentially gold ones, in the European championships here and next month in Norway at the Winter Olympics.


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Choice/Film; Robert Altman Then and Now
Robert Altman has always been ahead of his time.
Long before "Unforgiven" made revisionist westerns trendy, Mr.
Altman directed "McCabe and Mrs. Miller," a lyrical and hardheaded masterpiece with Warren Beatty as a two-bit gambler and Julie Christie as a madam in a ramshackle mining town.
The 1971 film only looks better with age.
It will be playing through Feb. 3 (except Mondays) at Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street in the South Village.
The affecting McCabe wears a gold tooth and bowler hat to set him apart from the local riffraff.
When he tells his mirror, "I got poetry in my soul," he's almost believable.
Mrs.
Miller teaches him how to run a profitable house, and smokes opium to make her life bearable.
In two of the best performances of their careers, Mr.
Beatty and Ms.
Christie play business partners and sexual partners who never quite admit they might also be lovers.


Almost a Nation: The Kurds in Iraq -- A special report.; Kurds Rebuilding Shattered Land, Winning a Precarious Autonomy
High in the treeless plateaus and snow-capped mountains of northern Iraq, Kurds are rebuilding their devastated towns and villages and drawing them together into a de facto state that stops just short of nationhood.
Almost three years after they rose up in the wake of the Persian Gulf war and were crushed by the forces of Saddam Hussein, close to four million Kurds live an autonomous -- but precarious -- existence.


Carter-Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Albany Speaker Is Ill
The Speaker of the New York State Assembly, Saul Weprin, has suffered a stroke, his family and Assembly officials said, raising doubts about his ability to continue in office and throwing the State Assembly into confusion barely three weeks into its 1994 legislative session.
The Speaker's illness comes at a difficult and politically sensitive time, as legislators are preparing not only to open negotiations on the budget but also to run for re-election.
Article, page B1.


The $6 Trillion Hole in Japan's Pocket
Many of the world's financial markets have recovered from a decade of excess in which problems were often measured in billions, or even hundreds of billions, of dollars.
But Japan is now coping with an even more awesome debacle: the loss of at least $6 trillion from one of the steepest plunges in stock and property values of this century.
And it is not over yet: the markets are just marking the anniversary of a crash that has sent stock and real estate prices down more than 50 percent, with no clear signs yet of a recovery.


First American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Pressured Bill White Delays His Resignation
National League club owners yesterday tried to persuade Bill White not to quit as their league president immediately.
They succeeded at least for the day, and White's resignation was not announced.
"There will be nothing today," Katy Feeney, the league's vice president for media and public affairs, said without acknowledging that White had decided to resign.


UST Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kenneth Utt, 72, Producer of Films Who Also Acted
Kenneth Utt, a film producer whose credits include "The Silence of the Lambs" and "Philadelphia," died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 72 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was bone cancer, said his wife, Angie Henry Utt.


Andrew Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Clinton Narrows Choices
President Clinton has narrowed his search to fill two top jobs.
Senior officials said he is focusing on the Deputy Secretary of Defense to move up to the top spot and will ask a Boston lawyer to be civil rights chief at the Justice Department.
Page 6.
Court to Hear Abortion Case The Supreme Court agreed to decide if judicial orders keeping protesters away from abortion clinics violate the right of free speech.
Page 6.
Chairwoman Sills?
Beverly Sills is expected to be nominated to head the board of directors of Lincoln Center, sources close to the board said.
Page 11.
China Opens Up to Banks
China allowed U.S. and other foreign banks to expand into some cities now closed to them and to accept deposits in Chinese currency.
Page 37.


G.O.P. SEES CRIME AS A MAJOR ISSUE
It was the winter meeting of the Republican National Committee, but it more resembled a convention of prison builders today as party leaders put a new emphasis on an old assertion: that Republicans are tougher than Democrats against crime.
The session began with a breakfast speech by Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the House Republican whip, who attacked President Clinton as weak on crime and called on the Government to erect stockades on surplus military bases to keep violent criminals locked up.


Review/Dance; Ritual to a 1970's Beat
Time seemed to have stopped in "Polyphonic Warrior Woman," a program of dance by four women that was presented on Thursday night at the Ohio Theater.
For better or worse, the premiere of a work of the same name was not dance's answer to Charles Busch but rather a ritual loaded with the kind of simple-minded sloganeering that in the 1970's helped set back the women's movement.
Ten women in various stages of bare-breastedness chanted, wafted, jousted and walked with candles in Phyllis Rose's six-part piece, which was set in part to a compelling percussion score composed and performed by Roderick Jackson.
There were also snatches of taped music and "I Am Woman," a poem by Judith Rose.
Central to the ritual was a stamping solo, called "Wise Woman," for the choreographer, who bears a passing resemblance to Roseanne Arnold but seems to have none of Ms.
Arnold's sense of humor.


Dow Soars To a Close Above 3,900
The Dow Jones industrial average passed another milestone yesterday by closing above the 3,900-point level for the first time.
The breakthrough came just two weeks after it punched through 3,800.
Stocks have been buoyed all year by signals of steady economic growth, low interest rates, improving corporate profits and the belief that inflation is no immediate threat.
Investors hungry for better returns are also pushing prices higher.


On a Brooklyn Street, Witnesses to a Catastrophe
At 514 Clinton Street, life will probably return to normal. Someday.
"We now live at 514 Lake Clinton," said Dustin Pina, his sense of humor no doubt fueled by fatigue, as he stood on the normally picturesque stoop of the Carroll Gardens brownstone at 10:30 A.M. yesterday.
It was nine hours after a water main had burst and the flood began.
The stoop was by then covered by an ugly coat of brown ice, the residue of water and heating oil that had rushed into the lower floors of the four-story house.
Mr.
Pina's reference to Lake Clinton was not far from accurate, because 514 Clinton sat above the epicenter of the water-main catastrophe.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Russ Swan, pitcher, on a minor-league contract and invited him to spring training.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Kent Bottenfield, pitcher, and Pedro Castellano, infielder, on one-year contracts.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Geronimo Pena, infielder, on a one-year contract.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Charles Oakley, New York Knicks forward, $3,000 for elbowing Vinny Del Negro of San Antonio during a game on Jan. 19.
BOSTON CELTICS -- Activated Alaa Abdelnaby, forward-center, from the injured list.
Placed Matt Wenstrom, center, on the injured list.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Signed Tree Rollins, assistant coach-center, to a second 10-day player contract.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Waived Tim Kempton, center.
Activated Jerrod Mustaf, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Danny Ainge and Duane Cooper, guards, on the injured list.
Signed Elliot Perry, guard, to a 10-day contract.
Football National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Named Bruce Coslet offensive coordinator.


Review/Music; Quartet Offers Light, Poetry, Motion, Even Ideology
Any concert by the Kronos Quartet is partly a sociological affair in which extramusical effects and ideology have as large a role as the compositions.
The group's first recital in Carnegie Hall on Thursday night was no exception.
It brought together Allen Ginsberg and mystical Minimalism, shards of rock music and iconoclastic compositional methods, along with all the customary Kronos accouterments.
Instead of traditional, undistracting staging, the players were raised on black platforms and seated in chairs wrapped with a black elastic material.
Instead of wearing nondescript concert dress, the players had on varieties of hip fashion (discarding their punk look of a few years ago).


Classical Music in Review
John Aler  Tenor Merkin Concert Hall
The program planners at Merkin Concert Hall are thinking thematically this season, and among the offerings at Merkin is a series of vocal recitals devoted to French art song.
For the second installment, on Wednesday evening, John Aler presented a slate of rarities, songs by Bizet, Saint-Saens, Faure, D'Indy, Duparc, Dupont and Hahn.


Judge Silences Lawyers In Drug Program Suit
A Federal judge ordered lawyers today not to discuss with news organizations a class-action suit filed on behalf of pregnant, drug-addicted women in Charleston against the Medical University of South Carolina.
The suit charges that the university tested the women for drug use without their knowledge when they came to the hospital for prenatal care, then turned that information and other medical information over to the police, without asking the women whether they wanted to give up their right to confidentiality.


Let Merit Prevail
To the Editor:
I support Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to eliminate the eight liaison offices for ethnic identity groups.
Categorizing people by ethnic heritage or life style does more harm than good, producing oversimplified and divisive generalizations.


JAPANESE PREMIER LOSES SHOWDOWN ON VOTING REFORM
In a stunning defeat for Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, the upper house of Parliament today voted down a political reform package that was at the center of his bid to end corruption in Japan's political system.
The surprisingly large margin by which Mr.
Hosokawa lost, 130 to 118, resulted largely from the defection of some Socialists in his governing coalition who feared that the overhaul of the electoral system would eliminate many of their party's seats.


2d Detective Implicated In Plot to Sell Information
For the second time in a month, another New York City police detective assigned to a premier investigative unit has been implicated in a scheme to sell confidential information to organized-crime figures, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Police officials identified the second detective under suspicion as John K. Wrynn, 28, who was abruptly transferred from the Organized Crime Investigation Division on Jan. 13.
No criminal or departmental charges have been filed against Detective Wrynn, but Federal authorities said he was the target of a Federal investigation about assertions that he gave confidential information to Mafia associates he knew from his old neighborhood in the Bronx.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
SPENCER CREW, who has been the acting director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History for the last year, has been appointed its director, Robert Adams, the secretary of the Smithsonian, said yesterday.
Dr.
Crew has been with the museum, one of Washington's most popular attractions, since 1981, when he joined it as a historian.
He became a curator in the division of community life in 1987 and was the chairman of the department of social and cultural history from 1989 to 1991.


Health Care Plan Isn't Cast in Stone
Health care experts in Congress and the Clinton Administration have begun to identify areas of possible compromise as they prepare for negotiations over President Clinton's plan to redesign the nation's health care system.
In informal discussions with Congress and in interviews, Administration officials have expressed a willingness to compromise on important details of Mr.
Clinton's plan, including cost controls and the structure of purchasing groups through which most Americans would obtain health insurance.


Birds Feast on a Cold Buffet


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The cable television industry, in an effort to stave off Federal legislation aimed at restricting violent programming, plans to create a rating system with independent monitors who would grade programmers.
The plan also endorses the introduction of a device that would allow cable subscribers to automatically block out programs that are rated violent.
The broadcast networks appear likely to accept at least part of the plan.  [ Page 1. ]  The Los Angeles earthquake and brutal winter weather in the East and Midwest have severely tested the nation's retailers.
New technology has helped distribution systems respond to some of the logistical nightmares such disruptions can cause.  [ 37. ] Companies
A Federal judge in New Orleans approved the largest class-action settlement stemming from the limited-partnership fraud scandal at Prudential Securities.
The ruling means that more than $90 million will be returned to about 115,000 investors.  [ 37. ]
In another switch, the board of Paramount Communications terminated its merger agreement with QVC Network and urged shareholders to back the latest bid from Viacom Inc.
QVC's investment bankers contended that the board was misled.  [ 37. ]
Boeing, seeing a small pickup in the airline industry, has scaled back the jobs reduction it had planned for 1994 by 14 percent.
And the company said it would add employees at a plant in Kansas.  [ 39. ]
Departing from Japan's tradition of lifetime employment, Toyota Motor is planning to hire some automobile designers for high salaries under one-year contracts.
The auto maker hopes to revitalize its design department by attracting talented people who do not want to spend their entire careers at one company.  [ 39. ]
After two years of losses, Caterpillar posted a strong gain for 1993.
Its shares jumped in heavy trading on the Big Board.  [ 39. ]
Westinghouse Electric reported a steep loss of $478 million for the quarter, as a result of a $750 million charge to cover the cost of layoffs and a streamlining of the company.  [ 39. ]
Immunex, a biotechnology company that merged with Lederle Laboratories' oncology business in June, named Lederle's president as its new chairman and chief executive.  [ 39. ] International
China agreed to give greater access to American and other foreign banks.
The announcement by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and the Beijing Government said China would also allow foreign banks to do business in local currency.
Mr.
Bentsen also said the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, would visit Beijing to consult on monetary policy. [ 37. ]
The Arab League will consider ending its 43-year-old boycott of companies that do business with Israel at a meeting of its foreign ministers in March.
About 10,000 companies are blacklisted.  [ 2. ]
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's defeat in the Japanese Parliament is expected to further delay efforts to lift the economy and to reach trade accords with the United States.  [ 5. ] Markets
The Dow Jones industrial average broke through the 3,900-point mark for the first time.
The advance by the blue chips was propelled by several strong earnings reports.  [ 37. ]
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond slipped in light trading amid some worries that political uncertainty in Japan could lead Japanese investors to sell their Treasury holdings.  [ 46. ]
Gold prices fell sharply for the second day as investors sold off in frustration over the market's failure to reach $400 an ounce.  [ 48. ]
The dollar recovered against the yen and European currencies.
A political defeat for Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan prompted an early selloff in the dollar.
But bargain hunters later drove the currency back up.  [ 48. ]


Samuel Steinwurtzel, Accountant, Dies at 83
Samuel Lionel Steinwurtzel, a certified public accountant specializing in nonprofit organizations, died on Jan. 3 at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 83 and a resident of Florham Park, N.J.
He had been in declining health and died of a heart attack, his family said.


Layoff Plan Scaled Back 14% at Boeing
Seeing a glimmer of hope on the economic horizon, the Boeing Company today scaled back the work force reduction it had planned for 1994.
With a go-ahead from the airlines for its new 737-700 aircraft, Boeing said it would begin adding employees at its plant in Wichita, Kan.
Nearly a year ago, facing canceled orders and an airline industry in worldwide recession, Boeing cut production and said it would have to trim its work force by 28,000.
Today's projected reduction, coupled with the 17,000 jobs eliminated last year, would result in a total cut of 24,000 jobs, or about 14 percent fewer.
Analysts said a modest recovery in the airline industry, together with the successful introduction of its new plane, had made Boeing management more optimistic.
Adding 1,000 Jobs in Wichita
Boeing, the largest producer of commercial aircraft, said it would cut 7,000 jobs this year in Washington State and 1,000 more at other locations; this reduction includes 1,451 jobs eliminated this month.
The Seattle company plans to add 1,000 jobs to its work force in Wichita, for a net job loss of 7,000.
As of Jan. 1, Boeing employed about 116,155.


Classical Music in Review
Gwendolyn Toth  Harpsichordist St. Michael's Church Manhattan
Just six months earlier, Claudia Dumschat had played Bach on the organ at St.
Michael's Church in beastly un-air-conditioned heat.
On Wednesday, Gwendolyn Toth played Bach's "Goldberg Variations" on the harpsichord, on an evening suited to Vaughan Williams's "Sinfonia Antartica."


Justices to Review Order Curbing Abortion Protest
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether judicial orders that keep anti-abortion protesters away from abortion clinics violate the demonstrators' constitutional right to free speech.
The case is a First Amendment challenge to a broadly worded injunction that a Florida state judge issued in April to curb frequent protests at the Aware Woman Center for Choice in Melbourne.


Classical Music in Review
'I Lombardi'  Metropolitan Opera
Lauren Flanigan is a bright-voiced soprano who is rising fast; she made her Met debut in 1991 with a minor role in "The Ghosts of Versailles," and by this fall she was drawing acclaim for her portrayal of the title role in New York City Opera's "Esther." As the Foreign Princess in the Met's "Rusalka" in November, she seemed uncertain and miscast, but her Giselda in "I Lombardi" on Thursday night made a strong impression.


Arab League May End Its Boycott Of Businesses Dealing With Israel
The Arab League will consider scrapping its 43-year-old boycott of companies that do business with Israel at a meeting of its Foreign Ministers in March, the League's Secretary General said today.
The Secretary General, Esmat Abdel-Meguid, said after a meeting with the American Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, that the 22-member body would decide collectively whether to end the so-called secondary and tertiary boycotts of Israel.


Violence and the Bobbitts
The jury in the Lorena Bobbitt trial reached a human judgment rather than a narrow legal one when it acquitted her of malicious wounding yesterday.
That's clear to anyone who watched the trial on television or read accounts of the proceedings.
Ms.
Bobbitt, after all, did indeed sever her husband's penis with a kitchen knife.
But why?
The jury -- after listening to her and a parade of witnesses testify that John Bobbitt had repeatedly abused his wife, raped and sodomized her, humiliated and taunted her -- decided she had suffered enough.
The verdict suggests that the jury decided Mrs.
Bobbitt had lost control and maimed her husband because he had maimed her -- her body and her soul -- over and over again.


Bank Rules Are Eased By China
China's Finance Minister agreed today to allow some American and foreign banks to expand into some cities of China now closed to them and to accept deposits in Chinese currency.
American and other foreign banks have been pressing the Beijing Government to open more areas of the country to foreign financial service companies, which hope to play a lucrative role as a bridge between China's tremendous appetite for investment capital and the huge interest abroad in investing in the development boom here.
Infrastructure investment in China alone between now and the end of the century is expected to top $500 billion.
Joint Effort Is Revived
Finance Minister Liu Zhongli's announcement of wider access in financial services came as part of a joint statement from himself and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, after a meeting of the two nations' Joint Economic Committee.
The committee, founded in 1979, had been a forum in which China and the United States worked out economic problems, but it had not met since the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
It was revived today by Mr.
Bentsen and Mr.
Liu.


Indonesian Official Opposes Johnson's Visit
MAGIC JOHNSON will not be allowed into Indonesia with a basketball team next month because he has the virus that causes AIDS, an Indonesian official said yesterday.
Johnson's agent, however, said that other officials of the country have assured him that there will be no problem.
Indonesia's Director General of Immigration, RONI SIKAP SINURAYA, said at a news conference in Jakarta that he would block Johnson's visit because he has H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Sinuraya said that under a 1992 immigration law, the Indonesian Government can refuse to allow people with H.I.V. or AIDS to enter the country.
Johnson is scheduled to arrive in Jakarta on Feb. 24, along with several other players, for three exhibition games


Oshkosh Truck Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lawyer Says Credibility Of Bodyguard Is Key
As a grand jury continued hearing evidence today in the assault against the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan, the lawyer for Tonya Harding's one-time bodyguard, Shawn E. Eckardt, said Eckardt's credibility would be a major factor in whether anyone is prosecuted in the case.
"Shawn is in the key role," said M. Mark McKnight, who is representing Eckardt.
"It benefits each and every other defendant to take him down. If I represented any of the other defendants, I would try to take out Shawn Eckardt, too."


Guilford Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Boy Finds a Role Model, Thanks to Neediest Cases
By his own admission, 11-year-old Tyrone Kindred is a live wire.
Even as he talks about his seemingly boundless energy, he finds it difficult to remain in one place for more than a couple of minutes.
"I guess I'm just full of get-up-and-go," Tyrone said recently as he lay on the floor of the apartment in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, where he lives with his grandmother, Elizabeth Kindred.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Rosemary Glyde, a violist and composer, misstated the given name of a surviving sister.
She is Judith Glyde.


Peoples Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.97
2.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.93
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.08
3.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.19
5.17
6.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.27
6.26
7.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.22
7.22
8.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.51
5.52
6.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 18


Bronx Cheers for Some Stars
It didn't surprise Mark Messier, or Adam Graves, or even John Vanbiesbrouck, who does not play for the Rangers anymore.
On a night designed to honor legendary National Hockey League players and to showcase the skills of the league's current All-Stars, the Madison Square Garden crowd still managed to find plenty of things to boo.
The fans may have raved for Wayne Gretzky, captain of the Western Conference team, and Sergei Federov, winner of the title as the league's fastest skater, but they had nothing but boos for any Ranger division rivals.
Even in introductions, the fans had loud and lusty boos for Philadelphia's Eric Lindros and the Islanders' Pierre Turgeon.


Bandag Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abortion Foes Fail to Attract Crowds of Past
When they gathered in past years on the anniversary of the Supreme Court's Roe v.
Wade decision, participants in the "March for Life" would hear telephone messages from Presidents who supported their anti-abortion cause.
Last year, they were provided an instant rallying point when newly inaugurated President Clinton marked the occasion by signing several executive orders overturning anti-abortion edicts of his predecessors.
Today, in a tepid reprise of rallies past, anti-abortion advocates drew less than half the people they did last year and were, for the most part, ignored by official Washington.


Praise of Innis Wins Rebuke For Giuliani
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that a fund-raising dinner on Monday to benefit a conservative black politician, Roy E. Innis, was "probably the most significant Martin Luther King celebration in the New York City area" and complained that the press had not covered it.
The remark, made on a radio talk show, drew a frosty response from some black elected officials and civil rights advocates.
Mr.
Giuliani was heckled and booed at another Martin Luther King tribute on Monday morning at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and his glowing statements about Mr.
Innis, the national chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, appeared to separate him further from the political mood of many black neighborhoods where liberal Democrats predominate.


Cards With Stats in Multiples of $1.25
Will a mint-condition Times Square ever be worth a slightly dog-eared Honus Wagner?
Never mind that "mint-condition Times Square" sounds like the kind of only-in-New-York contradiction that David Letterman's audience would giggle at.
This is about collectibles, or potential collectibles -- specifically, a new series of Metropolitan Transportation Authority fare cards that the agency hopes will someday be in the same financial league as the rarest of baseball cards.


When Does Reform Toward Indian Peoples of the U.S. Begin?
To the Editor:
"The Other Mexico" (editorial, Jan. 4) contrasts the "free market" of northern Mexico with the subsistence agriculture and native peoples OF Chiapas in southern Mexico, and calls for land, economic and government reforms to respect the rights of Indians.
Then, ignoring United States political and economic realities, you make a shockingly naive statement: "If Mexico is to take its place among the democracies of North America, the gap between economics and politics -- and between the two Mexicos -- urgently needs to be bridged."


Don't View East Bloc As a Paradise Lost
To the Editor:
"Women and Children Last" (Op-Ed, Jan. 8) by Lynn Duggan and Nancy Folbre, on the demise of social benefits for women and children in eastern Germany, is full of factual misrepresentations.
It also ignores the close linkage in Communist societies between state provision of social services with political oppression and economic misery.


Finger-Pointing by NATO Allies Delays Help for a Bosnian Town
Just 10 days after NATO leaders called for urgent action, including possible air strikes, to aid besieged towns in Bosnia, allied policy on the former Yugoslav republic is once again in open disarray, with the United States, France and the United Nations bickering over who is to blame.
To hear the French tell it, the United States has balked on promised air support for a military operation aimed at reopening the airport in the northern town of Tuzla, which is jammed with hungry Muslim refugees.
To hear United States military planners tell it, France has abruptly put forth unacceptable proposals for American ground troops to take part in the Tuzla operation.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
Neeme Jarvi has brought to his guest-conducting appearances at the New York Philharmonic the Sixth Symphony of Rued Langgaard.
A program that also included the Bruch G minor Violin Concerto and the Sibelius Fifth Symphony had its first of four hearings on Thursday.
There will be repetitions tonight and Tuesday.


Aftershocks Rumble On, Prompting an Agitated Question: Isn't It Over Yet?
As aftershocks from Monday's earthquake continue to rattle this city, many residents who once prided themselves on their laid-back style jump at the slightest rumble, avoid going inside buildings and refuse to leave their children's side.
One question is on their mind: When is it going to end?
Wendy Levin, 34 years old, said that she woke up this morning at her mother's house, thinking that perhaps the shaking had finally stopped.
It had been at least 12 hours since she last felt a tremor, and almost four days since she, her husband and 3-year-old child left their damaged apartment and moved in with her parents in Tarzana, in the San Fernando Valley.


U.S. Is Setting Up Tent Cities As Nerves Fray After Quake
The National Guard began erecting tent cities for earthquake victims today as jittery public officials promised other relief efforts for angry residents waiting in long lines to apply for aid.
The tumultuous opening of the Federal relief centers on Thursday prompted officials to dispatch National Guardsmen in riot gear today to patrol the lines that snaked through parks, fields and streets outside the centers.


Mandela Group Issues Parliament-in-Waiting List
After weeks of speculation, dissent and deal-cutting, the African National Congress published today the list of wildly disparate people it has nominated to replace the current homogeneous Government of whites.
The list, in effect a gallery of the likely Parliament-in-waiting, is a mix of militants and moderates, exiles and insiders, technocrats and Communists, venerated veterans like Nelson Mandela, who inevitably tops the list, and newcomers like the granddaughter-in-law of Hendrik Verwoerd, the founding ideologue of apartheid.


New Gifts Advance WNET Arts Project
With two donations totaling $3 million, the public television station WNET, Channel 13 in New York, says it has received more than $38 million in its campaign to raise $65 million for new arts and cultural programs.
The station this week announced the creation of a division to produce series and specials on the visual arts, architecture, social history and popular culture.
William F. Baker, the president of WNET, announced that Jac Venza, long the executive director of the public television series "Great Performances," would be the director of cultural arts programs, a new position.


Review/Dance; Mirthfulness and Passion In Three Works by Robbins
The New York City Ballet offered three major works by Jerome Robbins on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
Each was distinguished in its own right, and they complemented one another wonderfully.
"Ives, Songs" is a bittersweet choreographic sigh to vocal music by Charles Ives, the early 20th-century American composer whose music is often simultaneously sentimental and experimental.


Advanced Marketing Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Lorena Bobbitt Acquitted In Mutilation of Husband
In a verdict that highlighted the plight and rights of abused women, a jury today found Lorena L. Bobbitt not guilty of all criminal charges, concluding that she was temporarily insane last June when she cut off her husband's penis with a kitchen knife.
When the jury of seven women and five men announced its decision, acquitting Mrs.
Bobbitt of malicious wounding -- an offense for which she could have been imprisoned for 20 years -- a gasp went up among her supporters in the courtroom.


Search for Defense Chief Narrows to Pentagon Deputy
President Clinton has focused his search for a new Defense Secretary on William J. Perry, the current Deputy Secretary, and will weigh his decision over the weekend, White House officials said today.
Mr.
Perry, a 66-year-old former engineering professor who is widely respected in Congress and at the Pentagon, met with Mr.
Clinton alone this morning in what White House officials called a "warm" session.


Review/Dance; Speed and Nuance, Speed and Daring
George Balanchine's "Sylvia Pas de Deux" is associated with two expert technicians, Maria Tallchief and Andre Eglevsky, who performed the duet frequently.
And certainly this little oddity of a duet calls for a strong classical technique.
But technique must be used here in the service of lightness, charm and almost finicky detail.
Danced to a wonderfully gooey ballet score by Delibes, the duet is all pizzicato and candied violet.
It is a very French ballet, and Kyra Nichols and Nikolaj Hubbe captured those nuances in a performance presented by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.
Ms.
Nichols's footwork was fast and sharp but always delicate, topped by a soft upper torso that was like oil over turbulent water.
After a slightly rocky start, Mr.
Hubbe relaxed into his distinctive blending of earth and air, traveling across the stage and turning in a way that dug into the floor and sailed above it simultaneously.
He looked as if he were enjoying himself, too, and his partnering of Ms.
Nichols was effortless.


U.S. Trust Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sills May Get The Top Job At Lincoln Center
Beverly Sills, the soprano who followed a stellar career on the opera stage with a decade as general director of the New York City Opera, is expected to be nominated as chairwoman of Lincoln Center, several people close to the search committee of the board have said.
The directors of Lincoln Center are to hold a special meeting on Monday to elect a successor to George Weissman, who has headed the board of the performing arts complex since 1986.
The invitations to the meeting, which were faxed to board members this week, do not name the single candidate to be proposed, but sources close to the process say that the search committee is to name Miss Sills.
She would become the fifth head of Lincoln Center and the first woman to hold the post.


Fulton Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Theaters Are Burned By the Cold
The big chill is turning Broadway into Siberia.
"Ticket-buyers are getting weather-beaten, due to the length of the cold spell," said Stuart W. Little, a spokesman for the Theater Development Fund, which runs the reduced-price TKTS booth.
"There has been a cumulative effect, and many would-be theatergoers are just feeling discouraged right now."


RESULTS PLUS N.B.A. Kukoc Shocks Pacers  Toni Kukoc banked in a 3-pointer at the buzzer last night as the Chicago Bulls pulled off their 16th straight home victory, 96-95, over the Indiana Pacers. Reggie Miller's jumper with 0.8 seconds left gave the Pacers a 95-93 lead and, presumably, the victory. Miller even bowed to the crowd after a timeout was called. But Scottie Pippen lofted a cross-court pass to Kukoc, who launched the shot over Derrick McKey. (AP) Sonics 91, Mavericks 87: Sam Perkins scored 8 points during an 18-2 run in the third quarter as Seattle overcame a sluggish start to extend Dallas's National Basketball Association-record home-court losing streak to 19 games. (AP) Bucks 113, Hornets 110: Milwaukee got 20 points each from Vin Baker, Eric Murdock and Frank Brickowski, and the host Bucks overcame an 18-point deficit to beat Charlotte. (AP) Pistons 118, Heat 98: The sharpshooting of Joe Dumars and Terry Mills helped Detroit snap its 14-game losing streak as the visiting Pistons beat Miami, which lost its seventh in a row. Dumars scored 35 points and Mills 34. (AP) Celtics 124, Warriors 116: Boston won a season-high fourth straight game after losing 13 of its previous 15, beating visiting Golden State. (AP) Jazz 112, Kings 83: Jeff Malone made seven of his nine shots in the decisive third period, sparking Utah to victory over Sacramento. (AP) BOBSLEDDING Last U.S. Spot Filled  Randy Will of Binghamton, N.Y., drove his sled to victory in the final trial yesterday in Calgary, Alberta, to secure the last of the United States Bobsled Federation's three berths in next month's Winter Olympics. Brian Shimer of Naples, Fla., won the four-day trials and his sled was designated as USA-1. Jim Herberich of Winchester, Mass., is USA-2. (AP) YACHT RACING Tokio Keeps Its Lead  Tokio maintained a narrow lead yesterday with less than 24 hours to go in the third leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race. Tokio, a Whitbread 60 Class yacht skippered by Chris Dickson, was reported 208 nautical miles from the finish line at Auckland, New Zealand. The Maxi-class New Zealand Endeavor was only three miles behind, while five other boats remained in contention. (AP)


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The New Quest: Funds That Are Tax-Efficient
WEALTHY Americans who watched Washington raise their taxes last summer are just beginning to feel the impact.
Reflecting new top tax brackets of 36 percent and 39.6 percent, withholding tables have been changed for this year, resulting in smaller paychecks.
Because the law is retroactive to 1993, high earners face even bigger hits on April 15.


FPL Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jefferies Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Beliefs; Index of Good Deeds: Down 25. Index of Good Thoughts: Up 4. Index of Prejudice: Unchanged.
President Clinton will deliver his State of the Union Message this Tuesday from the Speaker's rostrum of the House of Representatives.
But symbolically he will also be occupying the Presidency's bully pulpit.
It will be surprising if the President does not seek to assess the moral and spiritual state of the nation as well as its political and economic condition.
Others, however, have been beating him to the punch.
Recently, a group of social scientists, including the polltakers Daniel Yankelovich and Everett C. Ladd, the political scientist Norman Ornstein and the sociologist Seymour Martin Lipset, answered a call to assess "The Moral State of the Union."


Corrections
A headline on Jan. 7 about a drug-trafficking case involving John and Joseph Gambino referred imprecisely to their guilty plea.
While the two admitting smuggling drugs, and prosecutors described them as heroin smugglers for the Mafia, the guilty plea did not specify that they were working for the Gambino crime family.
In addition, the article referred incorrectly to testimony by one witness, Salvatore Gravano, at an earlier trial on the same charges that ended in a hung jury.
While other witnesses testified that John Gambino was the main link between Mafia heroin traffickers in Sicily and the American Mafia, Mr.
Gravano's testimony did not make that link.


Pope &amp; Talbot reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oginga Odinga, 82, A Longtime Leader In Kenya's Politics
Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, who helped guide Kenya to independence in 1963 and was an important political leader there for more than 30 years, died on Thursday.
He was 82.
Members of his family said he had suffered a heart attack at his home in the town of Kisumu, 280 miles northwest of Nairobi, and died in the Aga Khan Hospital there.


Falcons Eye Coughlin
The Atlanta Falcons have talked this week to TOM COUGHLIN, the Boston College coach, and SHERM LEWIS, the offensive coordinator for the Green Bay Packers, about their vacant head coaching position.
Earlier, the Falcons interviewed JUNE JONES, their assistant head coach for offense, and GARY STEVENS, the Miami Dolphins' quarterback coach. (AP)


New England Business Service Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24


When Hearing Has Faded but Voice Is Strong
The occasion hardly needs more drama.
From their inception three years ago, Robert Shaw's annual choral workshops at Carnegie Hall and the resulting performances have been acclaimed highlights of the musical season in New York.
Tomorrow afternoon, Mr.
Shaw will conduct the current workshop chorus and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's in one of the great masterpieces of the century, Benjamin Britten's "War Requiem," of 1962.
For good or ill, any performance of this stirring work, for chorus, children's chorus, orchestra, chamber orchestra and three vocal soloists, still qualifies as an event.


A Setback for Economy and U.S. Trade
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's devastating loss in Parliament today set off an upheaval in Japan's politics, but in practical terms, it seems likely to have an even greater impact on the country's faltering economy and its frayed relations with the United States.
Mr.
Hosokawa had hoped that the legislation to clean up Japan's scandal-ridden electoral system would be the crowning achievement of his reform-minded Government, but in recent months the effort had become a bottleneck.


To Close or Not to Close?
Pity the poor suburban school superintendent in weeks like this.
Call off school and you're a snow wimp, intent on robbing young minds of valuable classroom time.
Open up and you're putting children's lives in danger.
No matter what you decide, snow means angry parents.
In the city it's different.
While many suburban school districts had two snow days last week and opened late the other days, New York City schools were open for business as usual.
Too many children in the city depend on the schools, according to a school board spokesman.
For many working parents, it's just too hard to find alternative care for their kids -- and many children depend on the schools for breakfast and lunch.
The last time anyone can remember city schools closing was Friday, Jan. 21, in the Great Blizzard of 1978.


METRO DIGEST
WATER MAIN BREAKS IN BROOKLYN
A 135-year-old water main ruptured in the 6-degree stillness before dawn in South Brooklyn, collapsing half a block of roadway in Carroll Gardens, flooding dozens of homes, cutting off utilities and closing the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel for the morning rush.
Page 1.
"We now live at 514 Lake Clinton," said a Carroll Gardens resident, in front of whose stoop yawned a frigid water-filled crater.
Page 26.
NEW YORK CITY ENERGETIC GOALS FOR COMMISSIONER
In his first two weeks in office, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has personally evicted a panhandler from a subway car, read the riot act to a precinct under scrutiny for corruption and made an impassioned speech in Harlem about civil rights.
For the next nine months, he has more ambitious plans.
Page 1.
GIULIANI'S PRAISE COOLLY RECEIVED
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that a fund-raising dinner on Monday for a conservative black politician, Roy E. Innis, was "probably the most significant Martin Luther King celebration in the New York City area." But the remark drew a frosty response from some black elected officials and civil rights advocates.
Page 24.
STRICTER RULES FOR SEX CLUBS
In an effort to strengthen regulations to avoid transmission of the AIDS virus, the New York State Public Health Council added vaginal intercourse to the activities banned in commercial sex establishments.
Page 25.
DETECTIVE ACCUSED OF MOB DEAL
For the second time in a month, a New York City police detective in an elite investigative unit has been implicated in a scheme to sell confidential information to organized-crime figures, law-enforcement officials said.
Page 25.
WHY NOT ONE OF THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE?
The "collectors' limited edition" fare cards are worth $36.25 in rides but cost $50 from the Transit Authority.
Here's how to order.
Page 25.
Lawyers for the City University of New York asked an appeals court to let it dismiss Dr.
Leonard Jeffries.
Page 25.
An official who was supposed to fight graft in New York City's school construction pleaded guilty to accepting bribes.
Page 25.
REGION WHITMAN HINTS TAXES MAY RISE
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said that her plan to cut income taxes should not force New Jersey municipalities to raise property taxes to make up for reductions in state aid.
But she warned that she would not hold herself responsible if local spending led to higher taxes.
Page 27.
SLAIN BOY'S MOTHER DISAPPEARS
The mother of a 5-year-old boy whom she reported missing at a carnival in May 1991, and whose remains were found in a New Jersey marsh a year later, was reported missing herself by the Middlesex County Prosecutor.
Page 27.
New York paid the first part of a $200 million debt to Delaware in a settlement.
Page 27.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 26
Neediest Cases 24


Classical Music in Review
Nathaniel Watson  Baritone St. Bartholomew's Church Manhattan
"Die Schone Mullerin," with its leaps of happiness and its conciliatory denouement, may be the most touching of Schubert's tragic cycles, if only for its paradox.
Nathaniel Watson, accompanied by his teacher, Herbert Burtis, sang these 20 songs on a Wednesday evening more appropriate to Schubert's companion piece, "Winterreise."


Bell Atlantic Corp.
The Bell Atlantic Corporation reported nearly a 3 percent rise in fourth-quarter operating profit yesterday to $337.2 million, compared with $327.5 million a year earlier.
But in the 1993 quarter, an early retirement of some debt reduced the final net income to $333.1 million, or 76 cents a share.
In the year-earlier quarter a similar retirement of debt of $10.2 million reduced net income to $317.3 million, or 74 cents.
Total revenues rose 1.3 percent, to $3.317 billion.
For the year, Bell Atlantic posted a 4.7 percent gain in net income.


Classical Music in Review
Clamma Dale  Soprano Weill Recital Hall
To commemorate the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, Clamma Dale presented an evening of ballads and spirituals from the end of the slavery era on Monday evening.
Her program, "Songs of the Civil War," drew on the repertories of both sides and she argued in her program notes that even the songs of the South have a special resonance for her.


Regulations for Sex Clubs Are Strengthened in Effort to Curb AIDS Risk
The New York State Public Health Council decided yesterday to amend state regulations to strengthen regulations intended to avoid transmission of the AIDS virus.
The council added vaginal intercourse to the activities banned in commercial sex establishments.
With the change, the council was responding to current scientific knowledge about H.I.V. transmission risks and to a proliferation of sex clubs in recent years despite a crackdown in the 1980's that led to the closing of many of them.


Dr. A. T. Jersild, 91, Teacher and Expert In Child Psychology
Dr.
Arthur Thomas Jersild, a developmental psychologist who wrote about how schools can foster self-awareness and self-understanding in children and teachers, died on Monday at a nursing home in Beaufort, S.C.
A former resident of Middletown, N.J., he was 91.
At his death, he was professor emeritus of psychology and education at Teachers College of Columbia University.
He published many books on child psychology and education between 1928 and 1965 that were widely translated.
His "In Search of Self" (1952) was based on some 3,000 interviews with students from the fourth grade to college.
He found that even small children have more self-awareness than was commonly thought and that emotional hurt can leave emotional scars worse than the scars from a physical attack.
"The little child knows what it is to have his feelings hurt," he wrote, "to be sad, to be disappointed with as much the same basic meaning as are experienced by the post-graduate student."
"Child Psychology" (Prentiss-Hall), first published in 1933, went through its sixth edition in 1968.
It was considered a premier text in its field.
He urged that teacher-training programs help future teachers face their own conflicts and anxieties.
His analysis of a teacher's self-understanding was published in 1955 as "When Teachers Face Themselves" (Teachers College Press) and remains in print as a paperback.
Dr.
Jersild was born in Elk Horn, Iowa.
He graduated Phi Beta Kappa from the University of Nebraska and earned his Ph.D. in psychology at Columbia in 1927, when he became an instructor at Barnard College.
He then taught at the University of Wisconsin before joining the Teachers College faculty in 1930.
He reached emeritus status in 1967.
Dr.
Jersild is survived by a son, John T. of Beaufort; a daughter, Alice J. of Staatsburg, N.Y., and two grandchildren.


'Mayor' Still Missing


DQE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


And Oh, How the Many Have Fallen
DR.
JOHN LYDEN, the director of the fracture service at New York Hospital, has long observed the fall of man (and woman), but he can't remember a patch of broken bones as bad as the one that started with the current cold spell.
"It's been pretty wild," he said, describing the continuing epidemic of ice-induced malpedestrianism that is bringing down so many people.
"We've been going pretty much nonstop -- ankles, hips, wrists, elbows," said the graying surgeon.
"I haven't seen anything like this in my 32 years here."


Ruddick Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


CYRIX WINS A COURT ROUND IN DISPUTE WITH INTEL
The Cyrix Corporation, based in Richardson, Tex., won a round yesterday in its court fight with the Intel Corporation over its ability to make microprocessors that are compatible with Intel's chips.
The Federal District Court in Sherman, Tex., ruled that Intel cannot collect a licensing fee from Cyrix's customers related to a key patent covering the Intel chip.
In July 1992, the court ruled that Cyrix's products manufactured by SGS-Thomson were covered by a cross license that SGS-Thomson had signed with Intel.
The two companies return to court on Monday.


Summerall And Madden Bound for Fox
The Fox Network has snared John Madden after a month of wooing.
And it's getting his broadcast partner, Pat Summerall, too.
Nothing official has emerged from the Fox or Madden camps, but several people familiar with the situation said yesterday that Madden, the popular CBS football analyst, had all but signed a spectacular four-year deal worth at least $30 million.


Computer Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mets' Olson Injured
GREG OLSON, the catcher the Mets signed as a free agent late last month, had a cast placed on his left hand yesterday to repair a broken hamate bone, the wedgelike bone on the outside of the wrist.
The team said Olson would wear the cast for two weeks and then have a rehabilitation period of another four to six weeks.


Pishchana Journal; Soviet Breadbasket Digs for Crumbs
In the fertile countryside here, where mist-shrouded fields of black soil await new plantings and pigs are being fattened for market, village life is in many ways lurching backward.
Like many others, the villages on the relatively well-off Dmitri collectivized farm helped make Ukraine the breadbasket of the Soviet Union.
But now the farmers do not contemplate exports.
Instead, they wonder if there will be enough fuel for the tractors in the spring and enough people in the capital, Kiev, 40 miles to the north, who can afford their products.


Kimball International Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Pictures yesterday with an article about the illness of the New York State Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, were reversed in some copies.
Mr.
Weprin was the older man; the younger man was Assemblyman Sheldon Silver.


Aubrey S. Newman, 90, Colonel Famed for 'Follow Me!' Battle Cry
Aubrey S. Newman, the infantry colonel whose World War II battle cry of "Follow me!" became a watchword for infantry leadership and bravery, died here on Wednesday.
He was 90 and had lived in Sarasota since 1960.
Colonel Newman shouted the words while commanding a regiment leading Gen.
Douglas MacArthur's "return" to the Philippines on Oct. 20, 1944 -- an amphibious assault on Leyte island.


Precision Castparts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


CHRONICLE
Dr.
MATHILDE KRIM and Dr.
JUNE OSBORN have been named the winners of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award, given by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, which has 140,000 members from 121 countries.
Both women have been pioneers in advocating research on AIDS.
Dr.
Krim, an adjunct professor of public health at Columbia University, is a founder of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Dr.
Osborn, a professor of epidemiology and pediatrics at the University of Michigan and a former dean of its School of Public Health, was the chairwoman of the National Commission on AIDS.


Dividing Pension Funds In Divorce Settlements
WHEN couples in their 50's and 60's divorce, retirement benefits can be an important part of the financial arrangement.
Although money in tax-favored retirement plans generally cannot be assigned to another person, the Internal Revenue Code provides for an exception, a qualified domestic relations order, known by the initials Q.D.R.O. and pronounced quadro.


Spurning QVC, Paramount Embraces New Viacom Bid
The board of Paramount Communications Inc. terminated its merger agreement with QVC Network Inc. yesterday and endorsed the latest bid from QVC's rival, Viacom Inc.
The move angered QVC's investment bankers, Allen &amp; Company, who argued that Paramount's board had been misled by the data from Viacom's investment bankers, Smith Barney Shearson, people involved in the negotiations said yesterday.
Executives at both investment firms declined to comment.


Reinvent Welfare, Humanely
It's time to end welfare as I knew it.
Twenty-five years ago I was a single, working mother, unable to provide for my three children, ages 1, 3 and 5.
I know what it is like to lie awake at night and worry about not having any health insurance.
I know how hard it is to find good child care -- I had 13 different babysitters in one year.
I know what it is like to choose between paying the rent and buying new shoes.


ASSAD'S SON KILLED IN AN AUTO CRASH
The eldest son of President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, widely mentioned as a potential successor to his father, was killed early today in an automobile accident outside Damascus.
The death of the son, Maj.
Basil al-Assad, who was 33 and one of the most popular figures in his father's inner circle, comes as a sharp blow to the President at an especially difficult time, only days after he met in Geneva with President Clinton in an attempt to put the Middle East peace effort back on track.
Syrian and Israeli negotiators are scheduled to resume their peace talks next week in Washington, after a four-month suspension.


Slower, but Surer, Arms Curbs
The U.S. has traditionally tried to stop the spread of nuclear arms by talking nations out of wanting the weapons in the first place or by denying them the technology to make arms.
But now that proliferation ranks high among the dangers to U.S. security, the Clinton Administration faces pressure to pursue a third course, military action.
Nonproliferation hawks, impatient with the traditional tactics of diplomacy and denial, cite the gulf war and the subsequent disarming of Iraq as proof that force works.
President Clinton has wisely resisted.
While keeping the military option in reserve, he has focused on diplomacy and on curbing trafficking in nuclear components to keep countries like North Korea and Iran from building bombs.


Hamilton Southworth, 86, Dies; Internist Promoted Living Wills
Dr.
Hamilton Southworth, an internist who was prominent in medical ethics groups and the administration of Presbyterian Hospital and did early research in sulfa drugs, died yesterday in Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 86 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and in Quogue, L.I.
He had pneumonia, said his daughter Katharine S. Smith.


Toyota to Hire Designers On a Contractual Basis
Japan's big blue-chip companies are known for their loyal lifetime employees.
But the nation's largest auto maker apparently thinks some such employees can get a little stale.
In a departure from the practice of lifetime employment, the Toyota Motor Corporation said today that it would begin hiring some automobile designers under one-year contracts.


Snowstorms and Earthquake Put Retailers to Test
Across the nation, logistics experts for retailers ranging from huge department stores to fast-food outlets are wrestling with problems that include brutal winter weather in the East and Midwest to the aftermath of the Los Angeles earthquake.
Faced with needs that change by the hour, companies are rounding up emergency power and water supplies for Los Angeles, juggling inventories and delivery routes from coast to coast, and redeploying drivers and hiring outside truckers to keep goods moving without violating limits on how long a truck driver can be on the road.
To avoid highway bottlenecks, some distributors switched to airlifting vital products.


Judge Approves Big Prudential Settlement
A Federal district judge today approved the largest class-action settlement stemming from the limited-partnership fraud scandal at Prudential Securities, a decision that will return money to some investors and limit Prudential's potential liability.
The ruling here by Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr. came even as he said he would have liked the settlement to have been larger.
Barring appeal, more than $90 million will be divided among about 115,000 investors participating in the action involving the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships.
That translates into about 8 cents for each dollar invested, before deducting 20 to 30 percent of the total, which is expected to be paid in fees to lawyers.


Pope Has Long Shown Concern for Jerusalem; Pregnant Omission
To the Editor:
"A Vatican Tie With Israel" (editorial Jan. 6) enshrines a common error.
To assert that "old wounds persist despite conciliatory statements by popes and papal enclaves intended to heal by absolving the Jews of blame for Jesus' crucifixion" is a misleading overstatement.


Corrections
An obituary of the Rev.
Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale on Dec. 26 misidentified his last published book.
It was "Bible Power for Successful Living," edited by Donald T. Kauffman, who assisted in the writing; it was not "This Incredible Century." The obituary also misstated the total sales of "This Incredible Century." The number was 74,373 through December -- not nearly 20 million, which is the figure for "The Power of Positive Thinking." And the obituary misstated the number of languages in which "This Incredible Century" has been published.
It has come out only in English, not in 41 languages.


Cragin Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PACIFIC TELESIS GROUP
The Pacific Telesis Group said yesterday that it lost $391 million in the fourth quarter, mostly as a result of a reorganization, but its profits from operations were also below expectations.
The Baby Bell based in San Francisco said earnings were reduced by $670 million because of special charges for a revamping that is expected to eliminate 10,000 jobs by the end of 1997.
Pacific Telesis reported a profit of $287 million for the quarter a year earlier.


Bahamas Burdened by Haitian Refugees
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 2 front-page report that the Bahamas are forcing Haitian refugees to flee to the United States: The situation of Haitian nationals illegally in the Bahamas is indeed difficult, one that Bahamian Governments have faced, without help from the international community, for more than 30 years.


Allan G. Odell, 90; Burma Shave Executive Linked Beards to Bards
Allan G. Odell, who developed the roadside advertising campaign of rhyming jingles for Burma Shave that became a fixture of rural America for almost 40 years, died on Monday at his home in Edina, Minn.
He was 90.
The cause was "just old age," said his son George.


Cable Industry Endorses Ratings And Devices to Lock Out Violence
The nation's cable television companies have drafted a plan to create a new rating system for violent programming, along with independent monitors to grade them with regular report cards.
The four broadcast networks appear likely to accept part of the plan.
The cable industry plan, which has not been made final, also endorses the introduction of a device that would allow cable subscribers to block automatically programs that are rated violent.
Cable companies would also adopt a number of voluntary guidelines, like restricting shows with graphic material to late-night hours when children are less likely to be watching.


Different Spins on European Comebacks
A decade ago, long before the worst of times arrived in Sarajevo, an East German teen-ager named Katarina Witt and a nearly perfect pair of British ice dancers named Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean won gold medals in figure skating at the Winter Olympics.
All three would turn professional, cash large numbers of checks and ultimately throw caution and six-figure income to the wind for one more chance at "amateur" glory.


Red Cross Says the Chinese Are Seriously Discussing Prison Visits
Delegates from the International Committee of the Red Cross said this week that Chinese officials had given the agency the most serious indications to date that they were planning to open prisons and detention centers to Red Cross inspections this year in what would be the first outside inspections in 45 years of Communist rule.
Jean-Michel Monod, who led a four-member delegation from the Geneva-based organization, said in an interview on Thursday that Chinese officials had initiated detailed legal and procedural discussions on how Red Cross workers would go about visiting political prisoners and detainees anywhere in China.


USX-Delhi Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shootout to Be Tested If All-Star Game Is Tied
When the National Hockey League plays its All-Star Game at Madison Square Garden this afternoon, the Eastern and Western Conference teams will use a shootout to decide a winner if the score is still tied after five minutes of overtime.
It could be a rehearsal for future policy in regular-season games.
Gary Bettman, commissioner of the N.H.L., said yesterday that he had appointed a 10-executive committee to study the shootout question.
The implementation of the All-Star shootout and the roster of the committee were announced during a Board of Governors meeting in Manhattan.
The report from the committee could come back in a few weeks.


The Earthquake; In the Car on a Post-Quake Commute
It was 5 A.M.
The sun had yet to peep over the horizon, but Mark C. Matlock was already preparing for departure.
Seat belt? Check. Fuel? Check. Refreshments. Check, check. He revved up the engine.


Corrections
A dance review on Thursday about a performance by the choreographer Donna Uchizono on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater in Manhattan misidentified the lighting designer for "Desiree." He is Stan Pressner, not Dave Feldman.


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bills Set Their Focus Just Beyond Montana
The American Conference championship game on Sunday has been portrayed as a battle between Joe Montana of the Kansas City Chiefs and the Buffalo Bills' defense.
Stop the passing of Montana, the 37-year-old master quarterback, and the Chiefs have nowhere to go.
Not so, Bruce Smith said today.
Smith is the Bills' All-Pro defensive end, their best pass rusher and the player who must have a big game if the Bills are to go to their fourth consecutive Super Bowl.
Smith is also a realist who believes in first things first.


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Don't Rally 'Round This Flag, Boys
WHEN players, coaches and officials begin to arrive in Atlanta on Monday for Super Bowl week, they will step into an intriguing conflict over a symbol.
Some argue that the symbol is deeply rooted in racism; others call it an artifact of Southern culture.
The dispute revolves around the public display of the Georgia state flag -- which prominently features the Confederate battle insignia -- in state buildings.
The most significant of these buildings -- for the National Football League's purpose -- is the Georgia Dome, home of this year's Super Bowl.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 JAPAN LAWMAKERS REJECT REFORM  The upper house of Japan's Parliament rejected a political reform package, a stunning defeat for the Prime Minister, who had promised to end corruption.
For the next nine months, he has more ambitious plans.  1  Neediest Cases 24  Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 11-17, 49  Beverly Sills may be nominated as Lincoln Center chairwoman.  11  Benjamin Luxon, with faded hearing but strong voice.  11  Cold cuts theater-ticket sales.  13  Music: Kronos Quartet.  11  Sports 29-34  Obituaries 10  Allan G. Odell; Burma Shave executive who linked beards to bards.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Slower, but surer, arms curbs.
Violence and the Bobbitts.
To close or not to close.
Where the sun never sets.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: The $ port$ report.
Russell Baker: Of course crime pays.
Stephen Koch: The Dimitrov conspiracy.
Lynn Woolsey: Reinvent warfare, humanely.
Bridge 17 Chronicle 22 Crossword 16


In Frozen Earth, Seeking Peace; A Father's Painful Search Continues for Sara Anne Wood
In a basin of snow and thick trees, Robert Wood dropped his shovel by his side and leaned against a small pine this afternoon.
He rested a few seconds, then bent again to the frozen earth, stopping for a moment to twist off a branch that had scraped his head.
"Somewhere up here my daughter is beneath the ground and I don't know exactly where," he said.
"Based on the information we have, our belief is that she is here. We realize that could be false. But she's my daughter. I'm certainly not going to be sitting at home letting other people do the work."


A Fixer-Upper That Becomes a Home and More
In a few weeks, Carol F. Darbyshire expects to move into a newly renovated house that will offer real comfort and a measure of financial security.
Ms.
Darbyshire, a 34-year-old landscape architect, bought the ramshackle two-family home in Boston early last year and then acted as her own general contractor to fix it up.
She will live in a duplex apartment in the building and rent the other unit.


Bridge
The most famous superstition in the bridge world is the Rabbi's Rule, which states that the king of clubs is always bare.
Statistics do not support this, but nevertheless a superstitious player, conscious of the singleton possibility, might well have found the winning road on the diagramed deal.
It was played in a home duplicate game, and was reported by Alex Groner of Poway, Calif.
He sat North, and eventually bid six diamonds in the hope that somebody could make something: Either five hearts by East-West or six diamonds by North-South.


Special Prosecutor to Open Office in Little Rock for Inquiry on Clintons' Land Deal
After being briefed by Federal officials on what has been learned so far about President Clinton's land dealings in Arkansas, the new independent counsel in the case was back at his Wall Street law firm today, completing personal business and taking the first steps toward finding a staff of prosecutors.
The counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., intends to open an office soon in Little Rock, Ark., which he said on Thursday would be "the center of gravity" for the investigation.
Colleagues at his law firm and lawyers who worked with him when he was the United States Attorney in Manhattan in the 1970's said today that he had a wide pool of professional acquaintances to draw upon for the investigation.


Observer; Of Course Crime Pays
Every politician in the United States obviously intends to run against crime as soon as possible.
It is a noble strategy with a fatal flaw; to wit, it leaves a dearth of pro-crime candidates for crime-hating statesmen to run against.
Many politicians, saying they fear that a complete absence of crime-loving candidates will end their dreams of serving the public, have asked my help.
And so, seizing the chance to mix business and patriotism, I announce formation of a company called the Pro-Crime Party Inc.


Q &amp; A
I.R.A. Withdrawals
What is the minimum amount that must be withdrawn annually from an individual retirement account when I reach age 70 1/2?
ROSLYN SCHLANSKY, Manhattan
Although you can start withdrawing funds from an I.R.A. at age 59 1/2, withdrawals must begin by April 1 of the year after the one in which you reach 70 1/2.
The minimum distribution is based on the account's balance on Dec. 31 of the previous year.
Distributions in any single year may not exceed $150,000, with a penalty of 15 percent on larger amounts.
And if you fail to withdraw enough to satisfy the minimum requirement, you will have to pay a penalty tax of 50 percent of the amount that should have been withdrawn.
"The minimum distribution for each year must be calculated in one of three ways," said Martin Leventhal, head of a New York accounting firm bearing his name.
"You can use the life expectancy of the owner, the life expectancy of the owner and a beneficiary or a specific period less than either of the first two categories." Information on calculating the minimum distribution is available by calling (800) 829-3676 and asking for I.R.S.
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrangements.
Ending Partnership Deals
Am I condemned to carry a dormant partnership investment for the indefinite future or is there some way of claiming a long-term capital loss?
J.J. BODDEWYN, Manhattan
The interest in a limited partnership can be abandoned, but there are potential pitfalls.
For example, you may have to satisfy a potential tax liability on deferred income that you never received, called a recapture tax.
In addition, "when you abandon the investment, the limited partner is responsible for his or her share of the liabilities," said David Scott O'Bryon, president of the American Association of Limited Partners.
"There may also be offsetting losses and gains. Most investors try to write off their investment as worthless, which is hard to prove."
Willing Real Property
In my will, I am leaving my condominium unit to a person of limited financial means.
Until the will is probated and he receives a cash bequest, how can he be protected against mortgage foreclosure?
MORTON MOSKOWITZ, Brooklyn
Personal property passes to the heirs at the time of distribution, which is often not made until the legal and financial affairs of the estate are settled.
Title to real property, like a condominium, usually passes at the date of death.
You "could provide in the will that the estate is responsible for all of the carrying charges -- common charges, real estate taxes, mortgage interest and amortization -- for a fixed period of time or until administration is complete," said Laurence Keiser, a partner in Greenfield Eisenberg Stein &amp; Senior, a New York law firm.
"Another alternative would be to require the executor to make preliminary distributions as advances against the cash bequest."
As a practical matter, creditors are normally more understanding when an estate is involved and will try to avoid foreclosure under such circumstances.


CHOICE EXPECTED FOR RIGHTS CHIEF
President Clinton, who was forced to pull back from two previous attempts at filling the Administration's top civil rights post, has settled on a 37-year-old Boston lawyer for the position, senior White House officials said today.
The officials said Mr.
Clinton would offer the post to Deval L. Patrick, a partner in the Boston firm of Hill &amp; Barlow, who also has strong ties with NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund Inc.


Public &amp; Private; The $ port$ Report
Figure skating is like a dream, grace and beauty in slow motion, what the body could be if released from the everyday burdens of gravity.
"Everything was beautiful at the ballet," three dancers with fractured childhoods sing in "A Chorus Line" of their refuge in toe shoes and tutus.
That's what skating evokes, when the ice is silver-bright, the blades swift, the skater accomplished -- a beautiful momentary release from the tatters of real life.
That is somewhat illusory, as any girl-child who has risen before dawn to practice her compulsory figures day after day, year after year, can testify.
Behind the glorious line of leg and upraised arm, behind the double axels and the triple-toe combinations, lie sweat and tears and pain.
And behind it all, at the highest levels, lies that golden thing that has become all that glitters in much professional sport today.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about a tax dispute between the Pennzoil Company and the Internal Revenue Service misstated the amount of back taxes and interest the I.R.S. wants to collect on Pennzoil's investment in the Chevron Corporation.
The total is $785 million, not $885 million.


With Assembly Speaker Incapacitated, Successor Rapidly Emerges
To the uninitiated, the only thing that might have seemed colder today than the weather outside the State Capitol, where it was 18 below, was the power struggle waged inside to choose a successor to Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, who was crippled this week by a stroke.
As Mr.
Weprin rested in a Queens hospital, unable to communicate and therefore unable to resign, the Assembly's Democratic politicians and lawyers moved with numbing speed to fill the vacuum left by his illness.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALPINE LACE BRANDS INC., Maplewood, N.J., a specialty cheese concern, plans to sell 65 percent of its Mountain Farms unit to J. R. Simplot Co., Boise, Idaho, to focus on its core Alpine Lace cheese business and to reduce debt.
The terms were not disclosed.
RALSTON-CONTINENTAL BAKING GROUP shares representing a 6.27 percent stake have been acquired by investment funds controlled by the New York investor Mario Gabelli.
The stock, now at $9.125, was purchased at $8.08 to $9.62 a share between Dec. 6 and Jan. 19.
Ralston-Continental is a unit of Ralston Purina of St.
Louis.


Lederle President Named to Head Immunex
The Immunex Corporation, a biotechnology company that merged with Lederle Laboratories' oncology business in June, said today that Lederle's president would take over as chairman and chief executive.
The new chief executive, Edward V. Fritzky, who is 43, succeeds Steven Gillis, a founder of Immunex, effective immediately.
In June, Lederle, the domestic pharmaceutical division of American Cyanamid, merged its oncology business with Immunex.
American Cyanamid, based in Wayne, N.J., holds a 53.5 percent stake in the merged company and plans to contribute $350 million to it.


Kellogg Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Where the Sun Never Sets
Whatever the weather without, the sun never sets in museums.
They are the ultimate storm cellars.
Those who brave the blasts to enter their portals reap a seasonal reward: uncrowded galleries.
One can escape to the Nile at the Brooklyn Museum, whose newly renovated West Wing displays the curatorial prizes from a superb collection of Pharaonic art.
Here it is perpetually summer, and tinted friezes recapture a world without boots, overcoats, snow shovels or the rest of January's dreary impedimenta.
Equally well timed, this Arctic week, was the opening at the Metropolitan Museum of an unfamiliar assemblage of landscapes by Edgar Degas.These 75 pastels, paintings and prints may come as a revelation to those who know Degas only as a renderer of dancers, fashionable sitters, jockeys and racehorses.
Here are the beaches of Normandy or the slopes of Vesuvius as seen through the diffuse haze of Impressionism, with the banished colors of summer sometimes dissolving into Rothko-like abstractions in smeared experiments with monotype engravings.


Home Is the Hero: Anderson Sparks Nets
Returning to the site of his college heroics at Georgia Tech for the first time this season, Kenny Anderson played hero again tonight.
New Jersey's point guard made a running jump shot that hit off the rim twice and finally went through with 1.3 seconds left in overtime to give the Nets a 113-111 victory over the Atlanta Hawks.
"That was a great shot, Kenny," said Coach Bobby Cremins of Georgia Tech, who visited his former star in the locker room.
"I just got here in time for the overtime."


Central Hudson Gas &amp; Light Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


High Noon In the Post: Shaq Over Ewing
It was the last-minute showdown the fans had come to see: Patrick Ewing versus Shaquille O'Neal in the low post.
And tonight's battle was won by O'Neal.
Ewing had the ball, the Knicks trailed by 1 point in the waning moments, and O'Neal was guarding Ewing.
With 15 seconds to play, Ewing went for his favorite turnaround jumper.
O'Neal blocked it.


Electronic Arts Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


City Makes Effort to Settle Suits at OTB
In a break from the position of former Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Giuliani administration has indicated its willingness to settle more than a dozen Federal discrimination suits that were filed by white employees who were dismissed by Hazel N. Dukes, the former President of the Offtrack Betting Corporation.
Paul A. Crotty, the city's corporation counsel, said yesterday that under the previous administration Ms.
Dukes had blocked consideration of any settlement.
But he added, "my view of a lawsuit is to try to make a good faith effort at settlement" and if that fails, take the case to court.


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SouthTrust Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Johnson Stands Ground, Every Hair in Place
People make jokes about Jimmy Johnson's prolific use of hair spray and how that hair never moves, and he laughs along with them.
They say he is cocky, arrogant.
He shrugs it off.
Coaches around the National Football League think he has a big mouth.
So what, he says.
Johnson's motto is: Everyone chill out and let me be.
So what will people think now?
The Dallas coach, never shy about talking about how good he is, has raised eyebrows again.
On a Dallas radio station Thursday night he guaranteed that the Cowboys would beat the San Francisco 49ers in the National Football Conference title game Sunday.
Today, in a news conference at Cowboys headquarters, Johnson didn't back down.


In Cold, Brooklyn Water Main Bursts and Floods
A 135-year-old water main ruptured in the early morning, 6-degree stillness in South Brooklyn yesterday, collapsing half a block of roadway, flooding dozens of homes, cutting off utilities to scores of buildings and closing the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel for the morning rush.
The break in the main, a 30-inch cast-iron pipe dating to 1858-59, set off a long, loud rumble shortly before 2 A.M. that shook people from their sleep and triggered security alarms.
It soon left a portion of the Carroll Gardens neighborhood a wreck of jagged slate and concrete, mud and ice.
Dozens of families, their homes badly damaged by the river of water that crashed into basements and ground floors, were evacuated.


Big Electric Concern Has Large Loss
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation yesterday reported a steep loss of $478 million, or $1.38 a share, for the fourth quarter of 1993 and a loss for the year.
The company described the earning report as "disappointing" but "in line with the corporation's previously announced estimate."


New York City, Go Home
New York City high school athletes in track and field and four other sports will not be allowed in statewide competitions, effective with the 1994-95 season, the state's largest scholastic sports organization decided yesterday in Syracuse.
The decision affects more than 30,000 athletes in 157 schools.
The New York State Public High Schools Athletic Association's executive board voted, 14-5, to remove the Public Schools Athletic League and the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association from state events in indoor and outdoor track, as well as swimming, wrestling, girls' tennis and girls' gymnastics.


Society Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arthur Altman, 83; Was Hit Songwriter
Arthur Altman, a songwriter whose credits include the music for "All or Nothing at All," died on Tuesday in Lake Worth, Fla.
He was 83.
The cause was a heart ailment, a statement from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers said.


USX-U.S. Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sold! Time to Call Them the New England Permanents
The future of the New England Patriots was settled in New England's favor yesterday when Robert Kraft, a Boston businessman who bought the team's Foxboro Stadium six years ago, won a bidding war that included a nominally higher bid from a group that hoped to move the team to St.
Louis.
Kraft wouldn't disclose the purchase price, but said the amount he agreed to pay James Orthwein, a St.
Louis businessman, was not only substantially more than the $106 million Orthwein paid for the franchise two years ago, but also the most anyone has ever paid for a National Football League team.
The Boston Globe has reported the bid at around $160 million.


2 Western Economists Quit Russia Posts
Two leading Western economists resigned today as advisers to the Russian Government, saying the "aims and policies" announced by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin mean the end of fundamental economic reform.
In response, Mr.
Chernomyrdin's spokesman quoted him as saying the new course of reforms "of course contains elements of Western market economics, but mainly takes into account the special characteristics of our state, people and Russian traditions."


Mother of Boy Missing in '91 Vanishes Too
The mother of a 5-year-old boy whose remains were found in a New Jersey marsh nearly two years ago after being missing for a year was reported missing herself yesterday by the Middlesex County Prosecutor.
The police said the car belonging to the mother, Michelle Lodzinski, a 26-year-old Middlesex County secretary, was found in the driveway of her home in Woodbridge near noon with its motor running by her brother, with whom she lived.


Philharmonic Named Orchestra of Year
The New York Philharmonic was named Orchestra of the Year at the Classical Music Awards ceremony at the Royal Albert Hall in London yesterday.
The awards, which were first given last year, were started by Bob Geldof, the rock musician best known for putting together the Live Aid benefit in 1985, and Ultan Guilfoyle, a television producer.
The ceremony was taped for broadcast tonight by the BBC.
The baritone Thomas Hampson and the mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli won awards as Singers of the Year, and the tenor Jose Carreras was named Personality of the Year.
Other award recipients included the Russian violist Yuri Bashmet (Instrumentalist); the 12-year-old American violinist Sarah Chang (Newcomer), and Valery Gergiev (Conductor).


Official in Shoplifting Case To End Duties for Pentagon
John W. Shannon, the former acting Army Secretary who was hired as a high-paid Pentagon consultant last year shortly after he was put on administrative leave for a shoplifting arrest, will leave the job at the end of the month, Defense Department officials said.
Mr.
Shannon was arrested on Aug. 26 outside the post exchange at Fort Myer, Va., after store detectives saw him put a skirt and blouse worth about $30 into a shopping bag and leave without paying.


Whitman Concedes Chance Of Higher Property Taxes
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said today that her plan to cut income taxes should not force New Jersey municipalities to raise property taxes to make up for reductions in state aid.
But she warned that she would not hold herself responsible if local spending decisions prompted higher taxes.
"I can't guarantee anything over areas over which I have no control," Mrs.
Whitman told reporters here after a speech to the winter meeting of the Republican National Committee.
She said she should not be blamed if, for example, localities made wage settlements exceeding the amount of state aid they receive.


Pope Has Long Shown Concern for Jerusalem
To the Editor:
While the agreement of diplomatic recognition between Israel and the Vatican is to be welcomed as yet another stage in the long process of reconciliation, you do a grave disservice to the spirit of friendship by suggesting that Vatican concerns over the status of Jerusalem postdate Israel's independence.


Roles and Goals for an Energetic Bratton
In his first two weeks in office, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has personally evicted a panhandler from a subway car, read the riot act to a precinct under scrutiny for corruption and gone to Harlem to make an impassioned speech about civil rights.
For the next nine months, he has more ambitious plans.
By April, he wants to have put new strategies in place on running the department.
By July, he intends to have markedly improved departmental morale.
By September, he wants to have restored the public's confidence in the police and reduced the fear of crime in the streets.


Pope Has Long Shown Concern for Jerusalem; Backward History
To the Editor:
Re "A Vatican Tie With Israel" (editorial, Jan. 6): You seem to believe that the proposal to internationalize Jerusalem was originally put forward by the Holy See.
It was part of the United Nations partition plan in 1947.
"Successive popes" did support the United Nations proposal to give the old city international status.


No Headline
My alarm went off, and I thought someone had broken into my house.
But it was a river that broke into my house. - RALPH ZURICA, who lives near a Brooklyn water main that burst in the cold.  [ 1:5. ]


Associated Banc-Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CUNY Says Speech by Jeffries Hurt Fund Raising
Lawyers for the City University of New York told an appeals court yesterday that a speech by Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, the head of the black studies department at City College, had disrupted the university and hurt its fund-raising efforts.
The university is appealing a Federal District Court decision last year that reinstated Dr.
Jeffries, who was dismissed as chairman after making a speech in Albany in July 1991 that was widely regarded as anti-Semitic.
Kathie Ann Whipple, a lawyer with the State Attorney General's office who was arguing for CUNY, said that the university received angry letters after the speech and that she believed the speech had scared off some donors.


School Building Agency Official Pleads Guilty to Taking Bribes
An official of an agency established to erase graft in New York City's school-building program pleaded guilty yesterday to accepting bribes from contractors in a bid-rigging scheme.
John Dransfield, 50, a project officer with the New York City School Construction Authority, was one of three authority employees charged last year with participating in the operation.
He entered his plea in Federal District Court in Brooklyn before Judge Sterling Johnson, who said Mr.
Dransfield was facing 41 to 51 months in prison.
Mr.
Dransfield remained free on bond until sentencing, scheduled for April 1.


F.D.R. Drive Closed to Catch 3
Three men who are suspects in at least 11 robberies on the East Side were arrested yesterday when the police sealed off traffic on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive to cut them off as they tried to escape from the robbery.
At 5:52 P.M., the men entered Noordin Cob, a stationery store at 1167 York Avenue, demanding money from the owner, the police said.
One of the men then struck the owner with a gun before the three men grabbed an unspecified amount of money from the register and fled, the police said.


The World; Russia's Reform Train Isn't Exactly an Express
THE installation last week of a new Russian Government, without Yegor T. Gaidar and possibly without his comrade-in-reform Boris G. Fyodorov, inspired no shortage of doom-laden predictions, including: hyperinflation, a cut in living standards, a fixed ruble, price and wage controls and a general collapse that would hand the country over to someone like Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky in the 1996 presidential elections, if not sooner.
Unfortunately, some of these prophecies are likely to prove true unless the Prime Minister, Victor S. Chernomyrdin, and the Central Bank chairman, Viktor V. Gerashchenko, are correct in their fervent belief that Russia is special and follows its own economic laws.


Making Trouble for a Thief
About one in 14 car owners in New York City can expect to be the victim of a car theft in the next year, but the police say drivers can do a lot to keep from becoming another sorry statistic.
"The Club prevents a lot of amateurs," said Lieut.
Richard Lombardi, commander of the Queens Auto Larceny Unit, referring to the most common device for locking a steering wheel.
"When they see security, they usually move on to the next car."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Employment cost index, 4th qtr., pct. chg.
0.8
0.8
Home resales, Dec., millions, ann. rate
4.21
4.20
Consumer confidence index, January
80.2
83.0
Thursday
Durable-goods orders, Dec., pct. change
1.9
1.5
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
380
350
Friday
Gross domestic product, 4th qtr., pct. chg.
2.9
5.5
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Congress returns from winter break
Clinton to give State of the Union address
Treasury to hold two-year note auction
Wednesday
Treasury to hold five-year note auction


SUNDAY, January 23, 1994; Top Secret Plane -- Now at a Store Near You
It's supposed to be top secret.
According to the military, the plane doesn't exist.
But scientists, aircraft buffs, and secrecy groupies insist that the Aurora hypersonic spy plane is real.
According to an analyst with the Federation of American Scientists, John Pike, the Government has spent $10 billion to $15 billion to produce one or two prototypes.
Well, the dispute is over.
The plane definitely exists, at least as a new model kit from Testor Corporation (photographed above), $10 at hobby shops and toy stores.
Testor has a history of releasing models of secret planes.
In 1986 it did the then-secret Stealth Fighter, selling more than a million kits.


The Other Side of the Wall
ON THE EDGE  A History of Poor Black Children and Their American Dreams.
By Carl Husemoller Nightingale. 254 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $24.
HARDBALL  A Season in the Projects.
By Daniel Coyle. 317 pp.
New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Northwest Saga: Getting Rich by Losing a Billion
LET'S say you buy a company, putting down a few million and borrowing billions.
Through fees and management contracts, you take out of it more than you invested.
The company proceeds to lose almost $2 billion, avoiding bankruptcy only through concessions by workers, suppliers and creditors.
Even so, your company faces the prospect of massive debt repayments within a few years, with little indication that operations can hope to generate the needed cash.


SUNDAY, January 23, 1994; Htijx ktw Pnix
The scrambling and decoding of electronic communication is one of the hottest issues in cyberpolitics.
The Government would like to have the key to all communications.
Export of cryptographic software is restricted.
Both software companies and independent groups like the Cypherpunks argue for the rights of individual privacy.
All of which makes Microsoft's new Creative Writer software for children intriguing.
It includes some primitive cryptographic tools to enable kids to encode what they write (the headline above is "Codes for Kids," encoded by the program) to hide it from curious siblings and F.B.I. agents.


CONGRESS IS FACING HEALTH CARE BILL AND FULL AGENDA
The House and the Senate come back to work on Tuesday expecting to be judged on how they deal with health care, the biggest domestic issue Congress has confronted in three decades.
It may even prove to be the most complicated task that Congress has ever faced, involving far more crosscurrents than the civil rights bills of the 1960's or the economic measures of the New Deal.
And before the issue actually comes to the floor in either House, it must make its way past scores of conflicting interest groups like the elderly, the hospitals and the various factions of the insurance industry, and through five major Congressional committees.


Three Easy Ways to Prepare Pot Roast
BEEF consumption has declined dramatically over the last decade.
Then why are steakhouses doing so well, with new ones opening and reservations hard to get in all of them?
The answer is that an increasing number of people are not cooking beef at home, but when they dine out they want a terrific, tender, beefy slab of perfectly charred steak.
This makes sense.
The quality of well-aged sirloin or porterhouse that a good restaurant can obtain is usually superior to that available for home cooks.
And the kind of high-heat grills with which restaurants are routinely equipped usually do a far better job of cooking a steak than a home broiler or grill, even an outdoor grill.


Serena Weissman, Eric B. Cohen
Serena B. Weissman, a daughter of Stephen B. Weissman and Sandra B. Kurman, both of New York, was married last evening to Eric B. Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Cohen of Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in New York.


U.S. ASKS INCREASE ON BIRTH CONTROL
The Clinton Administration is seeking a substantial increase in spending next year on population control programs with the goal of providing birth control to every woman in the developing world who wants it by the end of the decade.
The emerging policy, a sharp departure from the approach taken by the Reagan and Bush Administrations, emphasizes not only family planning but also education for women, which by boosting their living standards and independence ultimately increases their power to decide how many children they will bear.


Scenes From a Sandbar
This billion-dollar sandbar can appreciate a gold-digging seductress, and last Saturday night Eartha Kitt was working that side of her psyche for all it was worth.
For her final concert in the Naya Performing Arts Series, the limber diva slunk onto the stage of the Colony Theater in a tight money-green sequined gown that was breathtaking -- literally, by the looks of it.
She dished in French.
She sneered in Spanish.
She flirted in Turkish.
And in a nod to her role as Catwoman on "Batman" in the 60's, she let loose with a spine-straightening "meow."


BEST SELLERS: January 23, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
1
76
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
2
12
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
4
6
41
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
5
4
45
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
6
1
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
7
5
22
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
8
10
11
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
9
3
15
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
10
9
6
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
11
8
17
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
12
7
7
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
13
15
5
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
14*
47
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
11
14
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
4
37
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
1
5
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
5
22
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
3
10
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
5
2
14
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
6
7
16
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7
6
20
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
8
8
8
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
9
7
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
10
10
76
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
11
11
16
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
12
16
2
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
13
13
2
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
14
22
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
15
12
16
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
13
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
1
26
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
3
3
35
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
1
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND (Editor's choices of books of particular interest) THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.
A DRINKING LIFE: A Memoir, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Mr.
Hamill's brutally honest account of his drinking (and his father's) is the organizing theme for the 37 years covered here, but the more fundamental matter is a fine portrait of the emerging artist, boy and man, in a New York that is no more.
A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr.
Gaddis's fourth novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation, in fantastic combination and obsessive detail.
LEAVING HOME: A Memoir, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) What he's really trying to do with his humor, Mr.
Buchwald says, is get even for a dark, poverty-stricken childhood.
Most readers would agree his revenge is complete.
LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD.
From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War Zones, by Peter Arnett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A lean, engrossing memoir of reporters and war by a correspondent who was among the first to arrive and the last to leave in Vietnam, and virtually the only voice from Baghdad during the gulf war.
MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B.
Breslin. (University of Chicago, $39.95.) This recital of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English, is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.
PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly realized world of 1960's Dublin.
THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS, by Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $20.) The class in question is the black middle class, and Mr.
Cose's account leaves little doubt that its members are daily humiliated by white people, and don't like it a bit.
SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.
A SCIENTIST IN THE CITY, by James Trefil. (Doubleday, $23.95.) The author, who has written popular-science books that deal with the creation and the seashore, has a fine sense of what lay folk don't understand; his rendition of the city's potential and the constraints on it is fascinating.
W.E.B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (which lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.


Speaking of Drugstores
To the Editor:
The single most important issue is discriminatory pricing policies of drug manufacturers.
It is impossible for the community pharmacy, chain and independent alike, to compete with mail-order facilities, hospitals and H.M.O.'s that enjoy huge discounts.
These pricing schemes drive up the cost of prescription medications as much as 1,250 percent for all of us.


Lauren S. Cahn, Eric S. Schoenfeld
Lauren Samantha Cahn, a daughter of Miriam and Jeffrey Cahn of West Orange, N.J., is to be married today to Eric Scott Schoenfeld, the son of Beverly and Harris Schoenfeld of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Ronn Davids will perform the ceremony at the Chanticler restaurant in Short Hills, N.J.
The bride, 28, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from New York University.
Her father is a partner in Sills, Cummis, Zuckerman, Radin, Tischman, Epstein &amp; Gross, a Newark law firm.
Her mother is an associate at Eichler, Forgosh, Gotilla &amp; Rudnick, a law firm in Chatham, N.J.


Higher Taxes Imperil a Hamburger Shrine
IT is shortly before noon on a weekday, and already people are jamming into a tiny pub-like establishment on Crown Street in New Haven.
The crowd is, as usual, a democratic one: guys in leather jackets, Yalies in Reeboks, business and professional people in suits, and visitors to the city who had heard about the place and arrived to try the well-known specialty of the house, its hamburger.
The place is Louis' Lunch, an establishment that has become sort of a gastronomical and historical shrine in the old college town.
Now, however, it would appear that tax assessors no longer share the reverence; the proprietors estimate their tax bills are likely to more than triple over five years.


Muslim Gave Racist Speech, Jackson Says
Calling it "racist, anti-Semitic, divisive, untrue and chilling," the Rev.
Jesse Jackson has condemned a speech by a senior aide to Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, that was delivered at a New Jersey college two months ago.
Mr.
Jackson, in an interview on Friday night that he initiated, also called on Mr.
Farrakhan to respond to the remarks by Khalid Abdul Muhammad, a spokesman for the Nation of Islam, which were made on Nov. 29 at Kean College, in Union.
Mr.
Jackson said that he had tried in recent days to speak with Mr.
Farrakhan, but that he was out of the country.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Adam Smith Was No Gordon Gekko
TO most Americans who have even heard of him, the 18th-century Scottish philosopher Adam Smith is simply the patron saint of conservative economics, the face on ties worn by Reagan aides, the name on the door of a libertarian think tank.
But to a growing and politically diverse fraternity of economists, historians and philosophers, the popular image of Smith is little more than a caricature.
To them he is the father of all economics, a brilliant observer of social institutions, the source of all current theories of how societies become prosperous.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
THE BARD'S TALE  "Shaxpur," the title of a play by Sidney Michaels, is also one of the ways Shakespeare signed his name.
Mr.
Michaels, with the actress Florence Phillips, will give a staged reading of the work tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck.


Herbert J. Spoor; Dermatologist, 82
Dr.
Herbert J. Spoor, a dermatologist who practiced in Manhattan for 27 years, died yesterday in Beth Israel North Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The cause was the consequences of a stroke, said his wife, Edna.


In the Region/Connecticut; A Housing Market Recovery, Step by S- l - o -w Step
SHAKING out Connecticut's housing market as the recession fades reveals a virtually unscathed southern Fairfield County and the rest of the state in various stages of a mostly sluggish recovery.
The 25 to 30 percent decline in housing prices since 1989 appears to have bottomed out and houses in all eight counties are selling in an uneven pattern.
As old houses sell, new ones are being built.
But Connecticut Department of Housing data show that the numbers are not overwhelming.
For the year that ended on Nov. 30, 1993, 7,191 one-family housing starts were recorded, compared with 6,742 the previous year.


Sarah M. Curtis, Lee M. Hetfield
Sarah McBride Curtis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John P. Curtis of Millerton, N.Y., was married yesterday to Lee Matthew Hetfield, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph B. Hetfield of Watchung, N.J.
The Rev.
Brewster Beach performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Peter's Church in Millbrook, N.Y.
The bride, 25, graduated from Hampshire College.
She is an associate at Andree Lockwood Associates, fund-raising consultants in New York.
Her father is an internist in Millbrook.
Her mother, Ellen C. Curtis, now retired, was an administrator at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


East Village Spices At Gentle Prices
AL HAMRA ++  (212) 505-6559; 203 First Avenue, near 12th Street; $; no credit cards
This unassuming Indian restaurant does not provide much decor or atmosphere, but it offers a solid repertory of satisfying, familiar fare at bargain prices.
Portions are enormous and cost less than $5.
The dining room has a grayish linoleum floor, folk murals on one wall, wobbly tables covered with plastic, and track lighting overhead.
The food comes with paper plates and plastic utensils.
Two good starters are samosas, peppery potatoes and peas wrapped in a crisp crust; and shami kebab, grilled patties of minced goat, lentils and scallions with cinnamon and cardamom.
Entrees include savory chicken karahi, shredded boneless chicken with peas, Basmati rice and spices; tender spicy chicken curry, and moist piquant chapli kebabs, grilled minced lamb and herbs.
The menu also carries almost a dozen vegetarian dishes.
All main courses are served with a lettuce, cucumber and tomato salad and raita, an herbed yogurt mixture. ($25 and Under: 6/11/93)


Regret? No, Squint
To the Editor:
Only with surprise and amazement did I peruse the Styles section of Jan. 2 and find Anita Nall's picture enlarged to the length of the page ("What Might Have Been").
I felt it in the best interest of both Anita and Olympic swimming to respond to assertions in the article.


A Case of Derring-Do
There is a chameleon in all of us.
Look at these photographs of the young English model Poppy Lloyd.
Simply by wielding a pair of scissors with youthful abandon, she transformed herself from a soulful "Wuthering Heights" heroine to a puckish young woman.
I've had plenty of such moments in my life.
Who hasn't?
Anyone who follows fashion can't help but get swept up from time to time.
And right now is one of those moments when all sorts of wild notions -- like belly-button and nose rings, sky-high skirts and platinum buzz cuts -- are floating around.
So I offer this cautionary tale about my most dramatic incarnation.
It, too, started with my hair.


Hefty Furniture, Even Heftier Prices
THE BLOCK-FRONT DESK -- A status symbol 200 years ago and again today -- remains one of the marvels of 18th-century cabinetry.
And when a kneehole, a bookcase or exuberant carving was added, the buyer paid dearly.
"Block-front furniture was always expensive," says Stephen Dean Levy, vice president of the Manhattan antiques firm of Bernard &amp; S. Dean Levy.
"More labor was required, and a lot of wood was wasted in carving the block front."


A la Carte; Italian and Indian Restaurants Changing
ITALIAN restaurants on Long Island are jumping, but Indian restaurants are struggling.
Although there have never been as many as 10 Indian restaurants in Nassau and Suffolk Counties there are hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Italian eating places.
Despite the facts that Italian restaurants thrive on the Island and there are more Indian restaurants in one block of the East Village in Manhattan than on all the Island, the two have something in common.
Both are entering a period of changes.


COKIE, NINA AND LINDA
Thank you for Claudia Dreifus's interview with Cokie Roberts, Nina Totenberg and Linda Wertheimer, three reporters I've long admired (Jan. 2).
It galls me that they don't trot out Cokie until the second half of "This Week With David Brinkley."


Gravesend's Name Comes From Holland, not England
To the Editor:
As a historical archeologist who specializes in colonial New York, I constantly encounter apocryphal explanations of place names.
It happened again in The City of Dec. 12, where Gravesend was said to be named for the hometown of Deborah Moody, a wealthy Englishwoman.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Despite Fight, Official Stays
Officials at School District 8 in the Bronx must often confront the competing interests of the district's poor sections and more prosperous ones: Pelham Bay and Throgs Neck, largely white and middle class; Soundview, predominantly black and working class, and Hunts Point, black, Hispanic and poor.
The tensions caused by that competition came to a head recently as a group of parents in the South Bronx opposed renewing the contract of the district's superintendent, Max Messer.


Journal; The Other Quake
No sooner had Hollywood been rocked by nature's special effects on Monday than it was shaken by a second quake, delivered by the public.
Box offices nationwide reported that more Americans bought tickets to "Philadelphia" than any other film last weekend.
W.
C.
Fields, you may recall, found Philadelphia preferable only to death.
Hollywood assumed that the audience would feel the same about "Philadelphia." The movie is about a gay man with AIDS, a subject considered so abhorrent to the masses that no major studio has previously touched it.
The industry has busied itself instead churning out sure things like "Wayne's World 2," "Addams Family Values" and "Beethoven's 2nd."


L.T.
The San Francisco 49ers define his type as an elephant -- bigger than a normal linebacker, too small for a defensive end.
In his 13 National Football League seasons, which ended with his retirement last Sunday, Lawrence Taylor was an elephant, a tiger, a terror, the man who defined the position of outside linebacker and was simply the best to have played there
When opposing coaches started drawing up game plans, their first concern was not what they wanted to do to the Giants, but what Taylor might do to them.
Bill Walsh, then coaching the San Francisco 49ers, realized a mortal tight end or blocking back could not handle Taylor's pass-rushing rage, so he assigned a quick offensive lineman (the first was John Ayers) to block him.
Joe Gibbs, then with the Washington Redskins, would double-team Taylor with an extra tight end.


COMPANIES ARE CUTTING THEIR HEARTS OUT
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich takes to task corporate downsizing with arguments with which every every C.E.O. is familiar ("Companies Are Cutting Their Hearts Out," Dec. 19).
But he ignores a few issues that are of very real concern to American business.
Not the least of these is Clinton's Health Security Act, which proposes employers shoulder a great part of the cost of medical coverage of employees, whether or not they do so now.
Call the cost to business what you will, it is a payroll tax (on top of other payroll taxes), and, as such, is an absolute job killer.


'Priesto,' the Magic Show
Before he thought about being a priest, says the Rev.
Jerry Jecewicz, pastor of Brooklyn's Holy Spirit Church, he wanted to be a magician.
After his ordination 18 years ago, his vocation and avocation were intertwined in the form of 'The Priesto Magic Spectacular," a show that stars Father Jecewicz in priestly collar and top hat. In apparent defiance of the laws of nature, he makes his duck, Dudley, disappear, escapes from a locked trunk and causes a woman to float in midair.
Every so often, he says, he is contronted by someone who claims that "magic is deception and is therefore an opening for the Devil." But Father Jecewicz insists that he practices "honest" magic -- entertainment, not deception.
It is also a boon for his parish, since the money he raises with his show goes to support the Holy Spirit School; since his arrival there in 1991, he has performed at church events throughout New York and earned $25,000 for the school.


Stork Visits Griffey and Becker
So far, there isn't a Ken 3d or a Boris Jr.
KEN GRIFFEY Jr.  and his wife, MELISSA, have decided to name their first child TREY KENNETH GRIFFEY.
Before the boy's birth Wednesday afternoon in Seattle, the Mariners' center fielder said he would not name his son Ken Griffey 3d.


A New President
New York Public Library dinner, Jan. 13.


Hotels in Palma
To the Editor: Charles Corn, in "Orange and Olive Trees at Christmas" (Dec. 5), describes a visitor's view of Palma, Majorca, elegantly.
It made me recall an unanticipated visit to Majorca several years ago.
I was visiting my daughter and her family in Algiers when I learned they had to leave every 90 days for a week and return with a new visa; so I went with them to Palma.
A reservation had been made at the Athenian Palace Hotel but the Algerian travel agency had not gotten a confirmation and our stay was limited to one night.
Our family included a 6-month-old baby and this was the high season.
"But not to worry," said the desk clerk.
The next morning we were told that rooms would be available at the Victoria Hotel.


Paterson Tries Its Own Guns-for-Goods Exchange
IN this former industrial city, the handgun was once an object of honor and dignity.
It was here in 1836 that Samuel Colt manufactured the first of his legendary revolvers, until moving to larger quarters in Hartford in 1841.
But with firearms involved in most of the 20 murders here last year, law-enforcement officials say the legacy has been replaced by a modern scourge: illegal weapons are on the rise and in the wrong hands.


NONFICTION
TELEVISION  THE GAME SHOW KING  A Confession.
By Chuck Barris.
Carroll &amp; Graf, $21.95.


Report Card: Industrial Park
College Point Corporate Park is reaching a critical milestone in its 25-year history, with much of the land either fully developed or scheduled for development.
The park's 550 acres are occupied by more than 100 businesses, mainly offices and manufacturers, which employ some 4,000 people.
The city's Economic Development Corporation is continuing to press for the development of the 72 acres of public and private property for which there are no set plans and is considering opening it to retail businesses.


Smoke Gets In Your Food
PISCES ++  (212) 260-6660; 95 Avenue A, at Sixth Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa


Profile; The 'Iron Lady' Keeping Lotus on Track
JUNE L. ROKOFF dislikes nicknames, but at the Lotus Development Corporation, where she is senior vice president for software development and a cult hero, Ms.
Rokoff is known as St.
June, or sometimes the Iron Lady.
As Lotus rides the crest of a remarkable upturn in its fortunes, Ms.
Rokoff plays a central role: the glue that holds Lotus's development organization together.


Dream Overhaul
If the dream that opened in my head the other night is representative of the coming season, all I can say is, "Oh, my God." I mean, where do they come up with this stuff?
Here we are in the last decade of the second millennium and what do we get?
The same old tunnels, white horses, ocean waves, nagging guilts and, get this, the sensation of falling, falling, falling.
It is all the way subvirtual with shoddy production values, the kind of material that in any other context would put you to sleep.
What we need, what we plainly and desperately need, are post-Freudian, post-modern, post-ideological and interactive scenarios if we expect dreams to ever compete successfully with other media as we prepare to cruise down the great communications superhighway about to pass through to all our bedrooms.
Clearly, the tired pap that has lately kept us tossing and turning will not do.


No Guarantees for Boutiette
K C BOUTIETTE has one last chance to qualify for the United States Olympic speed-skating team, if he can come up with trans-Atlantic airfare to try it.
Boutiette, who was a champion in-line skater, won the 5,000- and 10,000-meter races in the United States trials earlier this month.
But he was not guaranteed a spot on the team because his time in the 5,000 was not fast enough for Olympic standards.


Garden Party
Paine Webber Art Gallery, Jan. 19.


THE BOTTOM LINE
Erica Abeel and her sister moo-shu-niks would have rejected most of these now-married men before they were successful and settled: "He's too conservative, too boring, too plain, too poor."
"No never!" they protest.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Washington's A-List: The True Essentials
IN a city where snow boots come in power colors and egos are not just inflated but checked daily with tire gauges, city leaders and Federal pooh-bahs did something extraordinary last week.
Facing brutal cold, impassable streets and blackouts in vast swaths of town, they told everybody on Wednesday to leave work, go home and stay there, unless they were "essential."
Thus the Office of Personnel Management shut down the capital's entire Federal work force, except for "essential personnel."


Seamless Travel
To the Editor: I have only one long comment to make after reading "Sorting Out Airline Partners" ("Practical Traveler," Dec. 5).
In 1969 I flew from New York to Lisbon, Lisbon to Madrid, Madrid to Palma, Palma to Barcelona, Barcelona to Lisbon and Lisbon to New York on three airlines (with a spur-of-the-moment change of schedule and airline in the middle of the three-week trip, involving no fuss or extra charge) on one booklet of stapled-together tickets issued by my travel agent . . . and for just $350.
Now that is seamless travel!
GAIL MINTHORN  Wilton, Conn.


In 'Tangents,' a Woman With 5 Identities
CONSIDER "Tangents," the showy new play at the George Street Playhouse, as a workout for actresses, and you're in unassailable territory.
Five young women are portraying five distinct identities, inhabiting a single being.
Each, it might be said, is a self, uncontained.
The being at the center of "Tangents" goes by the name of Sandy Garrison, but Sandy, a university student in her 20's, is nowhere in sight.


Redmen Stay Clear Of Cellar
St.
John's Carl Beckett, a lightly used senior guard, sidled up to Ron Rutledge, the assistant coach, before tonight's basketball game against the University of Miami and said, "I'm really feeling it."
Rutledge apparently was unimpressed.
The first half went by and Beckett didn't play.
Yet at halftime the head coach, Brian Mahoney, told him, "Keep yourself focused."


The Nation; The Cover-Up That Worked: A Look Back
"IT isn't the crime it's the cover-up," goes the truism that has routinely been applied to political scandals since the Watergate cover-up forced President Richard M. Nixon from office two decades ago.
Crimes can be forgiven.
But lie about them . . . well, the American public generally won't stand for that.
No one seemed more cognizant of this than Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra scandal.
The most searing conclusion in his final report, issued last week, was that President Ronald Reagan had "knowingly participated or at least acquiesced in the efforts" of his aides to cover up the affair that had been launched to aid rebels in Nicaragua.


Making Dinner for 600 Squirmy Friends
IT'S one thing to talk about worms and it's another thing to live with them.
For a couple of years now, I've been extolling the virtues of indoor worm composting.
That occurs when you put a pound or so of worms in a wooden box or a plastic bin, give them some banana peels and lettuce to eat, top them off with a little damp bedding of shredded newspaper and voila!, in a few months, your icky garbage is sweet-smelling compost.
I'd seen this magic trick performed at botanical gardens and schools and such, but I'd never tried it myself.
And so, early last month, I ordered a Worm-a-way bin made of recycled plastic and a pound of red worms -- Eisenia foetida, a type of earthworm famed for its ability to eat garbage -- from Flowerfield Enterprises in Kalamazoo, Mich.


A Vote for a Sidewalk Cafe And Menus Under the Door
To the Editor:
I don't live on the Upper West Side, but I love that wonderful neighborhood and its many excellent restaurants.
I was quite troubled to read in The City that the local community board had refused to renew the sidewalk cafe at the Empire Szechuan Gourmet at Broadway and 97th Street and that the cafe was closing.
I have spent some very pleasant evenings in that cafe.
Watching passers-by while eating delicious and varied Chinese dishes is one of the great New York experiences.
The removal of the cafe makes me poorer.


F.Y.I.
Whence Compassion?
Q.
Walking along Seventh Avenue in the mid-30's, I noticed street signs that read Compassion Avenue.
Please explain.


Books in the Belfry
From earliest childhood, certain spaces become lodged in the imagination, forever after triggering emotional exhilaration when encountered in the grown-up world.
Chief among these wondrous sites are towers and attics, a fact not lost upon Lee Harris Pomeroy, a New York architect.
When the opportunity arose to carve a penthouse apartment out of the eaves of a Belle Epoque building overlooking Central Park, he took advantage of this subliminal yearning to conjure a little spatial magic of his own.
"Turn-of-the-century builders didn't think of upper floors as prime real estate the way we do," says Pomeroy, who made his light and airy "garret" out of a group of storage rooms, servants' quarters and a one-bedroom apartment.
His most inspired move was to annex one of the building's copper-domed towers and turn it into a library for his wife, a classics scholar.
Formerly an artificial belfry -- no bats, but no rooms either -- the new circular library is lined with maple bookshelves on two levels that are connected by a winding metal-plate stair.


'Charlie Chan Is Dead'
To the Editor:
Rather than dealing with the literature presented in "Charlie Chan Is Dead: An Anthology of Contemporary Asian American Fiction" (Dec. 19), Sven Birkerts spends more than half of his review obsessing over the writers' bloodlines, and complaining that my inclusion of 48 writers as "Asian American" may have been too "hospitable." What exactly are his criteria for categorizing someone as Asian American?
Since this is the first anthology of its kind, is this really the time to be narrow?
Mr.
Birkerts seems to have ignored the introduction, in which I have written in quite plain English: "The writers selected for this anthology are exhilarating in their differences; there is an array of cultural backgrounds, age range and literary styles gathered here. . . . Even the notion of what is 'Asian American' is expanded to include the writer Joy Kogawa, a resident of Canada."


'Priesto,' the Magic Show
Before he thought about being a priest, says the Rev.
Jerry Jecewicz, pastor of Brooklyn's Holy Spirit Church, he wanted to be a magician.
After his ordination 18 years ago, his vocation and avocation were intertwined in the form of 'The Priesto Magic Spectacular," a show that stars Father Jecewicz in priestly collar and top hat. In apparent defiance of the laws of nature, he makes his duck, Dudley, disappear, escapes from a locked trunk and causes a woman to float in midair.
Every so often, he says, he is contronted by someone who claims that "magic is deception and is therefore an opening for the Devil." But Father Jecewicz insists that he practices "honest" magic -- entertainment, not deception.
It is also a boon for his parish, since the money he raises with his show goes to support the Holy Spirit School; since his arrival there in 1991, he has performed at church events throughout New York and earned $25,000 for the school.


CRIME IS BECOMING NATION'S TOP FEAR
Crime now rivals the economy in the eyes of Americans as the single most important problem facing the country, but they are divided over whether Republicans or Democrats are best able to do something about it, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The sharp rise in concern about crime helps assure that it will be a front-line issue in this election year.
But there is also a widespread sense that the country is powerless to deal with it, with most Americans saying they do not expect violence to decline significantly in the next few years.


What Is an Arabist?
To the Editor:
In his letter (Dec. 12), former Ambassador C. William Kontos attacks the veracity of my book "The Arabists," not so much by quotations from the book itself but through the review written by Evan Thomas.
Even the most accurate 1,000-word review of a 120,000-word book is, by definition, imprecise.
Let me be precise.
Mr.
Kontos notes that Jerry Weaver, the Arabist in question, was a Ph.D. with a specialty in Latin America.
Both those facts, as well as others about Mr.
Weaver's non-Arabist academic career, are in my book, but not in the review.
I made four long trips to the Sudan after Mr.
Kontos left, but while Mr.
Weaver was still around.
I also traveled with Mr.
Weaver in northern Uganda and visited him on his farm for three days of interviewing in 1992.
I'm comfortable with my 22-page description of Mr.
Weaver, which the reviewer, by necessity, reduces to a few unsubtle sentences.


Interface: People and Technology; Techno-Indulgence as Sin
THE mass-mediated culture that begat "I Want My Maypo" one generation and "I Want My MTV" the next is now careering wantonly toward an era of "video on demand." What would Max Weber, the German sociologist who explicated the Protestant work ethic and the spirit of capitalism, have said of such an idea?
Or of 500 channels of home shopping?
Or, terribile dictu, empowered couch potatoes?
Something chillingly Teutonic, no doubt.


In Pinter Country, There Are Only Questions
FOR HAROLD PINTER, THE PAST is a dangerous place, the more so because its crags and chasms are obscured by mist.
Not only do the terrible things that have happened there continue to shape life in the present; memories and half-memories themselves become weapons in the desperate struggles in which Mr.
Pinter's people are regularly engaged.
The past has the power to disorient, unsettle, obsess, trap and even destroy characters who, as he himself once said, are often already "at the extreme edge of their living, where they pretty much live alone."
The past hangs heavy enough over the 63-year-old Mr.
Pinter's new "Moonlight," his first full-length play in 15 years.
It's an even more potent force in his "No Man's Land," which is currently enjoying a rare spate of interest.
Late in 1992, Mr.
Pinter himself performed alongside Paul Eddington in what was, surprisingly, the play's first production in London since its premiere in 1975.
And on Thursday another major revival opens on Broadway with the Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center.
Jason Robards and Christopher Plummer have the main roles of the alcoholic recluse Hirst and the shabby old bohemian Spooner, respectively, under the direction of David Jones.


Johnson Is Playing to Win Rather Than Trying Not to Lose
When the Dallas Cowboys play the San Francisco 49ers today for the National Conference title, Coach Jimmy Johnson of the Dallas Cowboys says he will be looking for ways to win rather than avoiding ways to lose.
"In every game, you have momentum changes," he said.
"You don't have a set game plan for any game saying I'm going to play it this way in the fourth quarter. I did X's and O's for 20 years. I enjoy this much more, to find things we can do offensively and defensively to win games.


COMPANIES ARE CUTTING THEIR HEARTS OUT
Robert Reich's admonition to eschew payroll slashing and raise worker productivity through training is a great formula.
But the competitive markets of the 90's often require both.
Our job reductions at Union Carbide stem from a complete overhaul and improvement of our major work processes.
Nonessential work and jobs were eliminated.
That served investors well last year, but we also secured a more promising future for the people we retained.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
EAST SIDE Authors Will Tell All; Well, Part of It All
A series of lectures by best-selling authors, beginning on Tuesday at Marymount Manhattan College, will offer insights into the writing life.
Questions will be encouraged, snacks provided and books signed.
The first lecturer in the series, now in its third year, will be Pico Iyer (pictured at left), a travel writer and the author of "Falling Off the Map." George Plimpton is scheduled for Feb. 15; Joyce Carol Oates, March 7; Ben Okri, April 15, and Evan Hunter, May 24.


Conversations/Frank Sweeney; Prison Graduate Sells 'New Fish' Words to Live (or Do Time) By
THE classified advertisement in USA Today and The National Law Journal was a model of brevity and wit:
"Going to Federal prison for the first time? We will tell you what to expect and how to survive. Our consultants are graduates of the Federal prison system. Frank A. Sweeney &amp; Associates. Box 15 Demarest, N.J. 07627."


UP AND COMING: Jeff Williams; On TV, He's Brilliant On Stage, He's Twisted
IN "BIRDLAND," THE NEW ABC series set in a mental hospital, the actor Jeff Williams plays Dr.
Lewis Niles, a very young, very nerdy, very physiology-oriented psychiatrist about whom everybody, including the audience, asks: "How can such a brilliant, caring clinician be so naive and out of touch with his feelings?"
In person, Mr.
Williams, who has been an actor ever since he left college nine years ago, looks even younger than he does in a lab coat, and that inspires a different question: How can a person who's been working so hard for years be so calm in the face of what might become national recognition and financial stability?


Hit-and-Run Victim Improves; Inquiry Stalled
Two days before Thanksgiving, Sonya Kim went out for a jog near the Hudson River piers, tried to cross what may be Manhattan's most daunting road for pedestrians -- the West Street and 12th Avenue corridor -- but never made it to the other side.
She was struck at 12th Street by a southbound limousine that ran a red light.
She hurtled through the air, suffering multiple injuries, including three fractured limbs and head trauma that left her partly paralyzed and in a coma.
The limousine never stopped.


Rush Hour in the N.F.L.
Kansas City, Buffalo, San Francisco and Dallas reached this afternoon's conference championship games with quarterbacks immersed in playoff experience.
Each team has a star running back who grinds out critical yards and receivers who make fingertip catches.
Each has special teams that produce game-swinging plays.
Each has a defense that can arouse.
Each knows plenty about exploiting matchups.
Each team is of Super Bowl caliber.


For Rebels With a Cause
AS the owner of a small business, the president of a civic group or just a disgruntled taxpayer, you want something from the Legislature but don't have enough money to hire a lobbyist or make attention-getting campaign contributions.
What to do?


Seeing 'Schindler' Plain
IF YOU'VE READ EVEN A FRACTION OF WHAT HAS been written about "Schindler's List," you might be led to this improbable question.
Steven Spielberg: idiot savant or misguided bar mitzvah boy?
More than a month after its release, "Schindler's List" is drawing large audiences and touching them deeply, but among critics and commentators it is still struggling to shake off the burden of being a Spielberg movie.
Early reviews were nearly unanimous raves, but a sneaky condescension showed through.
The wonder, these rapturous reviews hinted, was not that a powerful film had been made about the Holocaust but that Peter Pan had made it.
It took a few weeks for the backlash to set in, as the discussion moved from the entertainment pages to the op-ed pages and talk shows.
The old Spielberg rap -- too entertaining for his own good -- came back to haunt him.
Why did he make a movie about a righteous Nazi? this argument goes.
Why did he make a movie about survival when the Holocaust was about death?
If you read and listen enough, it will appear that you can't see "Schindler" without seeing Spielberg.


INSIDE
Fear Not This Frigid Blip
Weather experts say this month's arctic freeze is just a downward, localized blip in a generally warmer trend in the world's climate.
Page 28.
On Trail of Skullduggery
The attack on Nancy Kerrigan has led investigators on a long trail from Phoenix to Portland, Ore., to Boston to Detroit.
SportsSunday, section 8.
No Gains in Israeli Talks
Israeli and P.L.O. leaders came together to mourn a mediator but failed to resolve their differences over the Palestinian self-rule plan.
Page 12.
Telly Savalas Dies
The bald actor remembered most for his role as a New York detective in the 1970's television series "Kojak" has died at age 70.
Page 30.


Midwest Has a Grip On Game's Hierarchy
Spring training doesn't begin for several more weeks, but major league baseball's well-entrenched power structure was in midseason form last week.
With club owners meeting in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., only a few miles from the Yankees' spring training site, the power structure reinforced its firm grip on its control of the game.
Some of the rookies -- the newer owners -- are upset and frustrated that they have been blocked in their attempts to make the team.
While the rookies remained on the bench, the veterans executed a series of maneuvers:


Can the Mass Media Be Trusted With Disclosures on Anything?; Selective Counsels
To the Editor:
Re "Pass an Unaltered Counsel Law" (editorial, Jan. 9):
Republican support of special prosecutors and independent counsels, in the case of the Clintons and the Whitewater Development Company investigation, is being tested with the release of the long-awaited report of Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra affair independent prosecutor.


Manhattan Community Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1 Battery Park, TriBeCa; 3d Tuesday of month, but Jan. 18 meeting was postponed to Jan. 25, 5:30 P.M.; Southbridge Towers Community Room, 66 Frankfurt Street; (212) 442-5050.
Chairwoman: Anne Campoccia DISTRICT 2 SoHo, Little Italy, West Village; 3d Thursday of month; next meeting is Feb. 17, 7 P.M.; site to be announced; (212) 979-2272.
Chairwoman: Carol Feinman


Affordable Housing Is Going Up, Slowly
DESPITE the sluggish response of many Westchester communities to the call for affordable housing, a recent conference here offered a look at some creative answers to the problem.
While some projects are initiated by municipal officials, a significant number are the work of private nonprofit community housing organizations.
Projects under way or recently completed include a 6-unit condominium conversion of a former church in North Tarrytown, a 9-unit project on Warburton Avenue in Yonkers, a 25-unit low-income project in Ossining and several renovations or conversions in Dobbs Ferry, Greenburgh, Irvington and Tarrytown.


One-Two Punch?
To the Editor:
American commercial films are empty.
They have three virtues going for them: technical facility, promotion and distribution.
Esthetically, they are laughable.
I commend the French for making a fight of it.
They've got Euro Disney on the ropes.
Let's hope for a knockout.
Vive la France!
GUS FRANZA  Moriches, N. Y.


Harrods' Code
To the Editor: I visited Harrods in London in November and was very pleased to see, prominently displayed on the entry doors, their dress code.
I respect their right to decide how they wish their clientele to be dressed -- they also don't wish to have backpacks in the store.


A SENSE OF PLACE
FROM Cape May to Wawayanda, Mr. and Mrs.
New Jersey are perplexed.
They are furrowing their brows, squinting their eyes, scratching their heads and muttering, "What do all these new health care proposals mean?"
Will everyone be forced to change doctors?
Will everyone have to fill out new forms?
Will physicians' handwriting be even less legible than it has always been?
Will New Jersey doctors still refuse to make house calls, but for a completely new and different set of reasons?


Back To the Source
To the Editor:
George Bernard Shaw's Oscar-winning screenplay for the wonderful 1938 film of his "Pygmalion" included several new scenes, among them the "cuddly coda" that Will Crutchfield tries to hang on Alan Jay Lerner's script for "My Fair Lady"  [ " 'Fair Lady': Look Who's Crying Foul," Jan. 9 ] .


A Writer's Block Is Broken, And a New Play Assumes Form
WRITING ABOUT A fictional midlife crisis in his latest play, Philip Kan Gotanda seems to have worked through his own.
A year and a half ago he found himself staring down writer's block.
"I was tired of what I was saying. I was doing interviews, and the things I would tell looked good in print, but I no longer believed in them."
It sounds suspiciously like Harry Kitamura's complaint in Mr.
Gotanda's new play, "Day Standing on Its Head," which opens on Tuesday at the Manhattan Theater Club.
The protagonist, a timid, stodgy law professor (played by Keone Young), is stuck in life and work, his marriage foundering and an important article about his student involvement with Asian-American political movements lying unfinished.
After a phantasmagorical journey packed with hallucinatory scenes, Kitamura is finally jolted out of his emotional numbness and professional stagnation.


Summerall Set For Fox Switch
The realization that after 32 years, Pat Summerall is leaving CBS for the Fox Network is dawning on him.
"There was an initial shock but now I'm looking forward to it," he said.
"But if I had my druthers, I'd have preferred to finish my career at CBS."


Speeding the Train To the Rome Plane
The Italian State Railways in cooperation with Alitalia Airlines has simplified the journey between central Rome and Fiumicino airport.
The establishment in late November of a 30-minute nonstop rail link between the Termini train station and Fiumicino allows passengers with hand baggage traveling on Alitalia flights to check in at Termini, where four check-in and ticketing desks have been opened beside platform 22, the departure point.
The service consists of 15 trains a day (one every hour between 7 A.M. and 10:50 P.M.), seating 228 passengers in air-conditioned first-class cars.
The trains are equipped for travelers who use wheelchairs.
The ride costs $7, calculated at a rate of 1,700 lire to the dollar.


Ecology Unit To Get Home Of Its Own
After years of being shifted from one school to another, an ecology center in School District 22 is going to have a home of its own, complete with greenhouse.
"We've been talking about getting this project off the ground for years," said the District Superintendent, John Comer.
"I'm glad it's finally going to happen."


Can the Mass Media Be Trusted With Disclosures on Anything?
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen calls, in "Hillary Rodham Candor" (column, Jan. 12), for full disclosure by the Clintons in the Whitewater Development Company affair.
While I agree that full disclosure would be helpful, this assumes that the mass media would use the information in a thoughtful manner -- a dubious assumption.


Manager's Profile
Arthur J. Bonnel
Fund: MIM Stock Appreciation, $58.5 million in assets.
Manager since 1987 inception. (Sponsor: Mathematical Investing Systems, Cleveland.)  Born: Aug. 20, 1945; Oakland, Calif.


The View From: Candlewood Lake; Community Divided on Expansion of Boat Launch
WHEN Frank Kershaw moved into a house on Indian Avenue in Danbury 25 years ago, the neighboring property was a wooded tract with frontage on Lattin's Cove at the southern tip of Candlewood Lake.
After he had lived there about five years, the state cut the trees and put in a boat ramp that has since become the most heavily used freshwater launch in the state, filling to its 200-boat capacity several times a year.


Pamela Stewart, Christopher Burke
Pamela Fowler Stewart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Nicholson Stewart of Tarrytown, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Richards Burke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Burke of Harrisburg, Pa.
The Rev.
Arthur Caliandro performed the Dutch Reformed ceremony at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
The bride, 27, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Colgate University.
Mrs.
Burke is an assistant in the private accounts group at Dillon, Read &amp; Company, an investment banking concern in New York.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Trevor Stewart Burton &amp; Jacobsen Inc., an investment management company in New York.


U.S. Plays Down French Appeal for Bosnia Strikes
After clear frustration on the American side with French statements that appear to criticize Washington for inaction on Bosnia, the United States today sought to play down the significance of French appeals for the possible use of air strikes to aid besieged towns there .
Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, suggested in a briefing to reporters today that the United States did not understand the French position, and would seek a clarification when Secretary of State Warren Christopher meets with French officials in Paris on Monday.


Taking the Wildness Out of Wildflowers
THERE is a surge toward growing wildflowers.
Now that seed catalogues are arriving almost daily, this is a good time to take a serious look at raising them in the garden.
Purists insist that only those wildflowers that belong to a particular region are the ones to grow.
There is great logic in this, as the native plants of a region are the ones most likely to thrive successfully.
The plants are adjusted to the vagaries of the weather and can adapt to the local soil conditions.
These wildflowers or indigenous plants fill the goals of those who want to maintain a balanced ecosystem and duplicate nature as best they can.


Sun Rises and Slightly Warms Brooklyn's Frozen Mess
After a week of brutal cold and icy chaos, the New York region basked in brilliant sunshine and a modest January freeze yesterday as travel and commerce returned to normal.
Utility crews, meantime, struggled to restore water and gas services to a Brooklyn community flooded and crippled by a water-main break.
As the temperature climbed to 32 degrees in Central Park at 3 P.M. and into the mid-20's in the suburbs, the week of bitter cold and disrupted life across the New York area and the Northeast was only a vivid memory.


FICTION
SOCIAL SATIRE  THE VICAR OF SORROWS  By A. N. Wilson. Norton, $23.


Jan. 16-22: A New Briefcase in Town; Independent Counsel Enjoys Broad Mandate in Inquiry On Clinton Land Dealings
A day after one independent counsel closed up shop, his old law partner came into town to begin yet another investigation of a President.
On Thursday, Attorney General Janet Reno appointed Robert B. Fiske Jr., a 63-year old Wall Street lawyer and former United States Attorney from Manhattan, to examine the real estate dealings of Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton during the 1980's.
To the Clintons, the appointment of Mr.
Fiske is good news, assuming they have nothing to hide.
If he finds no wrongdoing, his reputation for thoroughness and probity could extinguish the issues surrounding the Clintons' partnership in the Whitewater Development Company with the operator of a failed savings and loan.


Toby Shatzoff and Carl Feinberg
Toby Shatzoff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Shatzoff of Hackensack, N.J., is to be married there today to Carl Feinberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Feinberg of Allentown, Pa.
Rabbi Robert Schumeister will perform the ceremony at Temple Beth-El.
Mrs.
Feinberg is an assistant professor of computer information systems at La Guardia Community College in Long Island City, Queens.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.


G.O.P. CHALLENGES CLINTON'S AGENDA
Setting an acrimonious tone as the election year opens, Republican leaders put President Clinton on notice today that they were ready to fight him on virtually every major issue on his agenda, from crime to health care to welfare.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, went a step further at the winter meeting of the Republican National Committee here, suggesting that Mr.
Clinton's involvement in the Whitewater real estate deal when he was Governor of Arkansas might be used to the Republicans' benefit during the fall Congressional campaigns.


SURFACING
TELEVISION  The male Vanna White: Meet Dan Doherty, the happy-go-lucky hunk who dresses like a centurion on "Caesar's Challenge," an NBC game show.
He proves that spokes-modeling need not be the domain solely of leggy women.
SPORTS  Football fashion: Brandishing a tough-guy style popularized by "gangsta" rappers, some football players, including Deion Sanders, above, are wearing bandanas and similiar head wraps during games.
BUZZ  Casting Kerrigan and Harding: Even as the drama around the assault on the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan unfolds, people are guessing who will be cast in the inevitable television movie.
Early favorites: Winona Ryder as Kerrigan; Drew Barrymore as Tonya Harding, above.


A Little Help From Some Friends
In 1988, the Parks Department completed the $1.7 million first phase of a major rehabilitation of Madison Square.
The north end of the park was repaved, a playground and benches set up, and a statue of Adm.
David Farragut restored.
The second phase, to cost $2.3 million, was never done.
"There seemed to be other priorities, and in 1991 the project was killed by the fiscal crisis," said Joseph McCluskey, who heads the 23d Street Association.


Streetscapes/The Duke Chateau; A Grand, Sophisticated 1912 House Crumbling Away
WHEN Doris Duke died last October, her obituaries made passing references to her family mansion at 1 East 78th Street.
It is among the grandest and most sophisticated houses in New York, completed the year before the only child of the tobacco millionaire James B. Duke was born.
The stone facade of the mansion, now New York University's graduate Institute of Fine Arts, has been deteriorating for several years and sidewalk bridges protect those going in and out.


William Plotch and Suzanne Barnett
Suzanne Beth Barnett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Barnett of Syosset, L.I., was married last evening to William Stuart Plotch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard F. Plotch of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Plotch, 32, is an associate at Grunfeld, Desiderio, Lebowitz &amp; Silverman, a New York law firm.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is a lawyer in Garden City, L.I.


Jim Wright Tries Again
WORTH IT ALL  My War for Peace.
By Jim Wright. 322 pp.
New York: Brassey's (US)/Macmillan. $22.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Jan. 2 about diving off Malaysia misidentified a turtle shown swimming with a diver.
It was a green turtle, not a hawksbill.


East Village Spices At Gentle Prices
AL HAMRA ++  (212) 505-6559; 203 First Avenue, near 12th Street; $; no credit cards
This unassuming Indian restaurant does not provide much decor or atmosphere, but it offers a solid repertory of satisfying, familiar fare at bargain prices.
Portions are enormous and cost less than $5.
The dining room has a grayish linoleum floor, folk murals on one wall, wobbly tables covered with plastic, and track lighting overhead.
The food comes with paper plates and plastic utensils.
Two good starters are samosas, peppery potatoes and peas wrapped in a crisp crust; and shami kebab, grilled patties of minced goat, lentils and scallions with cinnamon and cardamom.
Entrees include savory chicken karahi, shredded boneless chicken with peas, Basmati rice and spices; tender spicy chicken curry, and moist piquant chapli kebabs, grilled minced lamb and herbs.
The menu also carries almost a dozen vegetarian dishes.
All main courses are served with a lettuce, cucumber and tomato salad and raita, an herbed yogurt mixture. ($25 and Under: 6/11/93)


Screening Out Culture Shock
To the Editor:
Quelle horreur: "Movies from the United States take 57 percent of the French box office"  [ "Aux Armes! France Rallies to Battle Sly and T. Rex," Jan. 2 ] .
The French could do nothing finer for the survival of their glorious culture than keep out 98 percent of a product created in a Los Angeles cultural cesspool by bankers, producers and lawyers for a culturally and intellectually illiterate audience.
SHALE DWORAN  New York


In Connecticut, a Wait For Would-Be Candidate
John G. Rowland, a former Republican United States Representative from Waterbury, Conn., came within a whisker of beating Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in the 1990 race for governor.
Since then he has been his party's presumptive front-runner for 1994, a heavyweight without portfolio whose every appearance in or out of state politics has begged the question of his future.
And Mr.
Rowland has milked the suspense for all it is worth, delaying and postponing an announcement of his candidacy for months, while hinting strongly that he would indeed run again.
The tease has worked, at least to the extent of making the declared field of candidates appear to be standing on stage waiting for his appearance.


The 'Confusing Mess' In Education
Re: "Schools Trying to Offer More for Less Money" (Dec. 12) and "Class Computers Largely Absent" (Nov. 14):
During the last five years, how many state, county, district bureaucracies or special interests were created or expanded in just the educational arena here in New Jersey?
How many departments, agencies, boards, councils, committees, commissions, consortiums, groups, foundations, coalitions, associations, federations, alliances, ventures, projects, programs, partnerships, cooperatives, specialized centers, networks, task forces?


The Rebels in Mexico Seem in No Mood to Yield
Slipping down through the rain forest and setting themselves on a muddy hillside, young rebels of the Zapatista National Liberation Army glared through their ski masks as though to answer first any question about their resolve.
Their menace was not what they might have hoped.
None of the seven combatants encountered 40 miles southeast of this provincial town stood much taller than five and a half feet, and only their 25-year-old captain, who clutched a semiautomatic rifle, was carrying a weapon more powerful than a battered carbine.
As an army spotter plane droned above the heavy clouds, the guerrillas seemed anxious to fade back into the ceiba trees and be gone.


Japan's Crisis on Political Reform Overshadows Bentsen Trade Trip
With Japan's coalition Government reeling from a surprise internal rebellion that could drive it from power, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen arrived here today prepared to tell the country's leadership that Tokyo's political chaos would no longer be an excuse to resist major concessions on trade.
But Mr.
Bentsen, who is scheduled to meet Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa on Sunday, has little leverage.
Japanese leaders spent the day preoccupied with strategies to salvage their Government after the defeat on Friday of legislation to clean up the country's political system.
Even with deadlines looming on trade issues, a conflict with the Clinton Administration seemed the least of their problems.


Taking the Wildness Out of Wildflowers
THERE is a surge toward growing wildflowers.
Now that seed catalogues are arriving almost daily, this is a good time to take a serious look at raising them in the garden.
Purists insist that only those wildflowers that belong to a particular region are the ones to grow.
There is great logic in this, as the native plants of a region are the ones most likely to thrive successfully.
The plants are adjusted to the vagaries of the weather and can adapt to the local soil conditions.
These wildflowers or indigenous plants fill the goals of those who want to maintain a balanced ecosystem and duplicate nature as best they can.


NEW CANADA CHIEF WINNING APPLAUSE
Short on panache and vision, long on prudence and street smarts, Jean Chretien has enjoyed an unusual honeymoon with Canadian voters.
Since his Liberals won a commanding majority in the House of Commmons three months ago, the country's 20th Prime Minister has increased his approval rating not by deferring tough decisions but by making a series of them politically palatable.


Did Sartre Ever Exist?
SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR AND JEAN-PAUL SARTRE  The Remaking of a Twentieth-Century Legend.
By Kate Fullbrook and Edward Fullbrook. 214 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


Getting the Best Price
Though they don't always trumpet it, many hotel chains offer discounts, upgrades and other perks.
One way to learn about deals is to call the hotel chain's 800 number.
Or you can consult a new 40-page booklet, "The Hotel/Motel $ pecial Program and Di$ count Guide," that lists bargain offerings at more than 100 chains.
Children accompanied by parents stay free of charge at Hampton Inns, for example.
And at most Best Inns of America, local phone calls and evening coffee are free.
Senior citizens, meanwhile, can get discounts almost anywhere -- although age requirements vary.


Elementary, Dr. Watson. The Neurotransmitters Did It.
THE temptation is irresistible.
On the one hand, the incidence of violent crime appears to be spreading across America like a metastatic cancer, invading backyards, suburban commuter trains, even a young girls' slumber party.
On the other hand, the power of biomedicine expands daily, as researchers trumpet the discovery of yet another gene responsible for yet another human ailment, or a clever new therapy to thwart those ailments at their inception.
Small wonder, then, that a growing number of researchers are seeking to train the might of molecular science on the greatest sickness of all -- violent crime.
They believe there is much to be gained by exploring the neurobiological basis of aggression, the biochemical gunpowder in the brain that prompts a person to explode in mortal fury.
Already scientists have identified several important signaling molecules, or neurotransmitters, that seem to play a role in aggressive and potentially dangerous behavior, some of which are described in three articles appearing in the current issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry.
And recently researchers from the Netherlands announced the link between a gene and a rare hereditary disease in which afflicted men impulsively commit violent acts.


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING  Endeavor Slips Past Tokio  The New Zealand yacht Endeavor edged past Tokio in the last few minutes of a 3,673-nautical-mile race and won the third leg of the Whitbread Round the World challenge by about 300 yards.
The Maxi-class Endeavor, skippered by Grant Dalton, crossed the finish line just 2 minutes 12 seconds ahead of its smaller rival, a Whitbread 60 yacht skippered by Chris Dickson.
Endeavor was trailing Tokio by about 100 yards when the two yachts passed Tiritiri Matangi Island in the Hauraki Gulf, but Endeavor had every possible sail set, including spinnakers on both masts, and caught and passed Tokio at the entrance to Rangitoto Channel.


Menu Dumping Threatens A Community's Safety
To the Editor:
The Jan. 16 article about Empire Szechuan Gourmet does not reflect the trashing of our neighborhood because of the menu dumping by Empire and other restaurants.
If you believe this menu distribution is a harmless little enterprise to occupy an idle waiter, think again.
At times in a given area of the West Side, there are as many as 50 men, arriving on bikes or in vans, carrying canvas bags to conceal the menus, going through our neighborhoods and violating our buildings' security.
Door locks have been broken and physical confrontations with residents have occurred.


Speaking of Drugstores
To the Editor:
Regarding "For Drugstores, Pushing Pills Is Much Less Profitable" (Jan. 2), the plight of today's retail pharmacists has been brought on over the years by the willingness of pharmacists to do nothing, and the total ineffectiveness of pharmaceutical societies.


SUNDAY, January 23, 1994; More Secret Codes
Neither the Government nor software makers have paid much attention to another code, the marks laundries (the ones that haven't gone to staple-on tags) put on shirts.
For instance, two Manhattan shirt wearers, Steve Price and Richard Liebmann-Smith (names and codes are real), become EC and VESM.
How?
What's the system?
There is none, or rather there are many.
At R &amp; L Laundry on the Upper East Side, where EC takes his shirts, Linda Yeung, manager, says: "We write it with permanent marker. If they have an existing mark we keep the same one." If not, they ask the customer or just make one up.


Those Old Cliches
To the Editor:
We must all be really and truly grateful for the advice in a recent Book Review headline, "Haul Out the Old Cliches" (Dec. 12), for it is certainly true and not false that they are much better than the new ones.
And while we're all at it, let's see if we can haul out some of those old editors who used to check sentences before they got into print, and from time to time deleted infelicitous phrases like, oh, say, repetitive redundancies.
RICHARD LETTIS Port Washington, L.I.


Changing of the Guard: The Whitman Team
Christine Todd Whitman will have 20 Cabinet members, one more than Gov.
Jim Florio.
She is restoring the chairman of the Board of Regulatory Commissioners.
Mrs.
Whitman has not announced her appointments for Corrections Commissioner, Adjutant General, Health Commissioner, Insurance Commissioner, Labor Commissioner and Public Advocate.
Cabinet members are paid $100,225 a year.
ELIZABETH RANDALL, Banking Commissioner AGE: 40.
HOMETOWN: Westwood.
N.J.
BACKGROUND: State assemblywoman, 1985-1991.
Partner, Randall, Randall &amp; Stevens of Westwood, March 1984-February 1991.
Has served in a variety of legal jobs in state and local government including assistant counsel to former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, Assistant Essex County prosecutor, municipal prosecutor in Park Ridge, and borough attorney in Hillsdale.
She has been Bergen County counsel since 1991.
FAMILY: Single.


Correction
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about the suspension of subway service on the Q line in southern Brooklyn misstated the age of the bridges that must be repaired.
They are 77 years old, not 30; they were completed in 1917.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Usually, the play comes first; the theater and set follow.
For Anne Hamburger's En Garde Arts, the site's the thing.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Coconut drops, pineapple tarts, currant rolls: sweet staples of Guyana, seeds of a New York bakery mini-empire.


Reaching New Goals in Washington


Return of the Mondegreens
To my horror and embarrassment," writes Yisroel Epstein of New York, "I was informed recently -- and in public -- that the phrase I had always thought was for all intensive purposes was, in fact, for all intents and purposes.
After the revelation, of course, the phrase began to make some sense."
In an account of a football game between Cornell and Penn, Jack Cavanaugh wrote in The New York Times, "And it was altogether fitting that today's game ended, to all extents and purposes, with a dramatic defensive effort." James Weid ner of Merchantville, N.J., clipped this usage and sent it in with the comment: "Granted, extents could conceivably fit the context of the article, but just what is the usual expression after all?"


A Mansion Warming
Christie's, Jan. 17.


THE BOTTOM LINE
Something is missing from Abeel's flip little essay -- the grief and pain caused a wife and children by a woman who moves in on another's life because she can't find a life of her own.
JUDITH LICHTENFELD New York, N.Y.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Providing for the Have-Nots Of the New Information Age
PEOPLE take the humble telephone, and by extension telecommunications, for granted, like tap water.
So when Vice President Al Gore talks about how even a town as small as his boyhood home of Carthage, Tenn., population 2,000, ought to be connected to the emerging information interchange as part of something called "universal service," it seems only common sense.
And when Southern New England Telephone recently announced an ambitious $4.5 billion plan to wire Connecticut with advanced fiber-optic telephone lines, company officials were careful to emphasize that both rich and poor would benefit.


Housing and Stores for a Site Off Union Square
THERE is low-income housing, and there is high-octane low-income housing.
The specialist in the latter category over the last few years in New York City is Andrew M. Cuomo, who is off to Washington now as Assistant Secretary of Community Planning and Development at the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


82 Points in a Half, 5 Victories in a Row
The Nets and the Warriors played a lackluster first half tonight, but Kenny Anderson sparked New Jersey to an 82-point second half and a 124-98 victory over Golden State at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets won their season-high fifth straight game.


'A Thousand Clowns': Revisiting Another Era
NEXT time you feel like pin ing for plays of another time all right, 1962 -- be advised that "A Thousand Clowns" need not be one of them.
In his program notes for the American Stage Company revival, James N. Vagias, the theater's executive producer, writes of the play as a "loving valentine" -- there's another kind? -- "to a simpler New York and a simpler time."


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Fishs Eddy Plans to Open 30 Outlets Nationwide
Fishs Eddy, the eclectic china and tableware company with three Manhattan stores, is planning to go national.
David Lenovitz, who owns Fishs Eddy with his wife, Julie Gaines, said the company expects to open 30 retail outlets across the country within the next five years.
In the next year, Mr.
Lenovitz said, they also plan to publish a mail-order catalogue.


Nuggets Can Talk to Manning
The Denver Nuggets have received permission from the Los Angeles Clippers to talk with DANNY MANNING about whether he would agree to sign a long-term contract if Denver traded for him.
Denver is on a long list of teams interested in the 6-foot-10-inch Manning, who can become an unrestricted free agent on July 1.


How to Really Make the Investor Whole
To the Editor:
The letter from Edward A. Grossmann ("Lawyers, Class Actions and Fees," Jan. 2), concerning class actions on behalf of investors, perpetuates a serious and common misperception of the proper measure of damages in such cases.
Mr.
Grossmann points out that members of his plaintiff class -- after partnership distributions, the sale of the partnerships and class-action proceeds -- will "recover $8,760 for every $10,000 invested in the partnerships."


Gastein Skiing
To the Editor: Reading Wayne Curtis's article about skiing in the Gastein Valley (Nov. 21) reminded both father and son of a decidedly different experience at Sportgastein, the highest of the five peaks, at Christmas in 1992.
We arrived by bus from Badgastein on a beautiful sun-filled day.
Although it was early in the season, snow conditions above the chairlift, aided by grooming, were the best in the valley.
The ride on the Kreuzkogellift was exhilarating and the alpine scene from the peak was the most spectacular in the valley.
We enjoyed a hot lunch at midstation in a modern cafeteria, using precisely the method the author described, ordering via the attractive photos of the selections.
The author missed the skiing highlight of Sportgastein, the Heilstollen.
Departing from the backside of the mountain, this eight-mile descent brings the hardy skier to a bus stop on the mountain road between Badgastein and Sportgastein.
Thus it is best run first thing in the morning to catch the arriving buses to Sportgastein or as a last run to catch the final bus back to Badgastein.


Christian Radio Experiences Growth
NEW JERSEY'S airwaves are full of Christian sounds.
From Cape May to Hackensack, listeners fleeing from secular talk, rock and rap can tune in to Christian music, religious call-in shows and inspirational programs of all kinds.
Five years ago, there were eight Christian radio stations on the air in the state.
Now there are 13, with another in the planning stage.
Four of the 13 AM and FM stations -- WFME-FM in West Orange, WKDK-FM in Camden, WEEE-FM in Cherry Hill and WCNJ-FM in Hazlet -- are noncommercial; the others sell time to commercial advertisers.


NONFICTION
COUNTRY MUSIC  LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE  By Naomi Judd. Villard, $24.


The Modern Upgrades an Old Picasso Favorite
NOT MORE THAN A MONTH OR two ago, the Museum of Modern Art acquired one of the rarest and most sought-after of all 20th-century prints -- a trial proof, inscribed and dated by the artist, of Picasso's "Frugal Repast" of 1904.
Behind it is a curious and instructive story.
Picasso was about as quick a study as anyone in the annals of art.
Once hooked, he pushed back the frontiers and overran the accepted limits of whatever medium he adopted.


'Home,' Uplifting Tale Of Young Black Farmer
THEATER Three in Port Jefferson is one of the few theaters on Long Island to make an effort to produce drama by black playwrights on a regular basis.
In honor of Black History Month, the Second Stage is presenting through Feb. 9 Samm-Art Williams's uplifting drama "Home." It is the story of a young black farmer who finds himself torn from his land and thrust into the turmoil of the Vietnam War and American urban decay.


COKIE, NINA AND LINDA
I was surprised to read Nina Totenberg's comment that when she applied for a position at The Patriot Ledger in Quincy, Mass., in 1965, a male editor told her, "Oh, we don't hire women."
I was a general-assignment reporter at The Ledger from 1957 to 1961, working with Brenda Maddox, Theresa McMasters and Mary Fitzgerald.
We covered everything from courts to city hall.
In fact, the then publisher, Prescott Low, and city editor, Don Wilder, were in the vanguard of male editors who gave women reporters excellent opportunities.


Report Card: Industrial Park
College Point Corporate Park is reaching a critical milestone in its 25-year history, with much of the land either fully developed or scheduled for development.
The park's 550 acres are occupied by more than 100 businesses, mainly offices and manufacturers, which employ some 4,000 people.
The city's Economic Development Corporation is continuing to press for the development of the 72 acres of public and private property for which there are no set plans and is considering opening it to retail businesses.


Business District Starts ... Slowly
The 125th Street Business Improvement District has officially opened for business, and property owners from Fifth to Morningside Avenue have received bills for tax assessments.
But one problem remains, local business owners say.
The city's failure to carry out its plan to move hundreds of street vendors is making it nearly impossible for the district to do one of its main jobs, clean the street.
Even in the bitter cold of the last few weeks, vendors lined the blocks from Fifth Avenue to St.
Nicholas.
City officials estimate that 400 to 800 vendors are on the street each day, with higher numbers on warm-weather weekends and during special events.


Surviving New York on Five Zingers a Day
"JUST spotted Mayor Giuliani on the weapons-for-toys line," said Roy Nemerson.
"He was turning in Andrew."
"Not too funny," I said.
We were sitting in the Green Kitchen on First Avenue, Mr.
Nemerson's hangout.
He wants to be comedy consultant to the Coping column.
He thinks zingers help you make it through.
They help him.
"Call me Roy," he said, "it's funnier than Mr. Nemerson. Andrew Giuliani is loud, unruly, brash and obnoxious. Finally we've got someone who can negotiate with Steinbrenner."


In America; 15 and Armed
Peter Reinharz, a city prosecutor, frequently tells the story of Ricardo Nunez-Reyes, a Brooklyn delivery man who might still be alive if New York had a more rational juvenile justice system.
Mr.
Reinharz is chief of the Family Court Division in the corporation counsel's office.
He prosecutes youngsters 13 to 15 years old.


Corrections
A chart on Jan. 9 with an article about Prozac and other antidepressant drugs misidentified the company currently developing gepirone.
Last fall Bristol-Myers Squibb sold the manufacturing rights to the Fabre-Kramer Pharmaceuticals Company, based in Houston.


Those Old Cliches To the Editor:   In his review of "The Complete Lyrics of Ira Gershwin" (Dec. 5), Sheldon Harnick says: "Ira Gershwin's professional life was an unremitting battle against cliches. In several lyrics he actually managed to make cliches work for him."


Peres and Arafat Unite in Mourning
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader, came together today to mourn the man who helped mediate the Israeli-Palestinian accord but failed in talks later to resolve differences on a plan to introduce Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
The two men expressed confidence that they could come to an agreement on putting the plan into force when they confer next weekend in Davos, Switzerland at the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum.


Rude Awakening; Quake Jars Assumptions: A Critic's View
BUILDINGS aren't supposed to murder architecture critics.
It's meant to be the other way around.
And it is particularly wounding to be menaced by a building you love: the Shangri-La Hotel in Santa Monica, a hostelry beloved by architects and photographers for its sleek Art Deco design and its spectacular views of sea, sky and palm trees.
But these features didn't amount to much when the earthquake struck last Monday.
After the bounce out of bed, the crawl across a heaving floor toward the supposed haven of a doorway, the prayers and curses, the amazement that any building could survive the jolts this one had just been put through, I pulled on clothes and went five flights down to the sidewalk.


There Is No Need For Term Limits
The Jan. 2 report  [ "Vote Buoys Term-Limit Campaign" ]  about the formation of the group Term Limits for Westchester seems either like an insult to voters or a simplistic solution to a nonexistent problem.
Could it be sour grapes that motivates Marcia Lee in her campaign to limit the terms of office of Westchester's elected officials?
Probably not, since her defeat for County Clerk was not at the hands of an incumbent.
Perhaps Dr.
Lee does not think Westchester's voters are wise enough to judge for themselves if they are being well represented.
Thank you just the same, term limiters, but "we, the people" are capable.
We Americans have been doing so for more than 200 years.
We need no such protection now.


Nancy Rockefeller, 93, Community Volunteer
Nancy Carnegie Rockefeller, a community leader and active volunteer in Greenwich, Conn., died at her home there yesterday.
She was 93.
Family members said she died of natural causes.


Q and A
Finding Locations Of Schools  Q. How can I get locations of all of the school districts in Manhattan and the addresses of all the elementary schools within each district in the borough?


Small Store, Big Move
FOR more than 40 years, Jimmy's has been a Brooklyn landmark, offering high-fashion men's and women's clothes to a well-heeled clientele that finds comfort in its family atmosphere.
Now, the owners of Jimmy's -- Jimmy and Gloria Jacobs and their daughter and son-in-law, Betsy and Dominick Lepore -- have embarked on a risky venture: opening a boutique in Manhattan in a high-competition zone when the economy is not being kind to retail businesses.
On Friday, a miniature branch of Jimmy's opened at 150 East 72d Street, in an apartment building that is a short stroll from Madison Avenue's designer boutiques.


County's Wish List For Albany
A NEWLY formed regional alliance of the top officeholders of New York City and Westchester, Rockland, Nassau and Suffolk Counties -- all Republicans -- could provide the political edge necessary this year to achieve a state takeover of local Medicaid costs, long sought by the elected officials.
That, at least, is the view of the Westchester County administration, led by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who was pleased to see the proposal included in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed budget two years ago but disappointed when it failed to gain committee approval in either house of the Legislature.


Just in Awe Of Mrs. Astor
To the Editor:


MORE AND MORE AND MORE AND MORE
When David challenges Goliath in the press these days, we all know who's supposed to win.
So the outcome of the grudge match between Wal-Mart and a New England hamlet will be no mystery to those burned out on media parables.
In one corner is the big discount doofus with its repellent name (unnatural capitals, ugly hyphen), aluminum-siding architecture and hordes of bargain hunters in running suits.
Who could side with all that?
Especially when the opposition is a bunch of J. Crew folk with the dulcet acronym Rural (Residents Urging Responsible Alteration of Land) who fed the arriving reporters quotations about the warmth of small-town community.
In the part of New Haven where I live, discussion of these current events takes place at Lulu's coffeehouse, where people meet for a hot cup of serious joe and 15 minutes of neighborliness before heading off to work.
After listening to withering dismissals of Wal-Mart and "Te Deums" to Main Street commerce, I felt a little guilty because I don't buy much at the local stores (and I suspect my neighbors don't either).


Plaid: Highland And Low
PLAID is having a bonny fashion season, and not just because a tartan blanket is traditionally wrapped round the knees when the weather gets tough.
Kilts have been hip since Madonna wore hers over leather jeans, Axl Rose slung his under a T-shirt, and Jean-Paul Gaultier made the kilt his personal trademark.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 23, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
49
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
2
4
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
3
3
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
4
5
THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her Colorado hometown.
5
9
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
6
93
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions during a trial.
7*
10
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
8
8
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
9
1
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in Los Angeles.
10
20
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
11
2
THE REBEL BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Topaz, $4.99.) A revised version of a 1979 novel about a romance in Regency England.
12*
97
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
13
56
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
14*
1
IN THE PRESENCE OF ENEMIES, by William J. Coughlin. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) The romance of an heiress and her lawyer complicates her battle for her dead husband's fortune.
15
9
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
533
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
2
19
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
3
6
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
4
2
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5
49
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
12
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
7
8
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
8
119
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
9*
8
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
10
2
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
11
12
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
12
8
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
13*
34
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
14*
23
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
15*
133
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
16*
41
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
17*
13
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
6
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
2
149
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
4
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
4
17
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Channel Surfing Is Genderless
To the Editor:
The Thing column on Dec. 26 included an unnecessary generalization and slur against men.
Elizabeth Kolbert, writing about a device to interfere with a television remote control, mentions "mindless (read male) channel surfing."


Ms. Kennedy And Mr. Caruso
Katherine Anne Kennedy, a daughter of the author William Kennedy and Dana Kennedy of Averill Park, N.Y., was married yesterday to Phillip Vincent Caruso, a son of the late Josephine and Vincent Caruso.
Michael Grupp, a leader of the Society for Ethical Culture, performed the ceremony at the Parker Meridien Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Caruso, 34, is a production coordinator, based in New York, for the motion picture industry.
The bridegroom, 37, is a still photographer based in Wilmington, N.C., who works in the film industry and met his future wife during production of "The Age of Innocence."


Getting A Home Inspected
BOTH novice and experienced buyers know they should have a home inspected before buying it.
But it doesn't necessarily follow that they will use the professional service wisely or get the most out of it.
Yet these inspections, which cost an average of $300, can fulfill a variety of needs if handled properly.
The most obvious is the chance to find out in advance if there are any flaws and then go back to the seller and negotiate a better price based on the inspector's report.


Catching Hell
To the Editor:
Since I state at the outset of "The History of Hell" that my interest is in art and popular culture rather than theology, and since the book is clearly not intended to be scholarly, the Rev.
Kendall S. Harmon's ire at my scanting 20th-century theologians seems a mite out of line (Letters, Jan. 2).
Andrew Greeley, the reviewer, seemed far more in tune with the book's spirit.
The first volume of Alan E. Bernstein's scholarly work "The Formation of Hell," expected to be the standard reference for a long time to come, is just out and may be more to Father Harmon's taste.





Inside Albany: A Guide to Power Centers
EXPLAIN Albany?
Assemblywoman Deborah J. Glick seemed momentarily puzzled by the question.
But as Ms.
Glick, Democrat of Manhattan, pondered the satirical possibilities of the Legislature in general and, perhaps, the Lilliputian role of the Assembly Republicans in particular, she hit upon the real guidebook.
"Read Swift," she said, struck by the absurdist parallels between "Gulliver's Travels" and modern-day state politics.


Alarming Trend Among Workers: Surveys Find Clusters of TB Cases
Federal health officials, alarmed by the growing number of cases of tuberculosis contracted on the job, are increasingly treating the disease as a work problem.
"The presence of tuberculosis in the workplace poses a significant risk to workers," said Joseph Dear, the head of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
"In just two years, we're aware of 10 worker deaths from tuberculosis. Ten in two years is cause for alarm."


Three Easy Ways to Prepare Pot Roast
BEEF consumption has declined dramatically over the last decade.
Then why are steakhouses doing so well, with new ones opening and reservations hard to get in all of them?
The answer is that an increasing number of people are not cooking beef at home, but when they dine out they want a terrific, tender, beefy slab of perfectly charred steak.
This makes sense.
The quality of well-aged sirloin or porterhouse that a good restaurant can obtain is usually superior to that available for home cooks.
And the kind of high-heat grills with which restaurants are routinely equipped usually do a far better job of cooking a steak than a home broiler or grill, even an outdoor grill.


Ann D. Wasson, Geoffrey Coley
Ann Dorsey Wasson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dennis Wasson of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Geoffrey O'Connor Coley, a son of Mary Montgomery of Delray Beach, Fla., and Bradley L. Coley of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Coley, 28, and her husband, 33, work at Salomon Brothers in New York, where she is a sales assistant in the taxable fixed-income department and he is a managing director in corporate bond trading.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a surgeon in Bridgeport, Conn., and the chief of general surgery at Bridgeport Hospital.


U.N. Agencies to Combine Efforts Against AIDS
The United Nations plans to combine the efforts of several agencies into a single program against AIDS that will be administered by the World Health Organization.
This coordinated effort, scheduled to begin in 1996, will merge the AIDS programs of the World Health Organization, the United Nations Development Program, the United Nations Population Fund, Unicef and Unesco.


Consolidated Edison Urged To Freeze Electrical Rates
Consolidated Edison, which has been pursuing a 2 percent rate increase for several months, should instead freeze its electricity rates for at least one year, the New York State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, urged yesterday.
He asserted that savings from lower interest rates and operation costs should be transferred to customers.
The increase requested by Con Ed, if approved by the State Public Service Commission, would add a little over $1 to an average customer's monthly bill beginning in April.
A typical residential customer, using 300 kilowatt hours a month, pays about $50.


Not All Arts Groups Have Felt Left Out
Regarding "When Arts Proponents and Educators Clash"  [ Dec. 12 ] , we are writing to emphasize that the Westchester Arts Council, under the leadership of Janet Langsam, has consistently involved Youth Theater Interactions, an arts affiliate and a down-county arts organization, in the process for participating in Arts Excel.
Y.T.I. was present not only at the most recent meeting at Manhattanville College but also at the meeting held there last summer as well as the recent Arts Expo.
The Arts Council is continually in touch with Y.T.I. following up on the numerous requests for proposals, which Y.T.I. has received from schools in our area for Arts Excel.
It is our belief that perhaps if more of the organizations who have felt left out had been at these meetings, especially the seminar last summer, then perhaps they would have felt more included.


Cold Comfort; Hardy Iceboaters Sail Into Winter
Iceboaters live in an upside-down world.
While everyone else plots ways to stay indoors and turn up the heat, they think up excuses to get out on the ice with the wind scraping their faces like rusty razors.
Normal people pray for temperatures to rise.


Business Diary: January 16-21
THE ECONOMY A Stubborn Public Finally Admits It: Things Are Looking Up  In some ways, public opinion is shamelessly fickle, but on the economy it's like a huge tanker -- it takes massive force to make it change direction.
For months now, the economic numbers have been consistently strong -- whether on car sales, unemployment or housing starts (which just took another jump).
Reflecting this vigor, stock prices are setting records almost daily.
But not until last week did the public finally sign on.
A poll showed that for the first time since mid-1990, when recession began chipping away at spirits -- and at George Bush's job security -- half of Americans expressed confidence in the economy.
So it's no surprise that President Clinton, who can thank the recession for his job, now has the approval of 54 percent of the public.
One heartening figure: A year ago, 40 percent of Americans feared for a family member's job; that's down to 21 percent.


SUNDAY, January 23, 1994; A New Donner Party?
"Treacherous" may have become the most popular weather word of all time.
"Brutal" is up there too along with "dangerous" and "scary." But treacherous seems to be the favorite of drivetime weathercasters.
The word suggests betrayal -- on the part of the roads at the very least, if not on the part of the precipitation itself.
It makes you wonder.
How can anyone who knows about the cycle of the seasons feel betrayed by a snowstorm in January?
Big talk makes commuters listen to the radio.
But then you get in the car and all it takes is an extra half-hour to get to work, which wouldn't be so bad if you didn't have to listen to the horror stories.
A man stepped out his door in the morning and almost slipped.
Another commuter was stuck in a traffic jam.
A woman is wearing long underwear.
And, and . . .?


Dispute With Giuliani No Cloud for Sharpton
The Reuben sandwich was fine, but for the Rev.
Al Sharpton the sweetest part of the meal came after dessert.
He strolled out of the restaurant a few blocks from the state Capitol in Albany with his luncheon companion, William D. Powers, the state Republican chairman, and was greeted by a gaggle of reporters.
Mr.
Sharpton immediately contrasted his chummy reception from Mr.
Powers with the refusal of the Giuliani administration to meet with him 10 days before over the melee in a Harlem mosque.


Taking the Wildness Out of Wildflowers
THERE is a surge toward growing wildflowers.
Now that seed catalogues are arriving almost daily, this is a good time to take a serious look at raising them in the garden.
Purists insist that only those wildflowers that belong to a particular region are the ones to grow.
There is great logic in this, as the native plants of a region are the ones most likely to thrive successfully.
The plants are adjusted to the vagaries of the weather and can adapt to the local soil conditions.
These wildflowers or indigenous plants fill the goals of those who want to maintain a balanced ecosystem and duplicate nature as best they can.


Dispute Over AIDS Reporting Is Costly, Health Official Says
Because of disagreement between health officials and AIDS groups over a new system for counting AIDS cases, New York City is still using a less reliable method that underestimates the number of cases and thus has cost the city at least $8 million in Federal money, the city's Health Commissioner says.
In a letter to the State AIDS Advisory Council this week, New York City's Health Commissioner, Margaret A. Hamburg, said the system used now to count new AIDS cases, which relies on death certificates and reporting by hospitals and doctors, missed 4,500 people in 1993, 22 percent of cases.
She said this meant the loss of Federal AIDS treatment money, which is allocated on the basis of need.


Married to the Reich
FRAUEN  German Women Recall the Third Reich.
By Alison Owings. 494 pp.
New Brunswick, N.J.:  Rutgers University Press. $24.95.


Traveling Tableware
At first glance it could be an extra-fat toothbrush case.
But when the Snack Pack is pulled apart, it becomes a stainless steel knife and fork with plastic handles.
The compact traveling tableware kit, made in France, is outfitted with built-in salt and pepper shakers, and also includes a plastic spoon.
It costs $12 and comes in aqua, green and hot pink at Civilized Traveler, 1072 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10021, (212) 758-8305; 2003 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10023, (212) 875-0306, and 2 World Financial Center, New York, N.Y. 10281, (212) 786-3301.
TERRY TRUCCO


NONFICTION
ILLEGAL DRUGS  THE BIG WHITE LIE  The CIA and the Cocaine/Crack Epidemic: An Undercover Odyssey.
By Michael Levine with Laura Kavanau-Levine.
Thunder's Mouth, $22.95.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 9 about air fare discounts commemorating the 50th anniversary of D-day misstated an example of British Airways' 30 percent discount for travelers over 60.
The airline no longer has 14-day advance purchase fares; its lowest fare -- a 30-day advance-purchase economy round trip from New York to Paris via London usable on a weekday until March 31 -- is $456.40 with the discount, not including airport taxes.


A Little Help From Some Friends
In 1988, the Parks Department completed the $1.7 million first phase of a major rehabilitation of Madison Square.
The north end of the park was repaved, a playground and benches set up, and a statue of Adm.
David Farragut restored.
The second phase, to cost $2.3 million, was never done.
"There seemed to be other priorities, and in 1991 the project was killed by the fiscal crisis," said Joseph McCluskey, who heads the 23d Street Association.


Michele Klopner, Thomas Hutchins
Dr.
Michele Anne Cuvilly Klopner, a clinical psychologist in Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Thomas Hutchins, a lawyer in Laredo, Tex.
The Rev.
Mary Klaaren, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Andover Chapel of the Harvard Divinity School in Cambridge.
Dr.
Klopner, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Jacqueline C. Klopner of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, and Washington, and the late Mark Klopner.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Rutgers University.
She is the founder and the administrative and clinical director of the Haitian Mental Health Clinic at Cambridge (Mass.) Hospital.
She is also a clinical instructor in psychiatry at Harvard Medical School in Boston.


Robber Killed in Queens Holdup
An attempted holdup by four men at a private social club in Queens ended early yesterday when a club member shot two of the robbers, killing one, the police said.
The dead man, who was not immediately identified, was shot once in the chest with a 9-millimeter handgun, said a police spokeswoman, Merri Pearsall.
Another suspect was shot in the leg and fled with the other robbers.
The police were searching yesterday for the suspects, who took an undisclosed amount of cash.


Harrods' Code
To the Editor: Three cheers for Harrods and their dress code.
Ms.
McMillan seems to think that full page advertisements are required.
I lived in Britain for a year; it was readily apparent to me that people needed to dress better when in town.
I know the colonies, or rather former colonies, are informal, but let's not condemn the mother country for trying to uphold standards.
MICHAEL M. SINCLAIR  Louisville, Ky.


After Quitting, Reformer Will Meet With Yeltsin
In a strong indication that the Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin is concerned about Western reaction to hisnew, more conservative Government, he met today with Boris G. Fyodorov, a reformer who would not accept a position in the new Cabinet, and told him to meet with President Boris N. Yeltsin on Monday.
Mr.
Fyodorov, the young Finance Minister who announced on Thursday that he was quitting, said today in an interview with Britain's Sky News television that his resignation as Finance Minister had not yet been accepted.
He suggested there was a "1,000 to 1" chance he might remain in the Government, which would seem to require his promotion to Deputy Prime Minister.


Michael Jackson Near Settlement
Michael Jackson, the pop superstar whose career has been jeopardized by accusations of child molestation, is on the verge of privately settling a civil suit against him, people close to Mr.
Jackson said today.
Under the agreement, the 13-year-old boy who asserted that Mr.
Jackson molested him will receive a financial settlement from the millionaire star.
In return, the boy will drop his civil suit against Mr.
Jackson, those close to the entertainer said.


Ruth L. Lansner, Lloyd N. Merrill
Ruth Lynn Lansner and Lloyd Neal Merrill, lawyers in New York, are to be married today.
Rabbi Marjorie Slome will perform the ceremony at the Merchants Club in New York.
Ms.
Lansner, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Helen K. Lansner of New York and the late Seymour Lansner.
The bride graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from New York University.
She is a partner in Gilbert, Segall &amp; Young, a New York law firm.


Commercial Property/Corporate Headquarters; Marketing Opulent Waifs Abandoned by Austerity
THROUGHOUT the metropolitan New York region, one can see opulent corporate headquarters buildings that now stand as reminders of the halcyon days when a booming economy led companies like Nestle, the American Can Company and Exxon Chemical to build monuments to themselves and their achievements.
Many of these buildings are now only partially occupied or, in some cases, vacant, victims of corporate relocations, downsizing and a generally more austere corporate climate.


Habitats/632 Hudson Street; Restuffing the Sausage
THERE are traces still of the sausage factory: the gritty, peeling orange sign, the giant walk-in refrigerators, the iron poles hanging from the ceiling, once part of a vast assembly that sent sausages from the stuffing machine to the smokehouse to the drying room.
For 40 years the building at 632 Hudson Street housed the Esteve Packing Corporation, where the specialties were sobrasada, butifarra and longoniza -- types of chorizo, or spicy Spanish-style sausage.
In those days, a Department of Agriculture inspector stood watch every day, a Federal requirement wherever meat is packed.


Binnette Lipper, Alvin Begleiter
Binnette Lipper, a composer and pianist, is to be married today in New York to Alvin L. Begleiter, an executive vice president at the Bank of New York.
Rabbi Avi Magid will perform the ceremony at the Stanhope.
Ms.
Lipper, who is keeping her name, teaches piano and composition at the Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale, N.Y.
She composes vocal, chamber and orchestral works.
She graduated from Hunter College and studied at the Juilliard School.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 9 about a program in New Haven to resettle immigrants from the former Soviet Union misspelled the surname of a tutor.
She is Joyce Donen Hirschhorn.


Ellen L. Price, J. B. Williams
Ellen Louise Price, the daughter of Robert Stafford Price of Carle Place, L.I., and the late Ann Carolyn Fleischhauer Price, was married yesterday to Jonathan Brownell Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Williams 3d of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas Fusco performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
Williams graduated from the Katherine Gibbs School in New York and is an executive assistant in human resources at Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm in New York.
Her father is a retired logistics engineer.


New York Car Theft Draws Police Priority
For Jason Wolder, a 34-year-old Queens sales representative, the theft of his 1980 Delta 88 in August was troubling enough.
But then there are the near-nightly screams of car alarms that stir his otherwise graceful Douglaston neighborhood and frequently wake his infant son.
They are not only a constant reminder of the loss of his old car, but just as important, they make him feel that maybe his family isn't safe.
"An anxiety pops up," he said.
"God knows what could happen if you have to face one of those guys by mistake in the street."


Taking the Wildness Out of Wildflowers
THERE is a surge toward growing wildflowers.
Now that seed catalogues are arriving almost daily, this is a good time to take a serious look at raising them in the garden.
Purists insist that only those wildflowers that belong to a particular region are the ones to grow.
There is great logic in this, as the native plants of a region are the ones most likely to thrive successfully.
The plants are adjusted to the vagaries of the weather and can adapt to the local soil conditions.
These wildflowers or indigenous plants fill the goals of those who want to maintain a balanced ecosystem and duplicate nature as best they can.


Adult Movie Theater Is Shut as a Health Hazard
For the first time since it began a new enforcement effort to slow the spread of the AIDS virus, New York City's Department of Health shut an adult movie theater in Manhattan yesterday, saying it had allowed risky sexual activities to take place.
The closing of the theater, the Adonis, on Eighth Avenue between 43d and 44th Streets, was the first since a state advisory panel last year urged the city to enforce existing state regulations that prohibit sexual activities with a high risk of transmitting the AIDS virus, including anal intercourse and fellatio.


The Bronte Bunch
"So hopeless is the world without, / The world within I doubly prize," Emily Bronte wrote in a poem that reflected the tragic, insulated, inward-turned life experience of her sisters Charlotte and Anne and her brother, Bramwell, as much as her own.
In THE BRONTES AT HAWORTH: The World Within (Clarkson Potter, $30), Juliet Gardiner adeptly chronicles both the outer world of the grim Yorkshire town of Haworth, where the Bronte children spent most of their lives with their highly educated but eccentric father, the Rev.
Patrick Bronte, and the inner world of the imagination to which each sibling turned, first in childhood and then throughout adulthood, for solace in the wake of relentless tragedy.
As young children, they witnessed the sudden deaths of their mother and then of their two oldest sisters, Maria and Elizabeth.
In the years that followed, with the exception of brief forays at schools, a few trips, scattered attempts at positions outside of Haworth and Charlotte's marriage only a few months before her death at the age of 38, the Bronte siblings spent their time cloistered on the one hand by the secluded atmosphere of their father's austerely furnished parsonage, and surrounded on the other by the vast, windswept expanse of the Yorkshire moors.
All four children conjured fantastical characters and kingdoms in miniature "novels," diaries, poems and mock newspapers -- so-called juvenilia that would put many adult writers to shame.
Ms.
Gardiner, the author of "The People's War" and "Over Here: The G.I.'s in Wartime Britain," quotes generously from these documents, as well as from the Bronte sisters' novels, family letters and Elizabeth Gaskell's classic biography of Charlotte Bronte.
The books also include fascinating drawings and watercolors by the multitalented family.
Ms.
Gardiner provides an excellent overview of the Brontes and an insightful journey into the artistic imagination.
DIANE COLE


Jan. 16-22: Ramparts Breached; Unwillingly, the Citadel Has a Woman in Its Classes
Local lore has it that a Citadel cadet fired the first shots of the Civil War, but it was the historic, all-male military college in Charleston, S.C., that took a shot across the bow last week.
The foe this time was a 19-year-old woman named Shannon Faulkner, who sued the college when it refused her admission and Thursday became the first woman to attend day classes there.
Miss Faulkner applied for admission to the Citadel, deleting all references to gender on her application, and was accepted.
When the college found out she was a woman, it rescinded her acceptance.
But a Federal judge ruled she could attend day classes there while her suit, which will be heard next month, is pending.


Fergus Reid 4th and Susan Carroll
Susan Genevieve Carroll, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Carroll of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Fergus Reid 4th, the son of Mr.
Reid 3d of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Anne de Baillet-Latour Reid.
The Rev.
Joseph Cervero performed the ceremony at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn.
Mrs.
Reid, 32, graduated from Arizona State University and was until recently an assistant editor at Art Business News, a monthly trade magazine in Darien.
Her father is a retired pilot for Trans World Airlines.


A Cornfield in Manhattan?
To commemorate the 200th anniversary of Madison Square Park, the sculptor Melinda Hunt plans to install a work in the spring entitled "Circle of Hope," a ring of planted corn 45 feet in diameter.
Once the corn is grown, members of the public will be invited to inscribe their vision of the future on small plaster tablets hung on a surrounding steel fence.
"The planting of corn is a symbol of hope and renewal," said Ms.
Hunt, a Brooklyn resident and former lecturer on multimedia art at the State University of New York at Purchase.


Contrasts in Photos, Paintings and Engravings
ELLEN DENUTO'S photographs have haunted New Jersey for more than a decade.
And disconcertingly so, for with their naturalistic lighting and added color, they lie somewhere between realism and Surrealism.
Their subject, more often than not, is the photographer herself in a state of artfully draped nudity.
At DDC Fine Arts here, there are a dozen such images keeping company with paintings by Jane Haw, an instructor at William Paterson College, where, incidentally, Ms.
Denuto has also taught.
Contrasting with this two-person exhibition is "Steel Engravings Circa 1850 to the 1890's" at the House of Brata, also in Montclair.


Good Care, Little Wear
To the Editor:
In her article on Neolithic tools, "Were Ancient Europeans Collectors?"  [ Jan. 9 ] , Rita Reif suggests that the mintlike condition of these relics indicates that they were not working tools but prehistoric man's collectibles.


On the Rink


As Bosnians Gain Militarily, They Lose Status as Victims
Torn from their homes, bombarded in their encircled capital, deprived of food, water and warmth, the Muslims have been the primary victims of the war here.
But as the underdogs make military gains, the United Nations and European diplomats are chipping away at the victim image and uncovering combatants bent on fighting to the end.
The mostly Muslim Bosnian forces say they are fighting for their survival.
The Sarajevo Government has, over the last eight months, sharpened its army's organization and discipline, eliminated renegade commanders and increased weapons production and procurement using channels through Serbian lines.


Wall Street; Fund Managers Testing the Rules
MOST securities analysts get to have their cake and eat it too, making money at their day jobs of picking stocks for customers, and trading their personal portfolios on the side.
So why not mutual fund portfolio managers?
Why not, indeed.
From the looks of things, a number of mutual fund managers have been as busy at trading their own portfolios as they've been at minding the money of the customers who pay them.
It's a God-given right to trade, say proponents of the practice.
They argue that trading for one's own account is a perk of the job that a fund had better permit, or risk losing hot money managers to a more permissive fund group down the street.


Jean-Louis Barrault, 83, Director And Actor in the French Theater
Jean-Louis Barrault, one of the great actor-directors of 20th-century French theater, died early today in his Paris home at the age of 83.
Associates said he died in his sleep, apparently of a heart attack.


Amsterdam Celebrates Its Golden Past
Amsterdam is recalling its Golden Age, that time in the early part of the 17th century when the arts flourished in the Dutch capital.
The celebration, which started last summer, reached its apex with the December opening of "Dawn of the Golden Age" at the Rijksmuseum.
In the exhibition, which runs to March 6, are 350 works from 1580 to 1620, including paintings by Abraham Bloemaert, Hendrick Goltzius and Jacques de Gheyn.
Tapestries by Karel van Mander and silver pieces by Ernst Marcus are also included.
The museum is at 42 Stadhouderskade, (020) 6732121.
Admission is about $5.50.


Commercial Property/Corporate Headquarters; Marketing Opulent Waifs Abandoned by Austerity
THROUGHOUT the metropolitan New York region, one can see opulent corporate headquarters buildings that now stand as reminders of the halcyon days when a booming economy led companies like Nestle, the American Can Company and Exxon Chemical to build monuments to themselves and their achievements.
Many of these buildings are now only partially occupied or, in some cases, vacant, victims of corporate relocations, downsizing and a generally more austere corporate climate.


Usually, Home Is Where the Heart Is
THESE are the times that try mothers' souls.
Mothers who love their children.
Mothers who want to spend time with their children.
Mothers who, if they face one more school closing because of snow, say they will lose their minds.
"If I see one more snowflake, I'm going to the Bahamas -- alone," said Debbie Orifici of Pleasantville, who has two children, Krista, 6, and Ariel, 3.
"The snow is very beautiful and all, but there's just this feeling of entrapment. You run out of things to do inside. I think we have already played every game ever created by Milton Bradley."


No Alterations
To the Editor:
Ronnie Dugger's generous review of "Strange Bedfellows: How Television and the Presidential Candidates Changed American Politics, 1992" (Dec. 26) creates a mistaken impression about how the book was written, an impression sadly understandable given the state of some nonfiction today.
Mr.
Dugger infers from the book's introduction that some of the direct quotations are paraphrased or rewritten.
Not so.
There is nothing between quotation marks in "Strange Bedfellows" that has been altered.


At Work; Breathing New Life Into OSHA
THE Occupational Safety and Health Administration is one of those government entities -- the National Labor Relations Board is another -- that looms considerably larger in the ideological imaginations of its constituent interest groups than its teensy size would seem to warrant.
It is, depending on one's political proclivities, either failing its mandate to protect the health and safety of the nation's workers or using its regulatory power to bludgeon employers and snuff out the spirit of capitalism.
To say that OSHA was not favored in the Reagan-Bush years is to engage in understatement on a massive scale.
The change in Administration yielded no great benefit by way of increased budget or staff, and isn't likely to any time soon.
But OSHA no longer has to worry about incoming shells from the Council on Competitiveness, Dan Quayle's experiment in personal bureaucracy, and it gets now what it missed for 12 years: support from the top.


Turning Back the Years for 5,280 Feet
On the 40th anniversary of Roger Bannister's historic first sub-four-minute mile, May 6, a banquet will be held in London to honor the 16 men who have been world record-holders in the event.
The American Airlines Miami Mile today provided an early reunion for four of them.
Jim Ryun, Peter Snell and Steve Cram were among eight one-time world-class milers who ran in a special Legends mile, and Bannister, now 65, fired the starting gun for the race.


Report Card: Industrial Park
College Point Corporate Park is reaching a critical milestone in its 25-year history, with much of the land either fully developed or scheduled for development.
The park's 550 acres are occupied by more than 100 businesses, mainly offices and manufacturers, which employ some 4,000 people.
The city's Economic Development Corporation is continuing to press for the development of the 72 acres of public and private property for which there are no set plans and is considering opening it to retail businesses.


THE BOTTOM LINE
Abeel suspects "that what we're seeing in the 90's-style liaison is nothing less than the death of romantic love."


THE BOTTOM LINE
How sad that Abeel and her women's group lack the moral conviction to date only unmarried men.
A friendship based on trust is an unequaled experience in a sound marriage.
She could be home lustfully attacking a satisfied husband instead of her moo shu pork.
CATHERINE DOYLE New York, N.Y.


FICTION
DISAPPEARING ACT  THE CIRCUS OF THE EARTH AND THE AIR  By Brooke Stevens.
Harcourt Brace, $23.95.


Selina Peyser, David Lamb
SELINA PEYSER and David Lamb met last March on a blind date that went spectacularly well even though, as Ms.
Peyser recalled, "he brought me one rose, which he admitted he pulled out of an arrangement in his office before walking out the door." Mr.
Lamb, 33, a managing director at Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates Inc., a New York investment banking firm, sent her 11 more the next day.
Ms.
Peyser, 30, is the president of Calypso Cowboy, a dry-goods store for the 1990's in Darien, Conn.
Housed in a former one-room schoolhouse built in 1755, the shop is filled with island and Western gear: Navajo blankets, antique cowboy boots, sea grass benches and paintings of seascapes.


ACCORD IS REACHED ON USE OF FORESTS
With the world's forests vanishing at an accelerating rate, rich and poor countries have agreed on a draft accord that would put forest preservation on a par with the commercial demands of the global timber industry.
But the agreement, reached late Friday in Geneva, falls far short of what many developing countries and environmental groups sought.
The final round of talks was convened two weeks ago under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
The goal was to complete a new version of the International Tropical Timber Agreement, a 1983 commodity pact that is supposed to promote environmentally benign free trade in wood harvested in the tropics, including logs, plywood and veneer sheets.
The original agreement expires on March 31.


Potential For Recycling
To the Editor:
Having read Anna Kisselgoff's essay "Why 'The Red Shoes' Is Still a Hit -- on Film"  [ Jan. 9 ] , I have a suggestion: In the tradition of Balanchine's "Slaughter on Tenth Avenue" ballet from the 1936 Rodgers and Hart show "On Your Toes" and Jerome Robbins's "Small House of Uncle Thomas" ballet from the 1951 Rodger and Hammerstein musical "The King and I," perhaps Lar Lubovitch will take his "Red Shoes" choreography from the recent short-lived Broadway production to a ballet company.
Wonderful work should not be thrown away.
CAROLE SCHWEID  Westport, Conn.


Tip O'Neill Gave Leadership as House Speaker; Congress, Bah!
To the Editor:
References to the Tip O'Neill maxim that all politics is local lead me to an explanation of why most approve of their own representatives, yet hold Congress in low esteem.


New Blight: Scratches As Graffiti
The city's graffiti war is escalating beyond the painted scrawls that mark much of the urban landscape.
Vandals who scratch windows -- damage that until now was largely confined to subway cars -- have recently defaced numerous storefronts along Eighth Street from University Place to Broadway and adjacent blocks along Broadway.
Shop and restaurant owners say they feel helpless to stop the vandals, who etch graffiti into their showcase windows.
While spray-painted marks can be scrubbed off or painted over, the glass scratches are permanent.


Asian-American Women Struggling To Move Past Cultural Expectations
When Jennifer Ng, who immigrated from Hong Kong as a child, was growing up in Manhattan, she said she believed she would never meet the expectations of her parents or society.
Her parents expected her to study hard, choose a safe, lucrative career, stay near Chinatown, marry and take care of the family.
Society, she said, type-cast her as passive and industrious.
But even as Ms.
Ng (pronounced ING) tried to meet these goals, she found herself doing other things.
She boarded at Barnard College in upper Manhattan, rather than commute from home in Chinatown, as her family wished.
Now 27, she is an investment consultant for Citibank, but she is also considering whether to apply to a business graduate school, even though she said her mother believed her energies would be better spent looking for a husband.
Discrimination and Isolation
"She tells me: 'You better stop being so independent, so outgoing,' " said Ms.
Ng, who left Hong Kong in 1973.
" 'That's why you have a problem finding a husband. This is the type of woman you should be: you should be very quiet and not express your opinions.' "


Joanna Delson, D. R. Venderbush
Joanna Gwen Delson, a daughter of Anna Peterson Delson of New York and the late Morton H. Delson, was married yesterday to David Ray Venderbush, the son of Lorna Maguire Bishop of Bethesda, Md., and the late Kenneth R. Venderbush.
Dr.
Cy Lowenheim performed the Buddhist ceremony at Masterview Studio in New York.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She teaches English at Shalhevet High School in Los Angeles.
She graduated from the University of Southern California at Los Angeles and received a master's degree in literature from New York University.


Satisfying Brunches for Wintry Sundays
AN UPBEAT remedy for winter's cabin fever is to go out for Sunday brunch.
Brunch is pleasant any season, of course, but in winter the leisurely and cozy aspects of it seem especially suitable indoors.
There is another good argument for going out for Sunday brunch -- an economic one.
Often a three- or four-course prix-fixe brunch is a relatively inexpensive way to entertain.


Jan. 16-22: Legend in the Making; 'Oops!' Says Postal Service As It Announces a Recall
To err isn't just hu-man; it's postal.
The Postal Service tries hard, but every so often it designs, or even sells, stamps that confuse emperor and king penguins, misstate Hubert Humphrey's Vice-Presidential tenure or depict free Finland as occupied by Nazi Germany.
Still, none caused a dither like this month's, when the service printed 250 million "Legends of the West" stamps only to find that one of the 16 legends being portrayed, a turn-of-the-century rodeo star named Bill Pickett, wasn't Bill Pickett at all.
It was his pudgy brother Ben, who may have seen cows but doubtless never bulldogged one.


Finding Profits in Architectural Specialties
POOLS and schools.
In a profession that continues to suffer from the slowdown in construction, architects who have developed special areas of expertise seem to be faring better than most.
Lap pools are a specialty of Leonard Weinberg, an architect who started his own practice 21 years ago today in White Plains.
And schools are a specialty of Barbara and Allan Anderson of the firm Anderson La Rocca Anderson Architects and Planners in Rye.


World Markets; Helsinki Soars Amid Signs of Recovery
SCANDINAVIA has had a rough time economically for the past several years, and nowhere have times been tougher than in Finland.
Only now, after a three-year downturn that could justifiably be called a depression, is the Finnish economy showing signs of life.
But on the Helsinki Stock Exchange, investors shed their doom-and-gloom attitude more than a year ago.
After selling furiously as the Hex index fell from over 2,000 in 1989 to about 550 in the fall of 1992, they have since bid stock prices up sharply, making the market one of the world's best-performing last year.
The index more than doubled to end 1993 at 1,580.
And after a bull run in the first few weeks of this month, it is already up by another 18 percent or so this year, hitting a 12-month high on Thursday before closing slightly lower Friday at 1,856.


St. Thomas
Of the three main United States Virgin Islands, St.
Thomas is the most cosmopolitan, bustling and unabashedly commercial.
Many Caribbean islands have white sand, aquamarine seas and lush mountains, but few display luxury goods in such abundance.
A commercial hub long before Blackbeard prowled its waters, St.
Thomas is now a prime destination for cruise ships, whose passengers rush ashore -- quite in the spirit of 18th-century buccaneers -- in pursuit of duty-free booty.
Others still come to get away from it all, even if a wave of development that followed Hurricane Hugo in 1989 sometimes gives a jolt of urban American reality.
Along with new resorts and fast-food restaurants, there is now a Kmart and a Hard Rock Cafe, and luxurious homes have blossomed like frangipani on the northern and eastern hills.
The sidewalks and narrow alleys of downtown Charlotte Amalie (pronounced ah-MAHL-ya), the territorial capital and St.
Thomas's only real town, prove that there can be gridlock in paradise.
Charlotte Amalie, St.
Thomas's first permanent European settlement, dates from 1671.


And the Winner Is . . . Science
New York City's school system gets lots of abuse, but its output of whiz kids in scientific research is stellar.
Almost one-third of the 300 semi-finalists in this year's nationwide Westinghouse Science Talent Search are high school seniors in the city, 88 in public schools, 4 in private schools.
Stuyvesant High in Manhattan has 26, followed by the famous Bronx High School of Science and Midwood High in Brooklyn.
In the 53 years of the competition, Bronx Science has had half again as many winners as any other school anywhere.


Even on a Clear Day, You Can Still See the Glass Ceilings
To the Editor:
Regarding "Women, Jobs and the Press" (Viewpoints, Jan. 9), statistics verifying that women have made striking advances into the ranks of corporate America are heartening, but it is premature to declare that the phrase "glass ceiling" be given a decent burial.


Tip O'Neill Gave Leadership as House Speaker
To the Editor:
"The Shrinking Speaker," your Jan. 8 editorial on Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.'s tenure as Speaker of the House of Representatives, approvingly recalls the autocratic rule of Thomas B. Reed as Speaker in the 1890's and criticizes O'Neill.


How Westchester Is Coping With the Storms of Winter
ANOTHER day in paradise," muttered Peter Savino, a veteran Con Edison troubleshooter, as he attempted to pump out a flooded transformer vault in downtown White Plains early Tuesday morning.
"Twenty-four years on the job," he said, "and I'm telling you, this ranks as one of the worst."


Right Sentiment, Wrong Poet
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman was justified in including the Holocaust Museum in his list of significant events in the art world during 1993  [ "The Big Got Bigger, and Sometimes Even Got Better," Dec. 26 ] .
However, I'd like to remind him of a small but important point: It was Theodor Adorno, not Walter Benjamin, who questioned the possibility of poetry after Auschwitz.
Benjamin died at his own hand in 1940, pursued by the Nazis into the Pyrenees.
Though now noted for his oracular observations on the twinning of civilization and barbarity, he was then the last great bard of the avant-garde and its powers.
He died, one might say, because he had too much faith in art.
And with him died, or should have died, faith in the artistic avant-garde.
In that sense, it is more appropriate to ascribe those words -- "to write poetry after Auschwitz is barbaric" -- to him than to their rightful author.


Changing of the Guard: The Whitman Team
Christine Todd Whitman will have 20 Cabinet members, one more than Gov.
Jim Florio.
She is restoring the chairman of the Board of Regulatory Commissioners.
Mrs.
Whitman has not announced her appointments for Corrections Commissioner, Adjutant General, Health Commissioner, Insurance Commissioner, Labor Commissioner and Public Advocate.
Cabinet members are paid $100,225 a year.
ELIZABETH RANDALL, Banking Commissioner AGE: 40.
HOMETOWN: Westwood.
N.J.
BACKGROUND: State assemblywoman, 1985-1991.
Partner, Randall, Randall &amp; Stevens of Westwood, March 1984-February 1991.
Has served in a variety of legal jobs in state and local government including assistant counsel to former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, Assistant Essex County prosecutor, municipal prosecutor in Park Ridge, and borough attorney in Hillsdale.
She has been Bergen County counsel since 1991.
FAMILY: Single.


Sweet Smells of Success
INSIDE a tidy, modest bakery in Flatbush, Brooklyn, scores of people crowd the counter daily, enticed by the flavors of their homelands thousands of miles away.
At Sybil's bakery there are sweet black-bean cakes; flaky turnovers stuffed with spicy ground beef or chicken; cheddary cheese rolls with a dash of mustard and hot pepper, or bread with a hint of lemon.


Telly Savalas, Actor, Dies at 70; Played 'Kojak' in 70's TV Series
Telly Savalas, who added the phrase "Who loves ya, baby?" to popular language while portraying a New York detective in the 1970's television series "Kojak," died on Saturday of prostate cancer.
He was 70.
Mr.
Savalas died in his suite at the Sheraton-Universal Hotel in Universal City, said Mike Mamakos, a spokesman, The Associated Press reported.


For Handy People Who Just Have to Put a Sharp Edge on It
THE principle of sharpening tools and cutlery is simple.
Grind one or both sides of a blade so that the surfaces meet at an angle.
But the catches include which angle is correct, how to hold the blade steady and which sharpening device is the best.
For most ordinary people, the simplest and least expensive device is a combination oilstone called a coarse-fine India stone.
This is a man-made block of aluminum-oxide abrasives.


U.S. Shift on Beijing: Will Embrace Win Change?
The Clinton Administration has subtly shifted its China policy in recent months, gambling that intensified economic and political contacts with Beijing will prove more effective than the threat of trade sanctions has been in changing China's human rights policies.
The Administration has by no means removed the threat of withdrawing China's preferential trade status this June, if Beijing does not meet very specific criteria on respecting human rights and abandoning illegal trade practices.
That threat still exists.
It seems real.
American officials have even stated publicly in recent weeks that if the decision were made today, China would lose its benefits, which allow it to export products to the United States at the lowest possible tariffs.


Shari Levine, Melvyn Stark
Shari B. Levine and Melvyn J. Stark are to be married today in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Gerald I. Wolpe is to officiate at Tappan Hill.
The bride, 34, is an account supervisor at Anne Taylor Davis Communications, a fashion advertising and public relations agency in New York.
She graduated from the State University College at Oneonta, N.Y.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Levine of Jericho, L.I.


A Cornfield in Manhattan?
To commemorate the 200th anniversary of Madison Square Park, the sculptor Melinda Hunt plans to install a work in the spring entitled "Circle of Hope," a ring of planted corn 45 feet in diameter.
Once the corn is grown, members of the public will be invited to inscribe their vision of the future on small plaster tablets hung on a surrounding steel fence.
"The planting of corn is a symbol of hope and renewal," said Ms.
Hunt, a Brooklyn resident and former lecturer on multimedia art at the State University of New York at Purchase.


M. J. Lautenbach, Peter Wolff
Martha Jane Lautenbach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Terry Lautenbach of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Wolff, the son of Elizabeth E. Stone and William B. Wolff, both of New York.
The Rev.
Leonard Wenke performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Isabel on Sanibel Island, Fla.
Mrs.
Wolff, 28, is an administrative assistant at the Service America Corporation, a food-service company in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y., and a member of the I.B.M. management committee.


The Biltmore Bounces Back In Florida
IT was 68 years ago, almost to the day, that the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, a mammoth $10 million monument to the headiest days of the great South Florida land boom, threw open its doors.
The Miami Biltmore, as it was then known, was a commanding presence, an ocher-apricot Spanish-Moorish-Italian fantasy with 500 rooms and a staff of 1,000 people.
Its central tower, modeled on the Giralda tower of Seville's cathedral, was, at 300 feet, the highest point in Florida.
The swimming pool, the largest in the United States, looked big enough to float a navy in.
Along a canal that once extended several miles from the hotel to the beach on Biscayne Bay, gondoliers poled guests and crooned Italian love songs.


THE ART OF FORGETTING
In "The Art of Forgetting" (Dec. 26), Anton Shammas argues that we Palestinians now must forget, but I respond that Palestinians have an obligation to remember, and to remember all.
Remembering, in and of itself, does not conflict with the art of compromise and often can assist in reducing the pain of compromise.


Jan. 16-22; 'I Can Sell You A Garden Rake'
Take large dollops of snow.
Add inch-thick ice.
Put in deep-freeze (in any state from Kentucky to Maine), add a shortage of snow shovels and rock salt, and you have a recipe for helplessness.
Most hardware stores have sold out of the tools of winter, as most tool makers are turning out rakes and hoes for the gardening season.
"Our major season for making snow tools is May, June and July," said John Stoner, a vice president at True Temper Hardware in Camp Hill, Pa.


The World; Iran, the Sequel: New Actors, but the Same Lines
WOVEN almost invisibly through the Iran-contra report on the Reagan Administration's arms-for-hostages trading and the cover-up that followed are reminders of the two fallacies that governed American dealings with the revolutionary regime in Teheran at the time.
The first fallacy: That there were good Iranian moderates eager to cooperate with the United States and worthy of its trust.
The second: That the United States was somehow capable of playing them off against the bad radicals, in a way that would restore America's alliance with its one-time partner in the Persian Gulf.


Port Authority's Homeless Policy Called a Success
THE prolonged cold and icy weather lingering in the metropolitan area has sent hundreds of homeless people searching for warmth in bus, train and airport terminals operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The surge of people has been testing the agency's two-year-old program to keep them out of the terminals.
That program, Operation Alternative, was started in December 1991 with the twin goals of keeping the terminals free of loiterers and panhandlers and at the same time offering help to people who need food, clothing, shelter or medical attention.


Communism of the Rich and Famous
DOUBLE LIVES  Spies and Writers in the Secret Soviet War of Ideas Against the West.
By Stephen Koch.
Illustrated. 419 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $24.95.


Freddie Mac's Multifamily Loans
To the Editor:
Your article on Dec. 12 headed "Freddie Mac Returns to Multifamily Loans" leaves the impression that borrowers and originators were at fault and caused Freddie Mac to drop out of the multifamily market in 1990.


Tent Cities Provide Shelter for Earthquake Victims


Don't Use Behemoths As Airport Model
I read Richard P. Duffy's Jan. 2 letter  [ "The County Airport Needs Mass Transit" ] , signed in his capacity of Westchester Coordinator, Empire State Passenger Association, with something akin to horror.
La Guardia -- Kennedy -- Newark -- Baltimore-Washington -- Washington National -- Atlanta (Hartsfield) -- Boston (Logan).


Songs of Conscience Plus Storytelling
AN array of free concerts (some accepting free-will donations) brightens the afternoon today, starting at 2:30 when Friends of the Westport Public Library present the folksinging, storytelling and multiple instrument-playing duo of Aubrey Atwater and Elwood Donnelly.
The audience can expect a mix of Irish ballads and American songs of social commentary as well as accompaniment on Australian monkey pods and toy xylophones, for example.
Half an hour later, recital options include a variety of English music played by the Musicians of the Old Post Road at the Yale Center for British Art (the program coinciding with the museum's "Toil and Plenty" exhibition), and an assortment of Americana by Joan Morris and William Bolcom at the Greenwich Public Library.


Even Stars Feel Lucky To Be Alive
The homes of Warren Beatty, Walter Matthau and Jack Nicholson were seriously damaged.
Barbra Streisand lost antiques.
Carroll O'Connor permanently closed his restaurant in Beverly Hills.
Jerry Van Dyke said he was lucky to survive.
"The whole roof came in on us," Mr.
Van Dyke said of the devastating earthquake early Monday morning.
"I have a lot of big fireplaces and chimneys, and they're no longer standing. We're lucky to be alive. I don't know how we got out."


Here's a Switch: Now They're Fighting Over Garbage
WHO owns garbage?
That is not a trivial question, because garbage disposal has grown far more complicated than simply paying someone to haul it away and dump it in a hole.


Sound Bytes; A Mass-Technology Sage For a Post-Orwellian Age
ORWELL had it wrong, in Peter Huber's view.
In his novel "1984," Orwell predicted that communications and technology would become tools of a new form of totalitarian government.
But Mr.
Huber say these advances have worked against central governments, placing information and processing power in the hands of millions
Among policy mavens, Mr.
Huber is an unusual figure.
Trained as an engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and as a lawyer at Harvard, he is now a consultant and part-time journalist whose work ranges from detailed industry analyses to novels.


Sports of The Times; Politically Incorrect Johnson Could Make Pro Football Fun Again
It has always been a mystery to me why college football had the scamps while pro football had the headmasters.
I have never understood why so-called institutions of higher learning nurtured great quotable characters like Barry Switzer and Lou Holtz and Jackie Sherrill while the open market of pro ball generally encouraged cautious leaders like Don Shula and Tom Landry.
But Jimmy Johnson is proving it does not have to be that way, and for that I am eternally grateful.
He kept the lid on his rogue personality while conducting an open-door policy at the University of Miami, but now that he is with the Dallas Cowboys, he is teaching us the true meaning of the word "professional." Anything goes.


Palm Beach's Majestic Grande Dame
FOR years the Breakers reflected Palm Beach society -- rich, grand, conservative, a little ostentatious and more than a little intimidating to mortals of lesser, or newer, wealth.
Many of the better-known names of the American dynasties spent the winter at the hotel and guests for the most part were members in good standing of the White Anglo-Saxon Protestant establishment.
Just as Palm Beach has changed, so has the Breakers: dress is more casual, the crowd a mixture of the establishment, the new affluence and business men and women.
But the imposing twin-towered Italian Renaissance building, set in 140 lush acres, 15 minutes from the airport and five minutes from downtown Palm Beach, is still luxurious, conservative as hotels go these days, and drop-dead impressive, with the old-fashioned elegance of a majestic dowager.
Long gone, though, is the staff member responsible for inspecting the stockings of womens' bathing costumes, insuring that they were dark enough to conceal the flesh underneath.
The grounds, open to the sun, are carefully manicured and the palm trees and foliage, lining the long entrance drive, look not only washed but shined.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12  BOSNIA UNDERDOGS GAINING  The Bosnian Army has improved its organization and strength, and the United Nations and diplomats are no longer seeing the mostly Muslim Government as an underdog.  1  Shells killed six children playing in a Sarajevo suburb.  8


Crime
Like them grim and gory, do you, with maybe a touch of the macabre?
"Butcher's Dozen: The Cleveland Torso Murders," an article in the November 1949 issue of Harper's Magazine, makes good, gruesome reading on the subject of a notorious serial murderer who terrorized the city of Cleveland between 1935 and 1938 and who had the great Eliot Ness running around in circles looking for the heads of the ripper's mutilated victims.
TORSOS (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95), John Peyton Cooke's disturbing fictional treatment of these same events, sticks close to the known facts and historical chronology.
But the sensationalistic tone of the novel is far removed from the gravity of a sober journalistic account, and the prose is too bald and brutal to give artistic form to the raw material.
In the author's blunt narrative method, the killing process is simply presented in close, horrific detail -- from the stalking of the victims in the city's crime-infested slums to the bizarre distribution of their body parts along the railroad yards on the downtown shores of the Cuyahoga River.


SUNDAY, January 23, 1994; The Sad-Truth Phone
Here's an idea, a phone that works as a lie detector.
The stress of lying shows up in microtremors in the voice and, unknown to the speaker, a digital readout informs the listener.
"I'm working late tonight, sweetheart." Busted.


BENEFITS
'Streetcar' Revisited  MONDAY -- A screening of a newly edited version of the film "A Streetcar Named Desire" will benefit the Greenwich House Theater Company.
Kim Hunter, who won an Oscar for her work in the film, will answer questions after the screening at the Loews Village VII Theater, 66 Third Avenue (11th Street).
A cocktail reception will follow.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 633-8360, or at the door.
Chef Scholarships  MONDAY -- Sixteen chefs, including Mary Sue Milliken and Susan Feniger, both of the City Restaurant in Los Angeles, and Jimmy Schmidt of the Rattlesnake Club in Detroit, will serve hors d'oeuvres and dinner at the Plaza.
The event will raise funds for the minority scholarship programs of the Hiram Walker Foundation and the James Beard Foundation, which provide aid to promising chefs.
A cocktail reception begins the evening at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $195, from (800) 336-3783.
For Earthquake Victims  THURSDAY -- An evening of comedy sponsored by the American Red Cross and the Comic Strip, a comedy club, will benefit earthquake victims in Los Angeles.
The program, at the Comic Strip, 1568 Second Avenue (81st Street), begins at 6 P.M.
The sponsors suggest a donation of $10, and a two-drink minimum is required.
For reservations, call (212) 861-9386.
Citiwomen Party  THURSDAY -- A party sponsored by New York Citiwomen, the young professionals division of Women's American ORT, will raise money for the organization's worldwide educational programs.
The evening, which begins at 6:30 P.M., will feature hors d'oeuvres and dancing at the 200 Fifth Club, 200 Fifth Avenue (23d Street).
Tickets, $40, from (212) 505-9631, or $50 at the door.
Viennese Opera Ball  FRIDAY -- The Viennese Opera Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria will benefit the cancer research programs of the Columbia-Presbyterian Cancer Center.
Dinner and dancing will follow an 8 P.M.
Champagne reception and a grand march by cadets of the United States Military Academy.
The evening will also include a casino, a performance by members of the Metropolitan Opera and a raffle of trips to Vienna and other prizes.
White or black tie.
Tickets, $270, from (212) 819-0158.
Beaux-Arts Ball  FRIDAY -- The Beaux-Arts Ball at the National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue (89th Street), will raise money for the academy's education programs and exhibitions.
The event, which begins at 9:30 P.M., includes cocktails, a buffet supper and dancing.
There will also be a raffle of trips, formal gowns and other items.
Black tie.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 369-4880, or $95 at the door.
An Appearance by Gore  JAN. 31 -- Vice President Al Gore is to speak at the Waldorf-Astoria at a dinner sponsored by the UJA-Federation of New York.
Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, and his wife, Billie, will be honored.
The event, which begins with cocktails at 6 P.M., will benefit the organization's annual campaign and Operation Exodus, a rescue and resettlement program for Jews in the former Soviet republics and Ethiopia.
Black tie.
Tickets, $150 plus a required donation of $2,500, from (212) 836-1676.
Ballet School Tribute  JAN. 31 -- The School of American Ballet will honor the entertainer Chita Rivera and Paul A. Allaire, the chairman and chief executive of the Xerox Corporation, with a dinner at the New York State Theater in Lincoln Center.
The fund-raising event begins with a cocktail reception at 6 P.M. and will include a performance by students of the school.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Honoring a Playwright  JAN. 31 -- The Manhattan Theater Club will salute the playwright Terrence McNally, who won a Tony Award for the Broadway musical "Kiss of the Spider Woman." The program, a benefit for the theater organization, will feature the actors Stockard Channing, Nathan Lane and Zoe Caldwell.
A 7:30 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by dinner and the show.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 645-5590, extension 146.
Asian New Year  JAN. 31 -- An Asian New Year's banquet will be held at St.
Malachy's Church, 239 West 49th Street.
The hosts will be Al Roker, weatherman for WNBC-TV, and Katie Kelly, a former entertainment critic for the station.
There will be performances by Cambodian dancers and by the children's chorus of St.
Rita's Asian Center.
Tony Guida, an anchor at WCBS-TV, and Jim Ryan and Felipe Luciano of "Good Day New York" will be among those honored at the event, which will raise money for St.
Rita's, a refugee assistance center in the Bronx.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 365-4390.
A Special Screening  FEB. 2 -- Jonathan Demme, the director and producer, and his wife, Joanne Howard, will be the hosts for the premiere of "One Foot on a Banana Peel, the Other Foot in the Grave," a documentary produced by Mr.
Demme and Peter Saraf and directed by Juan Botas and Lucas Platt.
The film chronicles the experiences of Mr.
Botas and others at an AIDS clinic in Greenwich Village.
The screening, which will raise money for St.
Mary's Episcopal Center, an AIDS residence in Harlem, begins at 7 P.M. at the Citicorp Screening Room, 399 Park Avenue (53d Street).
It will be followed by a cocktail reception.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 316-7426.
Joan Rivers and Friends  FEB. 2 -- The comedian Joan Rivers will headline an evening of comedy and music starting at 8 P.M. at Town Hall.
The program also features the comedians Kate Clinton, Frank Maya and other performers.
The performances will benefit the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center at 208 West 13th Street, which provides health, social service, educational and cultural programs.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception, at Club USA, 218 West 47th Street, will precede the show.
A dinner at the Townhouse Restaurant, 206 East 58th Street, will follow the performance.
Bus transportation will be provided from Town Hall to the restaurant.
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the reception and show alone, from (212) 620-7310, or $30 for the show only, from (212) 840-2823.
Marian Anderson Tribute  FEB. 3 -- The soprano Jessye Norman, the Dance Theater of Harlem, and others will perform in tribute to Marian Anderson, the late contralto, at Aaron Davis Hall at the City College of New York, West 135th Street at Convent Avenue.
Harry Belafonte and Phylicia Rashad will serve as hosts for the evening.
A dinner at 6 P.M. at the Pierre precedes the 8 P.M. performance, which will benefit the programs of Aaron Davis Hall.
Bus transportation from the Pierre to the concert and back to midtown will be provided.
A champagne reception with the performers will follow the program.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, or $250 for the concert and reception alone, from (212) 972-2268.
Peacemakers Award  FEB. 3 -- Israel's Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and Mahmoud Abbas, a member of the executive committee of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, both signatories to last year's Israeli-Palestinian peace document, will be honored with a Peacemakers Award.
The dinner, at the Regency Hotel, 540 Park Avenue (61st Street), is sponsored by Seeds of Peace, an organization that promotes Arab-Israeli understanding.
The organization also brings Arab and Israeli children together at a summer camp in the United States.
A cocktail reception at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner, the awards and performances by the singers Ann Hampton Callaway and Carol Woods.
Tickets, $500, from (202) 833-4558.


A Little Secret About Fire Hydrants
EACH morning in downtown Brooklyn, hundreds of residents start their day hunting for parking spaces or sitting in cars waiting for their current spaces to become legal.
By the time they go to work, the tension is already high.
Many of these frazzled drivers hungrily eye the spaces guarded by squat structures whose purpose has become as obscure as the obelisks in "2001." Their tension would rise even higher if they knew that many of the hydrants aren't intended to fight fires, and haven't for decades.
They don't have any water in them and never will.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


On Sunday; Shame Patrol: Arnold Diaz To the Rescue
WITH the trial over, the ultimate purpose of the Bobbitts' connubial severance story on television night after night seemed to become clear: It provided an endless test of whether Chuck and Sue and all the other anchor people could keep a straight face and get past the particular circumstance without giggling or stuttering at the letter "p" and ruining, really ruining, their careers.
This done, one of them cut back gratefully the other night to the endlessly told story that winter, as it should be, is here.
A camera was soon zooming in on Skippy, a dog that slipped on the ice and needed veterinary aid and whimpered gorgeously as a suggestion that, hey, pets are human, too.
Skippy's eyes were hazel and as intense as Bobby Ray Inman's and Tonya Harding's in some earlier cutaways in television's kaleidoscopic meander.


REFUGEES ALL TOGETHER NOW: How Do You Get to Carnegie Hall?
One violinist spends his Saturday nights serenading the first-date crowd in a kitschy Greenwich Village restaurant with tunes like "Edelweiss." Another is a piano tuner.
One cellist has just finished his apprenticeship in a beauty salon.
Your usual bunch of moonlighting musicians?
Hardly.
Of the 28 players in the New American Chamber Orchestra, 24 have been in town for two years or less.
They were mainstays of the far-flung state-run orchestras in the former Soviet Union.
They never played together there -- not even the concertmaster, Dennis Linkevich, and another violinist, Dina Keyserman, though both are from St.
Petersburg.
With the increase in anti-Semitism that came around the time Communism collapsed, the 28 joined the largest exodus of Russian Jews since World War II.
Soon they were lonely outsiders in the tight-knit world of classical music in New York.
Lacking the contacts to line up auditions while they struggled to master the strange sounds of English, they had to face an unfortunate truth of capitalism: playing doesn't pay the bills.
Some took whatever work came along.
Roman Teplinskiy, the hairdresser-cellist, even manages to hold down a third job as a car-service chauffeur.
"No welfare for me," he said.
"Not one day."


A Little Help From Some Friends
In 1988, the Parks Department completed the $1.7 million first phase of a major rehabilitation of Madison Square.
The north end of the park was repaved, a playground and benches set up, and a statue of Adm.
David Farragut restored.
The second phase, to cost $2.3 million, was never done.
"There seemed to be other priorities, and in 1991 the project was killed by the fiscal crisis," said Joseph McCluskey, who heads the 23d Street Association.


The Executive Life; From Make Believe To the Real Thing
"I wanted it to be normal." And so, only a day after the earthquake jarred Los Angeles awake last Monday, Michael Besman, executive vice president of production at TriStar Pictures, went to work.
Driven by the same desire, or just hard driving, so did many of his Hollywood colleagues, some mere hours after the jolt.
But others, harder hit, huddled with family and friends; one waited for the sun as a sign the world was in some ways still in sync.
As they rode through the aftershocks, many reflected on how others, with much less comfortable lives, had suffered so much more.


A Shot That Missed the Rim
To the Sports Editor:


Fly-Fishing In the Vastness Of Patagonia
WE started out on horseback, 20 miles south of the town of El Boson, under an afternoon sun, crossing fields where cows grazed and hawks flew overhead.
Our party of five -- three fishermen and two ranch hands -- forded a raging river, the ice-blue water covering our boots, the horses struggling to keep their footing.
When we headed up into the foothills of the Andes, scaling inclines it was hard to imagine the animals could maneuver.
After four hours, Valle Esperanza, or the Valley of Hope, opened in front of us, its shimmering lake reflecting the dipping sun, the snow-peaked Andes soaring on either side, with a river emptying out of the lake and snaking below us.


Komodo!
To the Editor:
I love Komodo dragons, from my solar eclipse expedition to Indonesia, so I noticed an error in Cynthia Zarin's review of Peter Sis' "Komodo!" (Nov. 14).
She referred to "Komodo, an island off Indonesia." Komodo is, rather, one of the thousands of islands of Indonesia.
JAY M. PASACHOFF Cambridge, Mass.


Bipartisan Pistol Denial
The Republicans in the New York State Senate this month released a fascinating document called "The Crime Problem." It is a useful roundup of styles of homicide in New York State.
It paints, as it happens, a picture of a society in denial.
Of the 2,394 deaths by weapons in the state in 1992, 1,653 were accomplished by handguns.
This means that New Yorkers fatally shoot one another with pistols at a higher rate than other Americans.
Nationally, handguns accounted for 12,489 of the 22,540 homicides in 1992, the most recent year for which statistics are available.


POSTINGS: Retail Musical Chairs; Park Avenue Leasing Game
Talk about ripple effects.
One building near Fifth Avenue changes hands and, suddenly, it's mini-musical chairs along Park Avenue.


Los Angeles Is Soldiering On, Even Though Picking Up Does Little Good
After calming the children and sweeping up the broken dishes, after inspecting the cracked walls and the damaged chimney and the broken furnace, after cooking on a camp stove, washing with bottled water and sleeping in the hallway, Craig Rehder answered the telephone, which was finally working, to hear his sister-in-law in Chicago.
"So," she asked a day after the earthquake on Monday, "what's your excuse for not leaving Southern California now?"


Coping With Car Theft at Shopping Malls
AT Trumbull Shopping Park, near the Merritt Parkway and Route 25, a man perched on a store rooftop scanned the vast parking lot with binoculars.
At Danbury Fair Mall, just off Interstate 84 and Route 7, a woman loaded down with packages walked through the parking lot, looking like a typical shopper in search of her car.
And, at the same time, at the Pavilions of Buckland Farms in Manchester just north of Interstate 84, a man on a mountain bike was weaving among cars, keeping a sharp eye on hundreds, and at times thousands, of vehicles parked in the huge lot.
All three were looking for the same thing: car thieves or others intent on breaking into parked cars.
In mall parking lots and garages, car theft has become the major form of crime.
During the past year, 367 cars were reported stolen at the state's five largest shopping malls, and many have not been recovered.


S. B. Wilshire, M. J. Kramer
Susannah Boyer Wilshire, a senior attorney at Texaco in White Plains, was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Michael Jeffrey Kramer, a cardiologist at Mount Sinai Hospital and Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
Mrs.
Kramer, 36, received undergraduate and law degrees from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Ann Glenn and William Wilshire Jr., both of Virginia Beach, Va.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Helping Russia
To the Editor:
On United States-Russian relations following the Moscow summit:


'American Films Are Better'
To the Editor:
The best way for the French film industry to protect and defend itself from "marauding commercialism from Hollywood" is not to impose more taxes on film goers who want to see "Wayne's World 2" or "Schindler's List" but to produce better films that more French people want to see.
There is a good and obvious reason why the French themselves prefer American films to their own native products: American films are better.
And there is a good and obvious reason why no American composer of classical music has achieved the lasting popularity of French masters such as Bizet and Berlioz: French classical music is better than ours.


Croton Falls Arts Showcase Battles Winter Blues
IT has been a tough January so far, so maybe "A Midwinter Arts Lift" is just what is needed.
Scheduled for the next two weeks at the Schoolhouse, in Croton Falls, the event will be a "celebration of theater, music, dance, poetry and art," said Lee Pope, the program's director.
It is also "a way to showcase the many talented professional artists who live in the area," he added.
At 2 P.M. today, the Westfair Chamber Singers offer an hourlong program devoted to songs of peace, stars and winter, followed at 3:30 P.M. by poetry readings with music by Kate Knapp Johnson and Stephanie Strickland.


Married, With Angst


Unhitch the Sled Dogs But Keep the Overcoat
It's not nearly as cold as you think.
That's the view of weather experts who see this month's Arctic freeze in the eastern United States as just a downward, localized blip in a generally warmer trend in the world's climate.


Roosevelt Island Deserves Both a Tram and a Subway
To the Editor:
As longtime residents of Roosevelt Island, we take exception to Gertrude M. Schneider's letter of Jan. 9 and her protest of continued state financial support for the Roosevelt Island tram.
Yes, we have been fortunate to have the Q line subway with the tram out of service, but Ms.
Schneider probably has access to both subway and bus transportation where she lives.
Would she accept elimination of one or the other to reduce the deficit?
I doubt it.
ELI JACK HELD  Manhattan


UNDER THEIR SKIN
In responding to the pictures from my book "Cocaine True, Cocaine Blue" in the photo essay "Under Their Skin" (Dec. 5), some people have called me insensitive, a voyeur, a racist.
My critics have the right, of course, to say what they want to say about me, but name calling doesn't alter the facts and nature of the drug plague choking our country.


When the Piano Came of Age: A Sonic Museum
IN 1888, A CUSTOMER COULD HAVE bought a Steinway upright piano for the then considerable sum of $1,500.
It would have had, as a catalogue of the time put it, "an extra fancy case, designed and executed in the highest style of art, richly carved  [ with ]  ornamented and engraved consoles and pilasters." It cost the same as the company's seven-foot grand piano and was, in fact, simply a grand stood on its end, with a different action; the upright was called a cabinet grand.
A few weeks ago, I heard an 1892 example of this instrument; it deserved the name and the price.
The sound was rich and warm and penetrating, its musical possibilities as impressive as the furniture the catalogue copy focused on.
I also heard an instrument built in 1861, when the American firm of Steinway &amp; Sons was less than a decade old and had just begun to alter the instrument with an astonishing series of innovations.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Knowing What They Like
IN her newly designated role of patron of the arts, Heidi Zimmerman was trying to view art work, but not the artist.
Eye contact would make it more difficult if she decided not to choose an artist's creation.


A Small Step for a Woman
Like other high school seniors, Shannon Faulkner felt she was smart enough and tough enough to make the grade at The Citadel, the 151-year-old South Carolina military college.
The Citadel's admissions office evidently agreed.
She was admitted on the basis of an application that left out one thing: that she was a woman.
Once the guardians of the college's old-boy tradition discovered this scandalous fact, Ms.
Faulkner was told she was applicanta non grata.
Despite the incursions of young women into such bastions as Annapolis and West Point, and the apparent survival of their standards, their morals and their ability to shoot straight, The Citadel was taking no chances.


New Program For Troubled Teen-Agers
FOR many parents, life with a teen-ager can seem like a nonstop balancing act as the family bounces from crisis to crisis.
Intense mood swings are normal in adolescence, but for seriously troubled youngsters they can trigger damaging responses.
Increasing numbers of teen-agers may respond to the upheavals of adolescence with severe depression and anxiety, with loss of interest in schoolwork and friends.
Some talk about, or even attempt, suicide.
Until recently there have been few alternatives for such young people except psychiatric hospitalization.
But a new program offered since October to the county's school districts provides another possibility.
The Intensive Treatment Day Program, as it is called, is operated jointly by the Southern Westchester Board of Cooperative Educational Services and the Rockland Children's Psychiatric Center, in cooperation with the Westchester County Community Mental Health Department, at its Rye Lake Campus in North White Plains.


Three Easy Ways to Prepare Pot Roast
BEEF consumption has declined dramatically over the last decade.
Then why are steakhouses doing so well, with new ones opening and reservations hard to get in all of them?
The answer is that an increasing number of people are not cooking beef at home, but when they dine out they want a terrific, tender, beefy slab of perfectly charred steak.
This makes sense.
The quality of well-aged sirloin or porterhouse that a good restaurant can obtain is usually superior to that available for home cooks.
And the kind of high-heat grills with which restaurants are routinely equipped usually do a far better job of cooking a steak than a home broiler or grill, even an outdoor grill.


A Plie Grows in Brooklyn
Walk down scruffy Fourth Avenue in Brooklyn, past scattered neighborhood shops, the familiar Brooklyn Academy of Music receding in the distance.
Turn right on Douglass Street, near the Gowanus Canal, and continue down the usually deserted block.
Enter the door of a building as unremarkable as all the others on this industrial street.
It is like tumbling down Alice's rabbit hole.
A giddy, chipped mosaic-floored hallway leads to a stairway of wooden planks.
Three flights up is the Gowanus Arts Exchange, an oasis, serene yet bustling.
The air is filled with an improbable mix of tapping feet, flamenco music and endlessly ringing telephones.
During the day, the studios may be filled with performers rehearsing for a show or children learning how to dance.
In the office, a space partitioned off the small lobby, a woman is likely to be working on a newsletter or meeting with dancers, musicians or producers.
At night, the larger of the two studios becomes a little theater, simple but well equipped, for programs of dance, music and theater by artists from the neighborhood, the city and beyond.
One night, a dancer and a violinist may be found winding around each other in a dreamlike collaborative duet; another night, a comedian may be found portraying a dithering fund-raiser gone amok.


The Old Guard Agrees: 54 Years Is a Long Time
Eddie Giacomin was near the shadows of Madison Square Garden yesterday, pondering the question that has haunted Rangers fans for 54 years.
"I look down this table and see Gump Worsley, Chuck Rayner and myself and think about John Davidson, who was also supposed to be here," the Hall of Fame Ranger goalie said.
"And I wonder why we haven't won a cup. It's just not a goaltender. That's for sure."


A Long Way From the Bus Ride to Binghamton
Mike Richter hasn't forgotten the bus rides.
It seems like a lifetime ago, but it was only last January when he was demoted to the Rangers' minor league team in Binghamton.
There, Richter played five games in front of small crowds in minor league towns, and he tried desperately to rediscover his form in goal.
One year later, he is a New York hero, the winner of the most valuable player award in the National Hockey League All-Star Game at Madison Square Garden yesterday.
In a one-period appearance for the victorious Eastern Conference, Richter made 19 saves on 21 shots -- many of the saves were brilliant -- to wow the crowd and earn the top honor.


Windows Pop: A Mystery Story
Hundreds of windows have been popping and shattering inside apartments at Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village, and the problem is getting worse, tenant leaders say.
Complaints were first heard two years ago, when 138,000 new windows were installed as part of a major capital improvement program at the two developments.
But they escalated late last year, and a recent survey has turned up 20 broken windows in one apartment building on First Avenue.


Bills Are Wearing Out Their Welcome
Joe Montana has four Super Bowl rings.
Jim Kelly could have had three.
A lot of people would like to see Montana go for a fifth.
Not many people want to see Kelly go for his first -- again.
After three straight losses in the Super Bowl, the Bills and Kelly have long ago ceased to be sentimental favorites in the race for a title.


Joe Montana, a Study in Good Management
IF he were an executive, he'd be called the ultimate turnaround specialist.
Perhaps no quarterback is better than Joe Montana at coolly leading a team to a come-from-behind victory late in the fourth quarter.
How he does it holds some obvious but all-too-often overlooked lessons for managers.
Mr.
Montana proved his mettle most recently in the Kansas City Chiefs' 28-20 defeat of the favored Houston Oilers in last Sunday's playoff game, throwing two late touchdown passes and setting up a third.
He also did it the week before in a 27-24 victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers, throwing the game-tying touchdown pass on fourth down with 1:48 to play, then driving the team to the winning field goal in overtime.


Bookings Hold Despite San Juan Spill
In the tourism business as in the environmental field, even a one-gallon oil spill is something of a disaster.
So the news that more than 600,000 gallons of heavy oil had spilled on San Juan beaches on Jan. 7 when a tanker barge ran aground furrowed brows both at the Puerto Rico Tourism Company, a government agency, and at the Caribbean Stranding Network, an island environmental group.
The environmental group's volunteers scoured the three-mile stretch of sullied beaches in search of affected fish and wildlife, while government officials sought to contain both the oil and the perceptions that more of the island's 258 miles of beachfront were affected.
For the environmentalists the impact seemed minor, since the spill was in developed areas and well away from pristine wildlife habitats.


Man Killed in Subway
A man was killed yesterday about 10 A.M. in the 59th Street station of the Lexington Avenue subway line when he walked along a track into an oncoming train, a Transit Authority official said.
The incident was apparently a suicide, the official said.
The man was unidentified yesterday.


We Are the President
We can now say one thing with absolute certainty about the Clinton Administration: There's never going to be any certainty.
Every time you settle back in your chair with a sigh of relief, ready to put your relationship with the President on cruise control, there's another jarring moment that gets you feeling all discombobulated again.


Giving Meaning to the Phrase 'Mind Your Manners'


Richard Pollard, 81, Photo Director at Life
Richard Otts Pollard, a former director of photography for Life magazine in New York, died on Jan. 14 at Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 81 and lived in that city.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Be Wary of Pejorative Labels
To the Editor:
"The Drug Makers Are Listening to Prozac" (Jan. 9) was fine from a business standpoint, but not when it comes to understanding illness.
Your subhead, "Feel-good drugs could boost productivity . . ." is accurate only if medicines affecting heart disease, arthritis, etc. are also "feel good" drugs.
The effect of calling antidepressants feel-good drugs, with that label's pejorative implications, is that people are then reluctant to take those drugs.


THE BOTTOM LINE
Abeel belongs to a women's group? Sounds more like a "predators' party" to me.


Viewpoints: 10 Years After Bell's Breakup; The Split-Up Worked. No, It Didn't.
WHEN the old Bell System came to an end a decade ago, there was instant nostalgia for a lost golden age and great anxiety about the future.
Many dire predictions were made about the breakup's effect on affordable rates, service quality and technological progress.
The reality has been much more benign.
The percentage of households with telephones has increased, from 91.4 percent in 1983 to 94.2 percent in 1993, according to the Federal Communications Commission.
For the poorest fifth of the population, this rose from 80.1 percent to 83.7 percent.
Average telephone rates did not double or triple, but grew at only half the rate of inflation.
Industry research and development increased, too, as did productivity, although at the expense of some employment.
The market for telecommunications equipment became competitive, with prices that are now among the lowest worldwide.
Nor were the very poor damaged by divestiture; a cheap "lifeline" service was introduced.


Vienna Waltzes To New Theme
Vienna is synonymous with waltzes, and it seems only fitting that the Austrian capital has some 300 balls a year.
Next month they include the Coffeehouse Ball on Feb. 9, the Bonbon Ball on Feb. 11, the Magicians' Ball on Feb. 19 and 20 and the Magicians' Ball for Children on Feb. 20.
The most important ball, however, is the Vienna Opera Ball, which will be held at the State Opera House on Feb. 10.
This year for the first time it will have a theme based on an opera or operetta.
The theme for 1994 is "Die Fledermaus" by Johann Strauss.


For Handy People Who Just Have to Put a Sharp Edge on It
THE principle of sharpening tools and cutlery is simple.
Grind one or both sides of a blade so that the surfaces meet at an angle.
But the catches include which angle is correct, how to hold the blade steady and which sharpening device is the best.
For most ordinary people, the simplest and least expensive device is a combination oilstone called a coarse-fine India stone.
This is a man-made block of aluminum-oxide abrasives.


Lila Polur and Robert Wrubel
Lila Polur, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Polur of Tampa, Fla., was married yesterday evening to Robert Gold Wrubel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles I. Wrubel of Demarest, N.J.
Rabbi Nathaniel Benjamin performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride and bridegroom, both 27, graduated from Wesleyan University.
Mrs.
Wrubel was until recently a senior research associate for the Advisory Board Company, a private health-care research company, in Washington.
Her father retired as the president of the Havatampa Cigar Corporation in Tampa.


Enthralling Missives From Sondheim's World
AN INTRIGUING PARADOX OF Stephen Sondheim's theater music is the extent to which his meticulously tailored-to-character songs enthrall when taken out of context.
A knotty soliloquy that seems inextricably linked to a dramatic situation can expand into a deeper reflection on love and death.
A high-velocity patter song, popped into the middle of a revue, can be savored as a virtuosic wordgame.
The quintessential Sondheim ballad -- "Send In the Clowns," "Losing My Mind" or "Not a Day Goes By" -- conveys a yearning that transcends words and evokes Puccini filtered through Freud.
String together two dozen randomly selected Sondheim songs, and you will have an anthology of modern cultural notions, attitudes and moods that might be called "Civilization and Its Discontents." Do it with care and impose a loose story line, and you have a show like "Putting It Together," the revue that was produced by Cameron Mackintosh and ran for three months last season at the Manhattan Theater Club.


Government Still Uses Human Guinea Pigs
To the Editor:
In "Government Guinea Pigs" (Op-Ed, Jan. 9), on radiation research conducted on Americans in the post-World War II decades, David Rothman states, "The critical question now is whether such exploitation could still occur." He responds: "the answer is an almost unqualified no." The facts say just the opposite.


Location, Location
BEFORE she puts on a play, Anne Hamburger calls the Fire Department, Police Department, Buildings Department, Street Activity Permit Office, Department of Sanitation, Department of Cultural Affairs, Landmarks Preservation Commission, Department of Parks and Recreation, office of the Borough President and various other public and private agencies, as well as landlords and neighborhood businesses.
Depending on the project, she needs cooperation from some or all of these organizations.
As the founder and artistic director of En Garde Arts, Ms.
Hamburger presents theatrical events in nontraditional settings.
During its nine years of operation, En Garde has found site-specific performance spaces in the unlikeliest of circumstances -- near a Brooklyn pier, on a Harlem street, in abandoned storefronts, warehouses and churches, in the meatpacking district and around the Lake in Central Park (and up in the Belvedere Tower).
With the audience enveloped by the action, En Garde is a valuable link between virtual reality and imaginative drama.


Kamali Bares All
Elegant, outrageous, painfully shy Norma Kamali is making a confession.
"I was a makeup freak," she confides.
Which, to anyone who followed fashion in the 1970's or 80's, is something of an understatement.
Kamali's signature look -- a pre-Paloma Picasso slash of red lips, pale powdered face and where-there's-smoke-there'seye-shadow eyes -- was not achieved with a light hand.
"I've gone from shaving my eyebrows to putting in a million separate eyelashes one by one," she continues.
"I used to take panstick and just spackle it all over my face."


BLUE HELMETS, EMPTY GUNS
I valued Brian Hall's balanced analysis of the paradoxes facing United Nations peacekeepers ("Blue Helmets, Empty Guns," Jan. 2).
However, more should have been said about the valuable role of humanitarian aid in complex crises, a role sadly eclipsed by policing considerations.
Despite the creation of a new United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs intended to increase humanitarian operations, lack of resources and political influence has made its first year a disappointment.
But Boutros-Ghali himself recognized in "Agenda for Peace" the importance of aid in support of peacekeeping.


From Endicott 2 To Rhinelander 4
I GREW up in the province of Endicott 2.
"What's that?" my 15-year-old daughter asks. "What's Endicott 2?"


'Priesto,' the Magic Show
Before he thought about being a priest, says the Rev.
Jerry Jecewicz, pastor of Brooklyn's Holy Spirit Church, he wanted to be a magician.
After his ordination 18 years ago, his vocation and avocation were intertwined in the form of 'The Priesto Magic Spectacular," a show that stars Father Jecewicz in priestly collar and top hat. In apparent defiance of the laws of nature, he makes his duck, Dudley, disappear, escapes from a locked trunk and causes a woman to float in midair.
Every so often, he says, he is contronted by someone who claims that "magic is deception and is therefore an opening for the Devil." But Father Jecewicz insists that he practices "honest" magic -- entertainment, not deception.
It is also a boon for his parish, since the money he raises with his show goes to support the Holy Spirit School; since his arrival there in 1991, he has performed at church events throughout New York and earned $25,000 for the school.


Thompson's Temper And Georgetown Game Both Lost in a Big Way
DePaul 78, Georgetown 51
Coach John Thompson of Georgetown was steaming yesterday in Rosemont, Ill., and his anger near the end of the first half spilled over into a confrontation with officials that resulted in his ejection.


'Priesto,' the Magic Show
Before he thought about being a priest, says the Rev.
Jerry Jecewicz, pastor of Brooklyn's Holy Spirit Church, he wanted to be a magician.
After his ordination 18 years ago, his vocation and avocation were intertwined in the form of 'The Priesto Magic Spectacular," a show that stars Father Jecewicz in priestly collar and top hat. In apparent defiance of the laws of nature, he makes his duck, Dudley, disappear, escapes from a locked trunk and causes a woman to float in midair.
Every so often, he says, he is contronted by someone who claims that "magic is deception and is therefore an opening for the Devil." But Father Jecewicz insists that he practices "honest" magic -- entertainment, not deception.
It is also a boon for his parish, since the money he raises with his show goes to support the Holy Spirit School; since his arrival there in 1991, he has performed at church events throughout New York and earned $25,000 for the school.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Evening Hours column last Sunday about an awards dinner for the Bank Street College of Education misidentified the woman with George B. Benta.
She is Dr.
Clementine Pugh, a trustee of the college, not Rachel Robinson.


Poetry and Publicity
To the Editor:
There is no excuse and certainly no point in Claude Rawson's savaging of the other Sitwells in his review of "Splendours and Miseries: A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell," by Sarah Bradford (Dec. 19).
It is particularly obnoxious of him to attack Edith's poetry.
In the late 1940's, the great modernist writer Elizabeth Bowen said, "Now that Virginia  [ Woolf ]  is dead, Edith Somerville and Colette and Edith Sitwell are the only living writers whom I really admire."


With Regret, City Rejects Loehmann's
A controversial plan to build a Loehmann's in Sheepshead Bay received a major blow on Wednesday, when a city agency reluctantly declined to grant the developer the necessary zoning variance.
Calling the decision "unfortunate if not painful," the City Board of Standards and Appeals rejected the variance request for the 27,000-square-foot store, saying the property does not meet the legal criteria of having unusual features that pose a hardship to development and require a variance from the waterfront's special limit of 3,500 square feet per store.


A Cornfield in Manhattan?
To commemorate the 200th anniversary of Madison Square Park, the sculptor Melinda Hunt plans to install a work in the spring entitled "Circle of Hope," a ring of planted corn 45 feet in diameter.
Once the corn is grown, members of the public will be invited to inscribe their vision of the future on small plaster tablets hung on a surrounding steel fence.
"The planting of corn is a symbol of hope and renewal," said Ms.
Hunt, a Brooklyn resident and former lecturer on multimedia art at the State University of New York at Purchase.


Immigrant Shot to Death
A Russian immigrant was found shot to death inside a parked car in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, on Friday night, the police said yesterday.
The man, Vladimir Kara, 27, of Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, was slumped in the passenger side of the car, parked at 125 Exeter Street, with one shot in the head, the police said.
They said a toy gun was found inside the car.


The Big Hairy Guy of Dance
MARK MORRIS  By Joan Acocella.
Illustrated. 306 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $27.50.


Spending the Yule in a New Silver Spur
FOR a change, I did my Christmas shopping the right way.
It wasn't any earlier, mind you.
Nor did I do the shopping in a catalogue.
I did it in a new Rolls-Royce.
There is something very nice about rolling up to Pier One Imports in a Rolls.
And, of course, I was chauffeured.
I had my son driving while I sat in the back on my wallet.


Data Bank/January 23, 1994
Data Bank/January 23, 1994
Housing Starts
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,540
1,450
1,390
Merchandise Exports
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
In billions
$40.1
$40.1
$38.9
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$50.2
$51.0
$49.5
Auto Production
Jan. 21
Jan. 14
Jan. 7
In units, weekly total
105,701
136,676
129,099
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
79,056
110,868
112,384
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.10
3.14
3.14
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
6.27
6.29
6.22
Weekly Jobless Claims
Jan. 14
Jan. 7
Dec. 31
In thousands
380
357
357


No Headline
"I'm getting tired of this! I just want it to go away." BRETT REHDER, an 8-year-old from the Northridge section of Los Angeles.  [ 18:1. ]


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
EAST MIDTOWN  $970,000
870 United Nations Plaza  2-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining room, eat-in kitchen, sauna; maintenance $3,018, 38% tax-deductible, listed at $995,000, 3 years on market (Broker: Ambrose-Mar Elia)


Economic Revolution: The 10-Day Tour
Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen boarded a plane nearly two weeks ago for an inspection of two huge transformations -- the move from Communism to a free market in Russia and the surge from poverty to modernity in the space of a generation by 2 billion people in Asia.
His journey, intended to promote American business and economic interests, brought home to the Secretary and his entourage the striking contrast between the tentativeness of the transition in Russia and the ferocity of it in Asia.
What follows is a diary of this journey by Thomas L. Friedman, chief economics correspondent of The New York Times, who accompanied the Treasury Secretary.


Yellow Roses
TRUE WOMEN  By Janice Woods Windle.
Illustrated. 454 pp.
New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


The World; In Haitian Diaspora, Dreams of the Future Are Dashed
THE setting was a political conference here last week.
For Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's exiled President, it was a chance to revive flagging international interest in returning him to office.
For a Haitian radio broadcaster, the complexities boiled down to one simple question.
"When will we be able to go back?" he asked an American reporter, with more than a hint of agony.
"I want to return to my country."
For Haiti's burgeoning diaspora, steadily fed by poverty, political intolerance and brutality, the question has long been the same.
The flight in dangerously overcrowded boats began long before the fall of the 29-year Duvalier family dictatorship in 1986.
In the years since, the seven months of Father Aristide's rule, which was aborted by the army in September 1991, was the only period in which there seemed to be hope that conditions would change.


Jan. 16-22; Plutonium and You: a Love Story
The other night one of Japan's news programs showed a shocking scene: A bag of rice from Thailand, one of the first let into the country since Japan lifted its import ban, arrived a bit mouldy.
Ahhhh, said the announcers, consumers must beware these dangerous imported foods, like apples from America tainted with pesticides.


Rider Unease Belies Statistics
The subway station at 103d Street and Broadway became a scene of chaos and terror 10 days ago, when a gunman opened fire in an arriving No. 9 train, injuring three people.
The man was quickly arrested, the victims were treated and carried out, and the station returned to its normal state: disheveled and a bit ominous.


Mutual Funds; Fast Game, Fast Player, Cash in Hand
TALK about confident.
Arthur J. Bonnel predicts that the Dow Jones Industrial Average will hit 9,000 by the end of the 1990's, and he aims to be "mutual fund manager of the decade" by then -- an awfully big bet even for a manager who works out of Reno, Nev.
But his bets have paid off before.
Mr.
Bonnel's MIM Stock Appreciation Fund returned 20.4 percent a year, on average, for the five years ended 1993, according to Morningstar Inc., fund researchers in Chicago.


Outlaw Those Blind, Deadly Land Mines
To the Editor:
"Humane Warfare" (letter, Jan. 13) by Jeffrey Milman, an Army captain in the Vietnam War, extols landmines as a "humane form of warfare." The statement would be laughable if the implications were not so starkly tragic.


The Executive Computer; This Little Scanner Just Knows That It Can
SCANNING is essentially the computer printing process run backwards, with images and text on paper being captured as electronic documents.
And for the most part it is used in desktop publishing and page design.
But a new hardware-and-software package from a small Silicon Valley company is based on a vision of scannng as a tool for corporate communications.
Visioneer, of Palo Alto, Calif., will bring to market this week its Papermax scanner and Maxmate software (list price for the system, $499), a quick and handy program for both Windows and Macintosh computers to copy newspaper and magazine articles onto the screen.


Clare M. Rooney, David M. Butler
Clare Margaret Rooney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis C. Rooney Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Michael Butler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glen W. Butler of Columbus, Ohio.
Bishop Edward M. Egan of Bridgeport, Conn., performed the ceremony at St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Butler, 28, is a decorating editor at Colonial Homes magazine in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is chairman emeritus of the Melville Corporation in Rye, N.Y., which operates several retail store chains.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Ray W. Heffernan, founded the H. H. Brown Shoe Company, now in Greenwich.


103d and Broadway: A Note From the Underground
People who use the IRT station at 103d Street and Broadway have long complained of squalid conditions and an ominous atmosphere.
A shooting 10 days ago has only heightened their fears.
With reports from Harlem, Greenwich Village, College Point, Bushwick and Hunts Point.
PAGES 6-11


Smith Puts a Charge in Knicks' Post
Except for the final score, Charles Smith's return was more successful than he had anticipated.
Smith tossed in 14 points and blocked 2 shots in 18 minutes of impressive play during New York's 106-103 loss to the Magic in Orlando Friday night.
It was Smith's first game action in seven weeks.
To Smith, it seemed as if he had waited seven months.


Flat Rental
To the Editor: I read with interest "A Real Home While Away" among the London articles in your issue of Dec. 5.
Prospective guests should be certain to understand fully the emergency cancellation policy of these apartment services in London.


Ward Is Finding Winter Deflating
When Florida State's basketball team took the floor at Cameron Indoor Stadium today, Duke students had to come up with a new reminder of Charlie Ward's other line of work.
The "Wide Right" cheer from last season just didn't have the same bite, so this time the dig came from the band.
The song played in the final seconds before tipoff was so out of place that a cheerleader took several steps forward toward the stands, leaned over a table and went up to several students standing in the first row.


17 Goals? It Must Be The N.H.L. All-Stars
After Mike Richter of the Rangers won a sports truck as the most valuable player of yesterday's National Hockey League All-Star Game at Madison Square Garden, everyone rationalized the selection of a hometown goalie who played only one period and gave up 2 goals on 21 shots.
"It's always nice when a guy from the home team gets it," said Wayne Gretzky, whose Western Conference team was defeated by Richter's Eastern Conference, 9-8.
"It's good for the fans. They go home happy."


Hotels Alter Award Plans
SEVERAL hotel chains have recently made changes in their award programs for frequent guests, as they continue to emphasize mileage in airline programs as an alternative to points toward a future hotel stay, or in some cases, as an added bonus.
Holiday Inn and Marriott, which took major steps in mileage awards last year, have not altered their terms, which were described in this column Sept. 19.
Here are highlights of the hotel mileage programs that have made major changes.


Unwed Mothers: The Scarlet Letter Returns in Pink
If there is a movie embodiment of society's ambivalence about unwed motherhood, it is "The Snapper," Stephen Frears's current film about a working-class Irish family coming to terms with their unmarried daughter's pregnancy.
When Sharon Curley announces that she is pregnant, her father, Dessie (played by Colm Meany), moans in dismay, flares up, demands to know who the father is, paces, jokes weakly, and finally persuades his daughter to join him for a pint at the pub.
In that brief scene, Dessie Curley travels a path that parallels the treatment over time of unwed motherhood in movies: from outraged rejection to uneasy truce.


Killings Spur Cry For More Police
In the wake of a near-doubling of homicides in the 30th Precinct last year, local police officials and community leaders have a message for the Police Commissioner: Send more help.
After dropping 41 percent in 1992, the number of homicides in the precinct rose to a seven-year high of 57 in 1993, according to recent data from the Police Department.


Coming Soon: 'Elixir of Life'
Looking for that little pick-me-up?
Try the secret potion used by China's record-setting runners, available soon at a supermarket near you.
MA JUNREN, China's flamboyant track and field coach, sold the formula for his "Elixir of Life" to a Chinese health food company for $1.15 million, the company's Hong Kong vice president, JACKY YU, said Friday.
Yu said his Guangdong Nowaday Group hoped to sell the potion beginning in March, first in China and later abroad, including the United States. (AP)


...And Punning Pedants Will Be de-Professed
To the Editor:
James Lipton's "What Do You Call a Group of Dentists?" (Viewpoints, Dec. 26) offers less of a challenge than was posed by Jimmy Launce, an announcer on WJR in Detroit about 20 years ago.
Mr.
Launce suggested that if lawyers can be dis-barred and priests can be de-frocked, surely there must be other appropriate terms of dismissal.
The University of Michigan faculty was quick to respond:


Adelaide Sets the Style
AUSTRALIAN cuisine has come of age in the last 10 years.
There may not be an identifiable national character, but there is a distinctive eclectic style.
Adelaide, the fifth-largest city in Australia, has given impetus to this movement.
It has nurtured some of the most creative and sure-handed masters in Australia today -- Philip Searle of Oasis Seros in Sydney; Cheong Liew, a teacher to Adelaide's culinary apprentices, and Chris Manfield of the Paramount restaurant in Sydney.
Surrounded by premium wine-growing regions -- the vineyards of the Clare and Barossa Valleys -- and acknowledged throughout the country for its restaurants, Adelaide encourages discriminating dining.


Real? Fake?
Spotting fur trim.


Circus and Animal Performances at the Peekskill Armory
ANIMALS, whether they are stranded whales, ailing harbor seals or horses headed for the slaughterhouse, are a special concern of the North Wind Museum, an organization that runs an undersea institute on City Island in the Bronx and a private farm in Somers.
The nonprofit group uses a variety of animals, including rarities like a llama, a buffalo and a Brahma bull, to teach children about the environment.
Some of the animals stabled in Somers were either abused, abandoned or neglected before finding a home with North Wind.
These include horses that now prance in parades, nuzzle city children who may never have touched a horse before and pull "pollution patrol" wagons on cleanup expeditions in New York City parks.
An ox otherwise destined for a dog-food factory was also recently purchased by North Wind for its educational programs.


A Girl, a Grandmother and Bette Davis
ELIZABETH FULLER has been telling the story for years, ever since Bette Davis showed up at her cottage in Weston one spring day in 1985 and remained, uninvited, a month longer.
Thirty-two days, to the day.
Ms.
Fuller's husband was counting.
She has told the story at dinner parties, in a book ("Me and Jezebel," published in 1992) and in a one-woman show that has traveled -- "through word of mouth," Ms.
Fuller says, "no agent" -- to local and dinner theaters, then to women's clubs on Long Island, in Minneapolis, in Kentucky.
Next month: Iowa.


Ralph Hetzel Jr., 81; Led Movie Association
Ralph D. Hetzel Jr., a former executive vice president of the Motion Picture Association of America and a former provost at the California Institute of the Arts, died on Jan. 13 at his home in Encino, Calif.
He was 81.
He died of complications from Parkinson's disease, said a son, Otto J. Hetzel of Bethesda, Md.


SUNDAY, January 23, 1994; Les Fleurs du Mall
American films have produced something like a national hysteria in France over the encroachment of mass-market commercialism on a sacred industry.
But a new mall underneath the Louvre suggests that the French are actually far less rigid about good taste and high culture than anyone ever imagined.
Wandering in to the new mall, les Galeries du Carrousel du Louvre, would-be museum visitors often find themselves waiting in line to wait in line to buy a ticket to the exhibits.
Forget it.
This is Paris.
Shop qui peut!


Residential Real Estate Market Rebounds in New York Region
After five years of slumping sales and plummeting prices, the residential real estate market in the New York region is starting to rebound, according to housing analysts.
Though the recovery is not as robust as in other parts of the country, like the Southeast and the Rocky Mountain states, the precipitous slide that saw home values in the region plunge by double-digit rates in the late 1980's and early 1990's appears to be ending.


Water Music


The Jeeves of Today Remains Loyal -- to Himself
FROM P.G.
Wodehouse's Jeeves to Stevens, the self-effacing narrator of "The Remains of the Day," the butler has been a fixture of English upper-class mythology.
Mannered, loyal and discreet, the good butler is also unflappable to a fault, a trait perhaps best underscored by a man who once worked for Lord Dunsany, the Irish poet.
After a group of hooligans ransacked rooms and set fires inside Dunsany Castle early this century, he intercepted the fleeing invaders at the front door and politely inquired: "And who shall I say called?"
But life and times have changed for Britain's serving classes.
First of all, there are far fewer butlers; estimates run to the hundreds instead of the 18,000-plus in the years before World War II.
Moreover, the modern butler these days is less the faithful personal servant than the professional household manager and organizer, says Ivor Spencer, the founder of the Ivor Spencer International School for Butler Administrators/Personal Assistants ("Trained British Style").
Students still learn how to iron the creases out of the morning newspaper, and lay out an employers' clothes.
But Mr.
Spencer says that there is no reason that they should end up dispirited and lonely, like Stevens, after a life devoted selflessly to the service of their employer.


Quotas: A Loaded Term
To the Editor:
So, the Motion Picture Association of America is against "France's imposition of quotas on American movies shown on television and its movie subsidies." Surely the M.P.A.A. knows that quotas is the wrong word to use.


Echoes of Pre-Renaissance Italy and Crumbling Walls
OF the three Rockland County shows under review, the first is a joint effort by Sister Adele Myers and Todd Stone at the Blue Hill Cultural Center in Pearl River.
The others are solos by Francesca Greene and Eric Laxman at, respectively, Piermont Flywheel and Piermont Fine Arts, two galleries adjoining each other at 223 and 218 Ash Street in Piermont Landing.
The Blue Hill exhibitors have in common an architectural approach but in all other respects are totally unalike.
Sister Adele, a member of the Order of the Dominican Sisters at Sparkill, made her Rockland debut 15 years ago as founder and director of Thorpe Intermedia, the gallery at the convent.
In 1991, she abandoned this project to pursue her career as a sculptor.
Her abstractions may be described as reliefs ornamented with fresco or, alternatively, as frescoes applied to reliefs.
Either way, their surfaces are expressionistic and their colors fresh.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BOLD BALLET
Premieres of ballets on the exploratory edge of dance will make up the Hartford Ballet program at The Bushnell in Hartford on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.


POSTINGS: Done In by the Elements; Post Office Will Restore A Crumbling Cornice
Rain, sleet and snow may not keep a mail carrier from the swift completion of his or her appointed rounds, but they sure did play havoc with the elegant cornice on the United States General Post Office, fragments of which had been falling to the sidewalks around Eighth and Ninth Avenues between 31st and 33d Street.
And so the Postal Service has erected protective sidewalk bridging outside the landmark building, which was designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White, and has spent $700,000 on emergency work to remove the unsafe cornice.
Next comes the restoration, which is to cost more than $2 million.


Mother of Boy Slain in 1991 Reports She Was Abducted
In a puzzling new chapter in the mysterious disappearance and death of a 5-year-old, Timothy Wiltsey, in 1991, the boy's mother told the authorities today that she was abducted at gunpoint outside her home in Middlesex County on Friday morning and driven nearly nonstop to Detroit by two men who identified themselves as law-enforcement officials.
But the authorities said today that the woman, Michelle Lodzinski, 26, had given them no explanation of why the men had seized her or what she thought their motive was.


The G.O.P.: Wising Up About Race?
In a nation that's growing blacker and browner by the day, the Republican Party remains astonishingly white.
Blacks were so scarce at the last national convention in Houston that TV news-show hosts held hostage the few they could find, whisking them from one appearance to the next, trying to show some diversity.
At election time, George Bush got only 11 percent of the black vote.
David Bositis, of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies in Washington, says the G.O.P. could have reaped almost 20 percent, simply by campaigning in black areas and touting black appointments to the Administration.


SARAJEVO SHELLING KILLS SIX CHILDREN
Exploding artillery shells killed six children and wounded at least three others today while they were sledding and playing on icy streets in the western suburb of Alipasino Polje, witnesses and hospital and morgue officials said.
All three wounded children were in serious condition, and surgeons operated into the night in an effort to save one child's foot, hospital officials said.


Quake and Freeze May Interrupt Economy's Growth in Short Term
The California earthquake and the Arctic cold in the East together may shear as much as half a percentage point or more from economic growth this quarter, some economists say, but later this year they may actually give the economy a boost.
While the earthquake and the freeze are expected to slow growth this winter as transportation is disrupted, factories are shut and consumers huddle at home, by the spring and summer, growth should increase as people spend to replace objects that were destroyed and rebuild from the earthquake.
Sophisticated Guesses
Indeed, some economists say that by the end of 1994, the country's employment and Gross Domestic Product are likely to be slightly higher than they would have been without nature's intervention.


Three Easy Ways to Prepare Pot Roast
BEEF consumption has declined dramatically over the last decade.
Then why are steakhouses doing so well, with new ones opening and reservations hard to get in all of them?
The answer is that an increasing number of people are not cooking beef at home, but when they dine out they want a terrific, tender, beefy slab of perfectly charred steak.
This makes sense.
The quality of well-aged sirloin or porterhouse that a good restaurant can obtain is usually superior to that available for home cooks.
And the kind of high-heat grills with which restaurants are routinely equipped usually do a far better job of cooking a steak than a home broiler or grill, even an outdoor grill.


Curtailing the Deer Population the Old-Fashioned Way


County's Wish List For Albany
A NEWLY formed regional alliance of the top officeholders of New York City and Westchester, Rockland, Nassau and Suffolk Counties -- all Republicans -- could provide the political edge necessary this year to achieve a state takeover of local Medicaid costs, long sought by the elected officials.
That, at least, is the view of the Westchester County administration, led by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who was pleased to see the proposal included in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed budget two years ago but disappointed when it failed to gain committee approval in either house of the Legislature.


Capturing the Exotic Life of Paul Bowles
"No matter what went on outside the mind forged ahead, manufacturing its own adventures for itself, and who's to know where reality was, inside or out. Although this was not a comfortable point of view he did not reject it because it coincided with one of his basic beliefs, that a man must at all costs keep some part of himself outside and beyond life."
Those words are by the famously self-exiled and enigmatic author/ composer Paul Bowles, quoting from his novel "The Spider's House." They alternate with the thrumming rhythms and pulsating sounds of Middle Eastern music accompanying the Moroccan sequences that open a new documentary film portrait of the author, purportedly the first ever made.


Irish Concerts Continue After a Tavern's Demise
To the Editor:
The Jan. 2 Neighborhood Report item about the closing of the Eagle Tavern in Chelsea focused on the move of the Eagle's long-running Monday night Irish music sessions to Flannery's Pub on 14th Street.
There was no mention, however, that the Eagle's equally well-known Friday night Irish concert series is also continuing at a new location, the Blarney Star on Murray Street.
DON MEADE  Manhattan


UNDER THEIR SKIN
There is, I believe, a line that must not be crossed in the visual depiction of certain human events.
One does not have to see a crack-addicted mother, with her baby, about to perform oral sex on her john to understand that women addicted to crack engage in this conduct.


After a 38-Year Drought, Manhattan Defeats Irish
Manhattan 57, Notre Dame 50
Brenton Birmingham scored 15 points to help Manhattan (10-5) defeat Notre Dame, 57-50, at South Bend, Ind., giving the Jaspers their first victory over the Fighting Irish in 38 years.
Manhattan's last victory over Notre Dame came in the 1956 Eastern College Athletic Conference Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden.


Sports of The Times; Montana's 'Genius Is Serenity'
IN his first life as a quarterback, Joe Montana measured the 49ers for four Super Bowl rings.
And in his second life, after missing virtually two seasons because of a damaged passing elbow, he will be center stage in another Super Bowl next Sunday in Atlanta if he guides the Chiefs past the Bills in today's American Conference championship game.
Then and now.
How much of Joe Montana, at age 37, is the same as it was in all those years with the 49ers?


Smith Has Cowboys in the Run for a Title
He is very much against injecting pain-killing drugs into his body, but Emmitt Smith knows it is a possibility.
He has declared the shoulder he separated against the New York Giants two weeks ago fit, but there is no question the pain is still there.
And when -- not if -- some 250-pound linebacker comes slamming into it and the pain shoots through his body he will have to rethink that pledge not to use the needles.
"I can't go into the game thinking about my shoulder and worrying about the pounding," he said.


Dvorak Loved Pigeons and Trains, Not Ideology
ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO today, at the old Madison Square Garden, Antonin Dvorak led the orchestra of the National Conservatory in a concert to benefit the New York Herald Clothing Fund.
The chorus was made up of blacks, and the composer presented an arrangement he had just made of "Old Folks at Home." Toward the end of the program he was presented with a gold baton.
"He thanked the orchestra," The Herald wrote, "by gestures that were more eloquent . . . than any words could have been, and taking up the beautiful present, he commenced to conduct."
Just five weeks before, Dvorak had scored an even greater success with his Symphony "From the New World." At the end of that concert he appeared in the balcony "as straight as one of the pines in the forests of which his music whispered so eloquently," wrote Alfred Steinberg of the Herald.
The audience "threw kid glove conventionalism to the winds," James Huneker noted in The Musical Courier, and screamed its approval. ("Like Mascagni in Vienna!" Dvorak reported to his publisher Fritz Simrock.)


Paradise Lost


Walking the Road of Life In the Face of a Disability
JASON KINGSLEY and Mitchell Levitz are soon to set out on a 10-city tour to promote their new book, "Count Us In: Growing Up With Down Syndrome," published by Harcourt Brace.
Many people will attend their book signings, see them on talk shows and, of course, read their book.
But there is one person who will be receiving a copy of the new publication who is not expecting it -- the obstetrician who nearly two decades ago told Jason's parents to institutionalize their infant son and tell people that he had died in childbirth because he had been born with Down syndrome.
In an opening chapter, Mr.
Kingsley says he has some things he wants that doctor to know.


To Hear the 8th-Place Witt Tell It, She's a Winner, Too
If you believed Katarina Witt's roseate version of today's events, two starkly different competitions took place here on the final day of the European figure skating championships.
One competition was for the ladies' medals.
It demanded precision, intestinal fortitude and enough triples to make Barry Bonds start to feel a little lacking.


Magnificent Obsession
RED HUNTING IN THE PROMISED LAND  Anticommunism and the Making of America.
By Joel Kovel. 331 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $25.


Jan. 16-22: Getting Tough on Racists; Prison for German Skinheads In Attack on Americans
An assault outside a discotheque in the eastern German village of Oberhof last October ballooned into an international incident when it turned out that the victim, who suffered facial and chest injuries, was an American athlete.
The athlete, Duncan Kennedy, a luge racer, had come to the aid of a black teammate who was being insulted by local skinheads.
Last week, a judge sentenced two of the assailants to prison.
The leader of the skinhead gang, who is 21, got 2 years 8 months, and a 16-year-old accomplice got one year.
Both had been on parole.
The sentences suggested that the German justice system, sometimes criticized for excessive lenience, is taking a tougher line toward racist criminals.
Later in the week, the police raided a neo-Nazi telephone service that offered recorded messages defending the convicted skinheads.


Korean Food Wholesaler Blocked Amid Fears of Retailing
A Korean food distributor's plan to build a vast wholesale warehouse in College Point has been rejected by the city amid concern by local merchants -- many of them Korean grocers and shop owners -- that the site would actually be used for retail sales.
The request by Rhee Brothers Oriental Food Corporation, which is based in Maryland, to convert a vacant building at 131-01 39th Avenue into a wholesale operation, was recently turned down by the Department of Buildings.


Discord in an 'Oasis of Tranquillity'
Residents of Turtle Bay Gardens are vigilantly protective of their neighborhood.
One of the last enclaves of old town houses around the United Nations, the historic district consists of two rows of stately 1860's brownstones, on 48th and 49th Streets between Second and Third Avenues.
Residents include the likes of Katharine Hepburn, Stephen Sondheim and the Consul General of Ukraine.
Yet all is not peaceful around the courtyard garden shared by the 20 town houses: the community has been galvanized by plans for a new restaurant next to the nearby Box Tree, a Zagat favorite for Continental cuisine.


Rebuilding of Streets Delayed
The city has delayed a much-awaited plan to rebuild a deteriorating network of streets in the heart of the fading Hunts Point peninsula, prompting an outcry of frustration and dismay from leaders in the neighborhood's struggling business district.
The $5.6 million project was scheduled to begin this spring after years of planning and pressure from civic leaders, merchants and other residents.
But the City Department of Transportation has decided to delay the project until 1997, citing fiscal constraints.


Corrections
The Executive Computer column last Sunday, about the growing corporate use of color printing, referred incorrectly to the QMS Inc. color printer used by Solar Turbines Inc. of San Diego.
The company uses the Color Script 100, not the newer Color Script Laser 1000.
It is the older QMS printer that was described as "much more expensive to run" than competing models.


I Read the News Today, Oh Boy. . . .


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
111.55
111.00
125.04
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7540
1.7500
1.5900
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3116
1.3244
1.2809
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4920
1.4930
1.5305
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$381.50
$389.50
$328.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Temple's Transformation
Since 1938, the short building with the wood-frame canopy at Riverside Drive and 105th Street has been the metropolitan area's only church of the Jodo Shinshu sect, the largest in Japanese Buddhism.
About two-thirds of the church's 200 members are Japanese-American, but there are also black and white members, some of them Hispanic.
They live throughout the five boroughs and in New Jersey, Long Island and Westchester County.


THE ART OF FORGETTING
It is regrettable that Anton Shammas adopts the idioms of Jewish history (i.e. diaspora, return, expulsion) but ignores the lessons of Jewish compassion, reality and practicality.


Rocks and Brooms on the Ice? It Must Be the Sport of Curling
TO the casual observer -- which is just about everybody -- the sport of curling looks like a group of people hurling rocks on ice and then, using very unlikely pieces of sports equipment, brooms, furiously sweeping the ice in the vicinity of the sliding rocks.
But as members of New Jersey's two curling clubs know, the rocks are really 42-pound granite stones imported from Scotland, where the sport originated some 400 years ago.


Tip O'Neill Gave Leadership as House Speaker; No Dove on Vietnam
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 7 obituary article on Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. omits the important fact that he was not an early opponent of the Vietnam War.
Indeed, he was a strong supporter of the war.


Commercial Property/Corporate Headquarters; Marketing Opulent Waifs Abandoned by Austerity
THROUGHOUT the metropolitan New York region, one can see opulent corporate headquarters buildings that now stand as reminders of the halcyon days when a booming economy led companies like Nestle, the American Can Company and Exxon Chemical to build monuments to themselves and their achievements.
Many of these buildings are now only partially occupied or, in some cases, vacant, victims of corporate relocations, downsizing and a generally more austere corporate climate.


Terry A. Collins, Eric J. Tveter
Terry Anne Collins, a daughter of Joyce Collins of Walnut Creek, Calif., was married yesterday to Eric John Tveter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Tveter of Floral Park, Queens.
The Rev.
William J. McIlmoyl performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church in St.
Helena, Calif.
Ms.
Collins, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a a mergers and acquisitions consultant.
She graduated from the Academy of Art in San Francisco.


For Handy People Who Just Have to Put a Sharp Edge on It
THE principle of sharpening tools and cutlery is simple.
Grind one or both sides of a blade so that the surfaces meet at an angle.
But the catches include which angle is correct, how to hold the blade steady and which sharpening device is the best.
For most ordinary people, the simplest and least expensive device is a combination oilstone called a coarse-fine India stone.
This is a man-made block of aluminum-oxide abrasives.


Wall Street; A Newsletter to Track T. Rowe Funds
THE 56 mutual funds sold by T. Rowe Price will come under new scrutiny this month with the launch of The Independent T. Rowe Price Adviser, the first monthly newsletter devoted to the funds' goings-on.
The editor, Daniel P. Wiener, just published his first set of model portfolios.
Initial advice: growth fund investors should divide 60 percent of their money evenly between the Blue Chip and Mid-Cap Growth funds, and 40 percent evenly between the Science &amp; Technology and International Discovery funds.
Mr.
Wiener's venture may not be wholly welcomed by T. Rowe.
Vanguard sued Mr.
Wiener last February demanding he drop the word "Vanguard" from his title.
Thus, the "The Vanguard Adviser" became "The Independent Adviser for Vanguard Investors." Vanguard said it was a matter of protecting a trademark.
Mr.
Wiener said it had more to do with some of the dirt he dug up.
As for T. Rowe, a diplomatic spokesman said, "There are shareholders I'm sure who would welcome third-party analysis." SUSAN ANTILLA


Battle Gear
Bone-chilling temperatures tested many a New Yorker's fashion imagination last week.
The woman at left kept warm in a tie-dyed down coat.
The one at right wore a molded velour mask hat.
While some pulled on knitted ski masks, others, who would not compromise their style, favored thigh-high boots and leggings.


Just Locks
WHEN Bob Marley, the reggae star, shook his long, matted ropelike tresses, scores of black Americans ran to the sink to imitate his dreadlock look.
What they discovered, however, was that dreadlocks, a hairstyle associated with the Rastafarian religion, wasn't like the Afro, which involves simply washing the hair and letting it dry and assume its natural texture.
Dreadlocks required years of not combing one's hair, letting it mat naturally.
Today, dreadlocks are being worn every which way but loose.
While Mr.
Marley's look is still a favorite among many black men and women, dreads are also short and spiky or tightly coiled.
The authors Toni Morrison and Alice Walker and young recording artists like members of Arrested Development and Toni Tone Tony wear the new style, and it does not carry the same image asMarley's dreadlocks, which some people saw as militant.


Florida Hopes Fears Will Fade From Memory
FLORIDA'S $31 billion a year tourist industry began 1994 hoping that the memory of violent attacks on visitors to the state, including the murders of 10 foreigners, might finally be receding.
The results for 1993 were "clearly mixed," said Mayco Villafana of the Greater Miami Convention and Visitor's Bureau.
The state estimates that the number of visitors to Florida increased by 1.9 percent, to about 41.3 million, but acknowledges that the bulk of that growth came before September, when the killing of first a German and then a British tourist produced a wave of canceled trips in markets around the world.
Europeans in particular still appear to be nervous about vacationing in Florida, especially Miami.
Robert Todak, general manager of Art Deco Hotels, a group of four hotels in the chic South Beach area of Miami Beach, said there "has been a definite decrease in European travel into South Beach" in the last quarter of 1993.
"Primarily we deal with European tour operators, and they are down." Tourism officials suggest that not just violence, but unfavorable changes in exchange rates and an economic slowdown in Europe have also contributed to the drop.


On the Street


THE BOTTOM LINE
Erica Abeel's Hers column "The Bottom Line" (Dec. 26) made me see red.
I'm all for Eros, but not at another's expense.
And don't write me off as one of those "married for life" women from middle America.
I've lived and loved in cities all over the world.


Changing of the Guard: The Whitman Team
Christine Todd Whitman will have 20 Cabinet members, one more than Gov.
Jim Florio.
She is restoring the chairman of the Board of Regulatory Commissioners.
Mrs.
Whitman has not announced her appointments for Corrections Commissioner, Adjutant General, Health Commissioner, Insurance Commissioner, Labor Commissioner and Public Advocate.
Cabinet members are paid $100,225 a year.
ELIZABETH RANDALL, Banking Commissioner AGE: 40.
HOMETOWN: Westwood.
N.J.
BACKGROUND: State assemblywoman, 1985-1991.
Partner, Randall, Randall &amp; Stevens of Westwood, March 1984-February 1991.
Has served in a variety of legal jobs in state and local government including assistant counsel to former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, Assistant Essex County prosecutor, municipal prosecutor in Park Ridge, and borough attorney in Hillsdale.
She has been Bergen County counsel since 1991.
FAMILY: Single.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a letter to the editor on Jan. 2 about Alice K. Turner's book "The History of Hell" misspelled the name of a 20th-century Eastern Orthodox theologian who wrote about hell.
He was Paul Evdokimov.


China Steps Up Air Security
After 10 hijackings and a couple of attempted ones last year, all to Taiwan, China is still scrambling to improve its aviation safety record.
Security officials recently stepped up luggage searches on southbound domestic flights and have issued tougher regulations to keep knives, toy guns and other items that might be used in a hijacking out of air travelers' hand luggage.
In addition, the Civil Aviation Administration of China announced last month that a new safety campaign, the third in eight months, would include spot checks of airline pilots' flying skills.
Passengers flying on southbound routes, where most of the hijackings occur, will have their luggage searched before they board.


Becoming a Pacifist
To the Editor:
I appreciate the positive analysis of my book "Reconciliation Road: A Family Odyssey of War and Honor" (Jan. 2).
However, the review states, "By the time of Mr. Marshall's graduation and his commission as a second lieutenant in 1969, he had become a pacifist." This is not true -- if it were, I would never have accepted my commission.


Seeing the Light


Seton Hall Falls Because Its Shots Don't
The Seton Hall crowd cheered for "dee-fense," the Pirates' strength this season, but the needed call was for offense, more of it.
Seton Hall came up short near the end today in another tingling Big East contest and lost to Syracuse, 78-74, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Orangemen, steady in overcoming foul troubles, improved their overall record to 12-2 and moved to 5-2 in the Big East.
Their conference losses were to Boston College, by 17 points on Dec. 8, and to Connecticut, the leader whom they trail by one and a half games.


New Stores To Serve Retail Desert
Since the 1970's, when arson fires raged through the streets of Bushwick, destroying as many as 500 wood-frame buildings a year, hundreds of new and rehabilitated homes have been completed along with thousands of units of public housing.
But retail development has lagged, forcing residents to go to other communities to find coin-operated laundries and dry cleaners and to buy simple necessities like aspirin and disposable diapers.
Next month, weather permitting, construction will begin on five storefronts on vacant city-owned lots along Broadway between Gates Avenue and Cornelia Street.
The tenants will include a currency exchange, a pizzeria, a coin laundry and Saverama, a variety store.
The developer, Broadway Bushwick Builders, is also negotiating with other possible tenants, including Rainbow Shops, a national clothing chain, and Blimpie's, the fast-food chain.


Let Memory Speak
BEYOND DESPAIR  Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth.
By Aharon Appelfeld.
Translated by Jeffrey M. Green. 80 pp.
New York: Fromm International. $17.50.
UNTO THE SOUL  By Aharon Appelfeld.
Translated by Jeffrey M. Green. 211 pp.
New York: Random House. $21.


Generosity of Young Helps the Needy
At an age when many of their peers have nothing more serious to think about than comic-book plots or homework, New York City children are confronted daily with the difficult realities of urban life.
Seeing the suffering around them, and encouraged by their parents, many children have been digging into their Christmas or Hanukkah money, their allowances or money they have found, to contribute to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


In a Painter's Writings, a New Way of Thinking About Size
IT is raining outside, but it is absolutely silent inside the East Hampton living space of Mercedes Matter.
It is a strange sensation, to be able to see the rain and not hear it.
The darkness is dropping rapidly as we study three large paintings hung on the wall opposite us, about 20 feet from the table where we are having our tea.
They are still lifes of skulls and bones, but all but the faintest trace of realism has disappeared from them as the sense of relational distance and subtle unveiling of color is heightened, as some other more deeply internal statement is made.
They are much worked over, but not in the way that would imply the thickening of paint, the touch finely rendered and careful.
So that I am not surprised, when I first ask Mercedes to talk about her art, that she apologizes that she is basically nonverbal, and asks instead to read a passage from Flaubert, so well known for his care and his need to rewrite and rewrite, until finally he reaches, as nearly as possible, that very reality -- which may not be reality at all -- he perceives.


Gaza Doctor, an Old Ally, Confronts Arafat in P.L.O.
In October 1991, Dr.
Haidar Abdel-Shafi became a familiar face to many around the world when he took his seat at a huge conference table in Madrid.
Across the way sat the one man in the room who had perhaps even bushier eyebrows than he, Yitzhak Shamir, then Israel's Prime Minister.
Mr.
Shamir looked like someone who would have given his soul to be anywhere but at that opening session of the Middle East peace talks -- and certainly not within glowering distance of the Gaza surgeon who led the Palestinian team and helped found the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Kerrigan to Get an Update From Officials
State and Federal officials investigating the assault on Nancy Kerrigan are meeting this weekend in Los Angeles with the figure skater to review developments in the case.
The meeting does not necessarily indicate that authorities have concluded their efforts in determining how many people were involved in the Jan. 6 attack in Detroit.
So far, four men have been charged, including the former husband of Tonya Harding, Kerrigan's chief American rival.


Dummies Get Smarter for Car-Crash Tests
The auto industry, working to sell more cars by selling safety, is about to send something new hurtling down the test track: a pregnant crash dummy.
The addition of a woman seven months pregnant to the dummy lineup represents a new era of precision in safety tests by the auto industry, now that improvements like air bags, antilock brakes and energy-absorbing car frames allow people to survive crashes that a decade ago would have killed them.
Changes in Research
General Motors, the progenitor of the pregnant dummy, is also a sponsor, with Ford and the Federal Department of Transportation, of crash tests on human cadavers.
For years, technicians tested how much force it took to break a rib and how much deceleration a body could stand before internal organs were torn loose.
Now they study questions like how far a foot can bend in a crushed car before the ankle snaps or the ligaments tear.


On a Roll


The World; Living With North Korea's Bomb
IT has been 28 days since the world was informed that North Korea probably has developed one or two nuclear bombs.
Yet Asia has not been engulfed by the war that once seemed imaginable the moment President Clinton received such news from the Central Intelligence Agency.
The Pentagon has not gone on alert.
North Korea is not menacing its neighbors with nuclear threats.
Japan and South Korea have not declared that they, too, will become nuclear powers.
They seem vigilant, but calm.


Postcards From the Sun
Like anything exotic, tropical fruit in the winter shocks first and lures later.
The soft, satiny flesh of a papaya, banana or mango summons a world that is neither cold nor brittle.
Their flavors, like those of pineapples, litchi nuts and grapefruits, are peregrines from a place in the sun.
Whether honeyed or musky, tart or exhaustingly sweet, tropical fruit commands a mood change, first in the palate, though it doesn't necessarily stop there.
A piece of pineapple can provide comfort on a chilly evening.
The fruit's thick, prickly skin isn't unlike the bundling that mere mortals assume, layer by layer against the frost.
But the fruit manages to maintain a certain sweet suppleness beneath the armor.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
SUNSET PARK Finding a company to build motors and a propeller for the Gowanus Canal's "flushing" tunnel, which opened in 1911 and broke down decades ago, is more difficult and expensive than city Department of Environmental Protection officials expected.
On Jan. 11, the office received one bid to build the machinery and at $2 million it was $1.2 million more than was budgeted for the project, which is part of a $5 million plan to clean the canal to attract developers.
Officials envision a fashionable waterfront establishment with marinas, restaurants, shops and condominiums running along the canal, which has long been considered an open sewer flowing through an industrial area.


O'Neal Sinks Everything But Foul Shots for Magic
Magic 121, 76ers 112
Shaquille O'Neal was 15 of 16 from the field -- mostly on dunks -- and scored 33 points last night to lead the Orlando Magic to a 121-112 victory over the 76ers in Philadelphia.


Dan Bailey; Teacher, 51
Dan Bailey, a special education teacher in Manhattan public schools and a founding director of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, died yesterday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 51.
The cause was AIDS, said Joanna Halteman, his sister.


New &amp; Noteworth Paperbacks
THE ISLAND: Three Tales By Gustaw Herling.
Translated by Ronald Strom.
Penguin, $9.95.
This Polish author's stories take place in his adopted country of Italy, ranging in time from the Middle Ages to just after World War II.
Although they reveal atrocities resulting from human pride and selfishness, they also illustrate the possibilities for redemption.
Selected as one of the best books of 1993 by the editors of The Book Review, this collection belongs "to the canon of great works of literature," Louis Begley said here.


Life Upon the Frozen Marshes


SUNDAY, January 23, 1994; Worth Thinking About
"It is a question of different sensibilities. The United States is a market that reasons in terms of profit. We in France are aware of profit but not obsessed by it. We are driven by intangible values. That difference is clear in the movies we make." -- DANIEL TOSCAN DU PLANTIER, PRESIDENT OF UNIFRANCE, A MARKETING ASSOCIATION


Editors' Note
An article in the Westchester Weekly today about political power in Albany mentions Saul Weprin, the Assembly Speaker, and his influence on legislation.
The section went to press before the announcement on Thursday that Mr.
Weprin had suffered a stroke, raising doubts about his ability to continue in office.


Erick Hawkins, Ever the Poet, Tries A New Vocabulary
ON A RECENT WINTRY evening, Erick Hawkins sat at attention in a brightly lighted practice studio at Hunter College, watching his dancers try out new endings for "Each Time You Carry Me This Way," a dance he choreographed last year.
One of the dancers remembered a partnering step with a skitter, originally devised for the dance but never used.
Mr.
Hawkins liked the step, so the dancers played with it, experimenting with footwork and inventing different ways of leaning into each other.
When Mr.
Hawkins saw a version he wanted, he had several couples dance it in unison, then in succession.
Finally, he asked to see just one couple perform the step.
"I think that's it," he exclaimed, a hint of excitement in his voice.


Why Classics Should Never Be a Penance
IF EVER THERE WAS A CLASSIC that could benefit from some exuberant, freewheeling interpretation, it's "The Government Inspector," Nikolai Gogol's venomously satiric sendup of bribery and rampant self-interest, set in a dreary provincial town in Czarist Russia 160 years ago.
I don't mean that it should be transposed to Chicago and played on roller skates.
The tale of how a well-dressed boob from St.
Petersburg swindles a bunch of pompous, small-time bureaucratic swindlers can be funny on its own.
It needn't be rewritten for our time.
Yet to present it with little sense of its clownish humor is to embalm it long before it's dead.
This is more or less what the National Actors Theater has done to "The Government Inspector" in the current production now at the Lyceum.
Starring Tony Randall, the company's founder and artistic director, and directed by Michael Langham, its artistic adviser, the old play just lies there, unrevived.


Meanwhile, on the Extremely Late Show
TED HAS ALREADY SIGNED OFF and David and Jay are winding down for the night when Thalia Assuras is revving up.
She is on the phone, checking story lineups.
She is riffling through a script.
She is on the phone again.
She is drinking strong, strong coffee -- cup No. 3 or 4 of the 10 or so she guzzles between dusk and dawn.
"And then," she says, "I start on the decaf."
It's another caffeine-fueled night at "World News Now," the late-late ABC News program that has made Ms.
Assuras a kind of Linda Ellerbee for the 90's.
Ms.
Ellerbee developed something close to a cult following on "NBC News Overnight," which went on the air in 1982 and was canceled in 1983 because it was costing $3.5 million a year.


Traveling Far and Lying Low to Get Nancy Kerrigan
On a freezing night two weeks ago, Shane Stant checked into a budget motel on the edge of Detroit's main airport, rented a couple of X-rated movies and settled in for the final phase of a calculated mission to injure one of America's top figure skaters.
The account of the attack was made public by investigators this week, who said Stant, a 22-year-old weight lifter and unemployed bar bouncer, was promised tens of thousands of dollars to track down the skater, Nancy Kerrigan.
And like a heavy from an old gangster movie, he agreed to club her in the knees to prevent her from competing in the United States Figure Skating Championships, being held in Detroit.


Susanne Jenkins, Edward B. Carey
Susanne Delatour Jenkins, a daughter of Mrs.
Kent R. Costikyan Jr. of Darien, Conn., and Andrew S. Jenkins of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Edward Bryce Carey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Carey of Norwood, Mass.
The Rev.
Beverly Edwards performed the Congregational ceremony in the Acoaxet Chapel in Westport, Mass.
Mrs.
Carey, 29, is an artist and sculptor.
She graduated from Bennington College.
Her father founded Jenkins, Covington Inc. in New York, a production company for television commercials.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Dr.
Beeckman J. Delatour, was the director of the American Hospital of Paris.


Nicole Harris, Robert Kramer
Nicole Harris, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Harris of Miami, was married there last evening to Robert Marc Kramer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Kramer of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Edwin Farber officiated at the Turnberry Isle Country Club.
Mrs.
Kramer, 25, is an advertising sales representative at New York magazine.
She graduated from Boston University.


For Handy People Who Just Have to Put a Sharp Edge on It
THE principle of sharpening tools and cutlery is simple.
Grind one or both sides of a blade so that the surfaces meet at an angle.
But the catches include which angle is correct, how to hold the blade steady and which sharpening device is the best.
For most ordinary people, the simplest and least expensive device is a combination oilstone called a coarse-fine India stone.
This is a man-made block of aluminum-oxide abrasives.


The Pilates Method And a Trademark Feud
This letter is regarding the Jan. 9 article "Old Fitness Plan Finds a New Clientele." The Institute for the Pilates Method is a membership organization for Pilates teachers worldwide, and we wish to call your attention to the following information.
There are a minimum of 500 Pilates Method studios in the United States -- at least 30 in the New York City area alone.
Institute Advisory Board Member Kathleen Stanford Grant, the only individual ever certified by Mr.
Pilates, taught Pilates at Bendel's for 16 years and has been teaching at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts since 1988.
Additionally, there are more than 50 Pilates Method studios in Canada, Europe, Singapore and Thailand.


Health Concerns Mounting As Tents Rise After Quake
Hundreds of green canvas tents went up today in parks around the city as thousands of earthquake refugees began a new routine, cooking breakfast on campfires, combing their hair in their car mirrors and heading off in search of housing.
With rain forecast for Sunday, Henry G. Cisneros, the Housing Secretary, announced on Friday that six tent cities would be opened in North Hollywood and the San Fernando Valley, where the earthquake was centered, despite a debate over whether they would become a long-term problem for the city.


A British Figure Skater With Roots in Greenwich
THE ultimate hurdle to the 1994 Winter Olympics was something figure skater Charlene Von Saher of Greenwich never envisioned.
Nervousness or an opponent, perhaps.
Landing a triple loop, more likely.
But the flu?
Who could have imagined.
Yet when it struck the British-born Von Saher after skating the performance of her life Dec. 8 during the short program at the People's Phone British Championships (the British national competition) in Basingstoke, England, Von Saher once again shared something with Nancy Kerrigan, who was on a quest to defend her own national championship two weeks ago.
Just as Kerrigan cried out "Why me? Why now?" after being struck on her right knee, Von Saher uttered the same, one month earlier and one ocean away.


It's Antique-Hunting Season
Preview of the Winter Antiques Show, Seventh Regiment Armory, Jan. 20.


34 Groups Are Awarded Grants by Arts Council
THE Westchester Arts Council recently awarded $24,700 worth of grants to 34 organizations in an effort to support the arts at a grass-roots level.
The awards, called "Arts Alive," are meant to help make art accessible to audiences in their own communities.
"One of the things that people treasure and uphold in their everyday lives is the fact there is some beauty and art and culture available to them in their own communities," said Janet T. Langsam, executive director of the Westchester Arts Council.
"People want to live in a place where the arts are alive in their own backyard."


Rewriting Rules for East Side Avenues
AFTER eight years of study and debate, a major rezoning of the Upper East Side -- intended to curb growth, change building forms and bring an end to plazas that often seem to benefit developers more than anyone else -- will be taken up tomorrow by the City Council.
One measure, a remapping, would limit development potential by reducing the size of sites along the avenues on which the largest buildings are permitted.


O'Brien Apology Accepted
DAN O'BRIEN, the world champion decathlete, has been cleared of a misdemeanor charge of unlawful entry after apologizing to a man who said O'Brien had come into his Moscow, Idaho, apartment at 1:30 in the morning.
The police charged O'Brien on Tuesday after NICHOLAS LABEDZKI, a University of Idaho student, accused O'Brien of walking into his apartment on the morning of Jan. 11.


Q and A
Seeing the West by R.V.
Q.
Our family of three would like to camp through the West this summer, renting a motor home to tour Yellowstone National Park and travel up to Banff, Canada.
Do you have any information about a camper rental agency in, say, Spokane, Wash., or any other suitable city? -- Sally Conroy, Danbury, Conn.


When Bucking the Tide Pays Dividends
JONATHAN'S is not a slave to culinary fashions.
When the Huntington spot opened about 12 years ago, it was a shop featuring wonderful breads, organic vegetables, lovely cheese, desserts and an array of homemade salads.
Over the years it added a few cafe tables where weary shoppers could enjoy pastries and coffee or light meals.
Recently, Jonathan's bid farewell to its store and is now 100 percent restaurant.
About the same time the hottest trend in dining -- restaurants in the midst of markets -- mirrored Jonathan's old self.
Among the restaurant-markets is the highly regarded Mad. 61, which opened in the fall in the Barneys store on the East Side of Manhattan.


Queens Museum of Art Drives Into Cultural Crossroads
The Queens Museum of Art is entering the final stages of a three-year, $13.5 million overhaul, and officials are developing programs and exhibitions intended to draw new visitors from the borough's growing ethnic population.
Nearly half the museum's 20,000 square feet of exhibition space has already been renovated and opened, and the rest is scheduled to be ready later this year.
The 55-year-old building, one of the last vestiges of the 1939 World's Fair at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, is the borough's largest art museum.


The Nation; Once again, Capital Cry: Press Did It!
LIKE every other week in America, last week had its share of people vying for victimhood.
Lorena Bobbitt, on the eve of her acquittal, clutched a teddy bear and bouquet, and Tonya Harding skated on a rink of thin ice to smile up innocently at Diane Sawyer.
But out of all the would-be victims, the most peculiar was Bobby Ray Inman.
The Rose Garden announcement last month that Mr.
Inman was the President's choice for Defense Secretary caused this jaded capital to genuflect.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Ace Ltd., Bermuda, eight million common shares, 6.4 million in the United States and and Canada.
J.
P.
Morgan.


Gunmen in Colombia Kill as Many as 35 Leftists
Hooded gunmen killed as many as 35 people and wounded 8 others today in what the authorities described as an attack by Marxist guerrillas on political rivals.
In the country's worst massacre in five years, about 20 gunmen broke into a block party in Apartado, near the Caribbean, organized by Hope, Peace and Liberty, a leftist political party.
They surrounded the group and opened fire with automatic weapons, witnesses said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; When it comes to offbeat promotions to woo passengers, where will the airlines draw the line?
MAYBE it was the ugly-briefcase contest from Midway Airlines.
Or Northwest Airlines' offer of cheap flights to the Mall of America in Minneapolis for one-day shopping sprees.
Then again, maybe it was the way several carriers tried to upstage each other with fare deals on Elvis Presley's birthday.
At some point in the last few months, offbeat airline promotions hit a critical mass, delivering a clear message: In contrast to many airline chiefs who say their business is not fun anymore, marketing executives appear to be having a pretty good time churning out unusual promotions.


New Fertility Science vs. Old Double Standard; Responsible Decisions
To the Editor:
As the mother of a baby born by gestational surrogacy, I am often surprised and disturbed by the reaction surrounding "new reproductive technologies" (front page, Jan. 11).


Dozens of Islamic Rebel Suspects Slain by Algerian Death Squads
Pro-Government paramilitary death squads have killed dozens of suspected Muslim militants in Algeria in the last four months, according to Western diplomats, human rights officials and witnesses.
The death squads have emerged in response to violence by the militants, who have killed officials, intellectuals and members of the security forces as part of a campaign to topple the Government, the officials said.


McKie Leads Temple Past Scarlet Knights
Temple boasted two potential pro basketball draft picks.
The Owls were the second nationally ranked team Rutgers was facing within a few days.
And though playing at home, Rutgers had the look of a road team because its white jerseys weren't available.
And it was all too much, as the Scarlet Knights fell, 78-65, today to the Owls.


INSIDE
U.S. Presses Japan on Trade
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told Japan it must make concessions or the United States will take action to end the trade imbalance.
Page A3.
Giuliani, Con Brio
Callas or Tebaldi?
Bjoerling or Corelli?
Quizzed on his operatic tastes, Mayor Giuliani faced some tough political choices.
Page B1.
The Golden Globes
If the Foreign Press Association's awards are really an indication, this may be the year that Steven Spielberg wins an Oscar.
Page C11.


Depositors Cry Foul in the Sale of a Savings Bank
For 90 years, the merchants and workers of this quiet Southern town have stashed their spare dollars and sought home mortgages at the Graham Savings Bank, a depositor-owned savings and loan association here.
Now, in one of many deals reshaping the savings and loan industry, the board of the savings bank has sold it to a big bank in Durham, N.C.
The transaction enriched insiders -- the chairman obtained an arrangement worth up to 25 years' salary -- but infuriated many depositors, who contend that they were barely compensated for their stake in the institution.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
For companies from cruise lines to hotels, computer technology holds the promise of increasing their profits by allowing them to price their products much more efficiently than they ever could with just paper and pencil.
The idea is to raise prices when demand is highest, and set prices low enough to draw customers when demand is slack.
However, marketing experts warn that consumers may be irked by the change.  [ Page A1. ]


U.C.L.A. Next One Penciled In At No. 1
If the voters do right by the Bruins, the new No. 1 team in The Associated Press men's basketball poll, which will be released today, will be U.C.L.A. for the first time in a long time.
How long?
U.C.L.A. hasn't been in the top spot since January 1983.
The No. 2 Bruins defeated Arizona State, 98-81, in Los Angeles Saturday as Tyus Edney and Ed O'Bannon each scored 21 points.
U.C.L.A. (13-0) now leads the Pacific-10 Conference with a 6-0 record and is the only remaining undefeated team in Division I.


Mexican Army Is Said to Abuse Rebel Suspects
As fighting between peasant guerrillas and Government troops dies down in the southern state of Chiapas, the army is facing a growing chorus of accusations of torture, beatings and illegal arrests of suspected rebels from peasants, human rights investigators and others.
Many reported cases have come to light only in recent days as investigators succeeded in entering the state prison and some villages that were isolated after the fighting broke out on Jan. 1.


The Knicks Complete Their Lost Weekend
It was the Knicks' most deplorable loss of the season, for a number of reasons.
It happened at home.
It happened against the Philadelphia 76ers, a sub-.500 team that had lost eight consecutive games to New York.
And it happened not because the 76ers played an extraordinary game, but because the Knicks played as if they were in an emotional hangover from Friday's loss in Orlando.


Books of The Times; Pat Weaver on Yesterday, 'Today' and 'Tonight'
The Best Seat in the House  The Golden Years of Radio and Television  By Pat Weaver with Thomas M. Coffey  Illustrated. 276 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
Aside from being the father of Sigourney, Sylvester (Pat) Weaver is probably best known for his association with NBC-TV from 1949 through 1956, first as head of programming and later as network president.
In those roles he was responsible for creating programs like "Your Show of Shows," "Today" and "Tonight," among many others.


Review/Music; The Emerson Explores Late-Quartet Affinities
This seems to be the year for dual Beethoven and Shostakovich cycles.
The New York Philharmonic is juxtaposing the composers' symphonies, repeating a dual cycle that Kurt Masur presented in Leipzig in the mid-1970's.
And the Emerson String Quartet is exploring the late Beethoven and Shostakovich quartets in three concerts at the 92d Street Y. It offered the second installment on Saturday evening.
There are reasons these composers' works sit beside each other so easily.
Beethoven's revolutionary posturing and his image as a battler against Fate resonates with Shostakovich's lifelong battle with Soviet officialdom.
Such Romanticized biographical comparisons can be stretched only so far; but their quartets, particularly their late ones, are regarded as reliable mirrors of their innermost thoughts.


U.S. Agrees to Alter Patents' Period of Coverage
The United States has agreed to change its patent law to prevent patent holders from seeking royalties long after they first developed their inventions.
In an agreement with Japan that was signed here Thursday with little fanfare, the United States said it would adopt a system in which patents, once granted, would be valid until 20 years after the date on which they were filed.
Currently, American patents are valid for 17 years from the date they are granted.
The Administrative Factor
Occasionally, patents take a decade or two to be granted because they are held up in appeals and amendments in the Patent Office.
When this happens under the existing system, an inventor can obtain a 17-year monopoly on an invention made long ago and demand payments from companies that have long been using the technology on the assumption that it was not protected by patents.


Tradition vs. Mother Nature? It's No Contest


Governors' '94 Message: Crime, Crime and Crime
The issue of crime is sweeping the nation's statehouses, with governors sounding like tough-talking sheriffs as they declare that fighting violence is at the top of their legislative agendas.
A review of dozens of State of the State addresses delivered this month by Democrats and Republicans, in large states and small, finds similar if not identical themes.
The emphasis was more on locking up prisoners than on rehabilitation.
Again and again, the governors talked about cracking down on juvenile criminals.


TransCanada Pipe Line reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


They Snarl and They Swagger. Be Careful Not to Pet Them.
There is an old saying in pro football that goes something like this: If your dog can't bark, get his rear off the porch.
The Dallas Cowboys obviously have a bark as big as their bite.
They are front and center once again.
They are in the Super Bowl once again versus the Buffalo Bills in the first back-to-back rematch of the Big Show in National Football League history.


Syrian Capital Is Still a Center Of Exiles, Rebels and Secrets
For all the talk of peace with Israel and a new and more open relationship with the West, this ancient capital remains a city of shadows and secrets, not only for Palestinian guerrilla organizations but also for both exiled Arab leaders and rebellious Kurds.
They work from offices in dusty apartment buildings on the sidestreets of Damascus, where silent men keep constant watch.
The Syrian capital is home to 10 hard-line Palestinian groups, most of them driven from Beirut about a decade ago, as well as to Kurdish nationalists and Baghdad intellectuals who are bitterly opposed to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, and Shiite Muslims who are foes of the Government in Saudi Arabia.


Review/Music; Juilliard Again Keeps Its Focus Broad
Amid the extraordinary musical upheaval of the 1920's, European festivals like Donaueschingen, Baden-Baden and ISCM presented a rich cross section of new music of the day: a conglomeration of avant-garde and progressive styles, free of the severe ideological constraints that would limit similar events after the second world war.
One could hear Bartok, Berg and Weill next to more esoteric figures like Alois Haba and Josef Matthias Hauer.
Juilliard's annual Focus festivals, under the direction of Joel Sachs, deserve comparison to those pioneering efforts at musical open-mindedness.
Without following any one stylistic agenda, Mr.
Sachs tries to summon the strongest voices from the widest possible spectrum.
This year, the subject is almost impossibly broad: "Musical Worlds in Fusion," native cultures fusing with classical styles in Latin America, Africa, Europe, the former Soviet Union, Asia and the Pacific Rim.


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; After rebuilding from the quake, will networks think twice about new investments in Los Angeles?
THE earthquake in Los Angeles has left the television industry with the short-term question of how to finish the programs that were being prepared for the February sweep competition, and the long-term question of whether television production there has become a serious financial risk.
Even as some television executives vowed to keep meeting production schedules, others were questioning whether a traditional positive Hollywood attitude would be enough to overcome the costs of rebuilding stages and sets and the lingering psychological damage of a week's worth of shocks and aftershocks.


Smith (A.O.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Fireside Chatter
Last week this newspaper published a letter from Lawrence Cranberg, the president of a company called Texas Fireframe.
Those fires burning so brightly in the background of so many televised White House gatherings appeared to Mr.
Cranberg to result not from the interaction of wood and match but of match and gas jet.
The gas flames then play over simulated logs of ceramic or concrete to create "a fake wood fire," he conjectured.
If the White House needed coaching in building a true wood fire -- the kind that warms the soul as well as the feet -- he, Lawrence Cranberg, stood at the ready.
Mr.
Cranberg's letter promptly ignited an Administration response.
The White House has 27 fireplaces, a deputy press secretary said, and they all burn wood.
Furthermore, they all draw beautifully.
Not for the Clintons and their predecessors, the sudden billow of smoke, the float of ash and the coat of soot that are the occasional lot of most fireplace owners.
The White House fireplaces never fail to hail the chief.


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cunard Awards Job To Backer Spielvogel
Cunard, the cruise line that owns 15 ships including the Queen Elizabeth 2, has named Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide in New York to handle its worldwide account.
Billings were estimated at $20 million to $25 million.
The American portion of the account has been handled by Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York since 1988.
Elsewhere around the world, the account had been divided among various local agencies.


In Wine Circles, a Run for the Roses
Wine Enthusiast, a magazine published by a wine accessories catalogue house, is mounting a challenge to the dominance of Wine Spectator, the nation's biggest periodical for wine consumers.
Adam M. Strum, publisher of the Enthusiast, wants it to match or pass the circulation, advertising power and editorial influence of the Spectator.
Both magazines, redesigned and fatter, were reborn in October.


World Economies


Man Arrested in a Stabbing Admits to Others, Police Say
A man carrying a list of 17 people he said he intended to kill was arrested yesterday after stabbing a man who was walking with his wife and son in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
They said the suspect confessed to the crime and two other stabbings, saying that he was moved to attack people by their rudeness.
The suspect, Darryl Wright, 28, who was carrying a bloody hunting knife with a 7-inch blade when he was arrested, made no attempt at robbing any of the three stabbing victims, said Detective Mitch Kolpan, who interviewed Mr.
Wright.
"He said people bumped into him on a crowded street and never said 'Excuse me' or 'I'm sorry,' so he just took out his knife and stabbed them," Detective Kolpan said.
"He showed no remorse." A Love Letter and a List
In Mr.
Wright's pockets were several notes, including a rambling love letter to a singer, Janet Jackson, and others that said "kill everyone" and "attack on sight," said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a spokeswoman for the police.


In Wine Circles, a Run for the Roses
Wine Enthusiast, a magazine published by a wine accessories catalogue house, is mounting a challenge to the dominance of Wine Spectator, the nation's biggest periodical for wine consumers.
Adam M. Strum, publisher of the Enthusiast, wants it to match or pass the circulation, advertising power and editorial influence of the Spectator.
Both magazines, redesigned and fatter, were reborn in October.


Retail Giant Becomes a Job-Seeker's Oasis
Robert Eggleston was ready to move out of his home state last November after losing his job on the pit crew of an auto-racing team and finding no other work here in the Hudson Valley, despite 20 years' experience as an Army mechanic.
Then something changed his mind: the prospect of a full-time job at the new Wal-Mart that is to open in the spring in this town across the river from the Catskills.


CHRONICLE
For ROBERT TUGGLE , director of archives for the Metropolitan Opera, sorting through the costumes in the company's inventory is like rummaging through a closet deciding what clothes to give away -- but on a grand scale.
Mr.
Tuggle was approached recently by Lucinda Frame, a board member of the Metropolitan Opera Guild, who asked for costume donations for a benefit auction at Christie's on March 8.


Russian Reform, Gasping
Russian economic reform is barely breathing.
President Boris Yeltsin last week named a Cabinet stacked with officials who want to keep the economy firmly under government control.
Gone is Yegor Gaidar, the primary architect of market reform; gone, for now, is Boris Fyodorov, who, as Finance Minister, was the only Russian standing in the way of hyperinflation.
Mr.
Yeltsin appointed only one reformer, Anatoly Chubais, but he is rumored to want out in a few months after he completes his ambitious privatization program.
Running policy for Mr.
Yeltsin will be Gorbachev-era apparatchiks like Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, who proclaims an end to "the period of market romanticism," and Viktor Gerashchenko, head of the Central Bank, who wants to pump trillions of excess rubles into an economy already running inflation rates above 20 percent a month.
No wonder Mr.
Chernomyrdin promises to control inflation by "non-monetaristic" means.
Translation: government price controls.


Training Firm Acquired
Rowan &amp; Blewitt, a Washington issue and crisis communications firm, has acquired Executive Television Workshop of New York, which specializes in training executives in media and presentation skills.
The terms were not disclosed.
Rowan &amp; Blewitt was started in 1984 by Ford Rowan, the former NBC News correspondent, and Richard F. Blewitt, a former public relations officer.


Former Executive at Macy May Get Top Spot at A.&amp; S.
Federated Department Stores is expected to name a former executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company this week as the new chairman of its Abraham &amp; Straus department store chain, people in the retailing business said yesterday.
Chaim Y. Edelstein, the head of A.&amp; S. since 1985, resigned on Friday.
A spokeswoman for Federated said only that Mr.
Edelstein, 51, had resigned to pursue other interests and that a replacement would be named within a week.
Mr.
Edelstein could not be reached for comment.


Subway Policy Silences the Homeless
To the Editor:
In "Begging and Giving," your Jan. 12 editorial discussing the New York City Transit Authority's unsympathetic new policy toward subway panhandlers, you assert that, although people have the right to give to beggars, the homeless do not have a right to solicit in the subways.
After all, you explain, "the public has a right to its peace of mind." In this way, you are able to reconcile our desire to ride peacefully with our liberal guilt.
But you ignore the problems of the panhandlers themselves.


Hewlett-Packard to Get Big Pacific Bell Order
Pacific Bell has agreed to buy four powerful computers from the Hewlett-Packard Company to be used to deliver digital movies to thousands of homes in California, according to several people familiar with the agreement.
The machines, known as video servers, store video images as computer data.
They are a crucial component of the interactive systems that cable and telephone companies are planning to deploy to offer a range of features, including video on demand, home shopping, video games and educational programs.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Chicken Pox Loses  Jalen Rose had 28 points, and Juwan Howard, recovering from the chicken pox, contributed 20 as Michigan withstood a second-half comeback to defeat Illinois, 74-70, yesterday in Champaign, Ill.
The 15th-ranked Wolverines (12-4, 4-2 Big Ten) squandered a 13-point lead in the second half.
But each time the Fighting Illini (10-4, 3-2) seemed ready to take the lead, Rose made key plays. (AP) Memphis St. 62, Cincinnati 55: Cedric Henderson and Deuce Ford both scored 16 points as defense-minded Tigers stunned No. 19 Cincinnati in Memphis to end an eight-game losing streak.
Cincinnati (12-5, 1-2 Great Midwest) had a horrible night from the field, connecting on only 28 percent of its shots against a pressing zone defense. (AP) Georgia Tech 74, Virginia 70: In Atlanta, Travis Best and James Forrest scored 20 points apiece, leading No. 17 Georgia Tech over Virginia.
Forrest's short jumper in the lane with 4:42 remaining capped a 10-0 Tech run and gave the Yellow Jackets (11-5, 2-3 Atlantic Coast Conference) their largest lead of the game, 63-52, over Virginia (10-6, 4-2). (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Penn State Now 13-0  Katina Mack and Shelby Thayer scored 16 points apiece, and No. 3 Penn State took advantage of 30 turnovers to beat Michigan, 97-53, at Ann Arbor, Mich., yesterday and remain undefeated.
Seton Hall (14-2, 7-1 Big East) built its lead on runs of 10-2 and 8-0 in the first half. (AP) N.B.A.
A Big Assist  Glen Rice scored 17 of his 21 points in the first quarter and Steve Smith had a career-high 15 assists last night as the Miami Heat ended a seven-game losing streak with a 113-80 victory over the Washington Bullets in Miami.
Heat coach Kevin Loughery won his 600th game. (AP) ALPINE SKIING  Girardelli Breaks the Ice  Marc Girardelli of Luxembourg, the defending World Cup overall champion, posted his first cup triumph of the season yesterday in a super-giant slalom in Wengen, Switzerland.
Girardelli was timed in 1 minute 41.30 seconds in the final Super G race before the Olympics. (AP) Schneider Takes Cup Lead: Vreni Schneider of Switzerland took the overall World Cup lead with a slalom victory, the 48th cup victory of her career and sixth in a row on the tricky, icy Maribor hill in Slovenia.
Schneider edged Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden and Urska Hrovat of Slovenia with a total time of 1:47.94.(AP) LUGE  Prock Takes Title  Markus Prock of Austria, the 1992 Olymic silver medalist, won the men's title yesterday at the European luge championships in Konigssee, Germany.
Prock, the four-time overall World Cup champion, had the best times in both heats and finished with a combined time of 1 minute 35.907 seconds. (AP) YACHTING  Closest Race Ever  The 3,272-nautical mile third leg of the Whitbread Round the World Challenge was the closest in race history, with just over two minutes separating the top two finishers yesterday.
Grant Dalton's maxi ketch New Zealand Endeavour was first into Auckland, New Zealand, 2 minutes 12 seconds ahead of Chris Dickson's Tokio, a Whitbread 60 yacht.
Three hours behind, Winston, skippered by Dennis Conner and Brad Butterworth, won the tight battle for third over Yamaha and Galicia 93 Pescanova. (AP) GOLF  Magee Wins by 2  Andrew Magee's final round of 67 on the par-72 Tucson National course produced an 18-under-par 270 and a 2-shot victory yesterday at the Northern Telecom Open.
Jay Don Blake, Vijay Singh, Steve Stricker and Loren Roberts, whose 64 was the day's low round, had 272's. (AP)


Bratton Puts Focus on Beat For Shake-Up
Saying he was discouraged at seeing some officers on beats "looking bored to tears," Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has declared that his promised reorganization of the Police Department will reach down to the foot officer.
And he called on officers to be more aggressive in confronting even minor quality-of-life problems.
Mr.
Bratton, who begins his third week as Commissioner this week, promised that in the next few days he would announce a major shake-up of his executive staff and speed programs to deal with "issues of fear" like panhandlers, squeegee men, drugs, guns and violence in schools, and even fighting truancy.


Critic's Notebook; As Shadows Fall, Cozy Electronic Companionship
Leaping to the defense of local news programs is like diving into a shallow and polluted pool, but as nature teaches, nutrients are often found amid muck.
Lately, maybe because of the weather, I have been warmed by a community spirit that keeps the hours from seeming too dark as afternoon turns into evening.
Snow, sleet or frost, viewers at home and reporters sliding around out there are allied against the elements.
No, none of the laments you have read in this corner or elsewhere are about to be withdrawn.
The programs still trade in mayhem and mawkishness, in the five boroughs and beyond.
Where freakery calls, local news has the reach of CNN.
Travel budgets are busted for a Bobbitt.


Spielberg Gets Golden Globes in Two Categories
Five days after a devastating earthquake struck Los Angeles, the folks in Hollywood did exactly what was expected of them: they put on their best clothes and went to an awards party.
The 51st annual Golden Globes presentations on Saturday night, an annual rite that is often predictive of the Academy Awards, was gripped this year by the impact of last Monday morning's earthquake.
Some expected guests, like Kirstie Alley and Arsenio Hall, canceled because their homes were severely damaged.
Others, like Debra Winger and Tim Robbins, chose not to fly in from New York.
Many people seemed nervous.


Skating Officials Still Waiting
Figure-skating officials are still in a holding pattern concerning the case of Tonya Harding as their deadline for making a decision about her Olympic eligibility approaches a week from today.
"We're reviewing our options and just waiting," said Claire Ferguson, president of the United States Figure Skating Association.
"Information is ever changing. At this point, we're not condemning her."


The State of the Speech
In his State of the Union Message, President Clinton will try to appeal to middle-class voters by focusing on crime and health, aides say.
Page B6.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Understudy Helps The Cowboys Win
BERNIE KOSAR doesn't know why the American Football Conference has lost nine straight Super Bowls.
I've got my own theories, but they have more to do with jinxes and justice than with head-punch-knuckle football reality.
Kosar merely said, "I hope it's 10." He's been out of the American Conference for half a season and already he's a turncoat.
And a happy turncoat.
Kosar came off the bench to play quarterback for the Cowboys when Troy Aikman suffered a concussion yesterday, and he held the team together for a 38-21 victory over San Francisco.


Cowboys, Bills In a Rematch


Treasury Plans Auctions of Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week consists of today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and the auction of two- and five-year notes tomorrow and Wednesday, respectively.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.94 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.10 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a rate to yield 4.10 percent; the five-year note at a rate to yield 5.05 percent.


Bridge
The world's strongest pairs contest, perhaps the strongest ever, ended yesterday afternoon in a victory for a star Norwegian pair.
The Cap Volmac World Top Tournament, played in The Hague, was won by Tor Helness and Geir Helgemo.
They were members of the Norwegian team that placed second in the World Team Championship in Santiago, Chile, four months ago.
Helgemo, at 23, is without doubt the world's best young player.
In the last year his other successes include second place in the World Junior Team Championship and third in the European Championships.
About half the contestants were current or former world champions.
The standings in the field of 16 pairs were: 1st, Helness and Helgemo, 890 victory points; 2d, Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, United States, 839; 3d, Alain Levy and Herve Mouiel, France, 807; 4th, Tony Forrester and Andy Robson, Britain, 784; 5th, Paul Chemla and Michel Perron, France; 6th, Enri Leufkens and Berry Westra, Netherlands, 772; 7th, Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, United States; 8th, David Berkowitz and Larry Cohen, United States.
The defending champions, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, were 10th with 757.


Chicago President Quits DDB Needham
Susan Gillette, president of DDB Needham Worldwide's Chicago office, is, as expected, relinquishing her job and significantly cutting back her time at the agency.
As a result, the agency's top management is being realigned into a team structure.
The agency, in a statement on Friday, said Ms.
Gillette, 43, wanted "to spend more time with her family." For months, trade publications have reported that Ms.
Gillette had been seeking to reduce her role for personal reasons.
Dorothy Denzler, a spokeswoman for DDB Needham Chicago, said Ms.
Gillette, who was not available for comment, did not plan to return to the agency full time.


New Fertility Science vs. Old Double Standard; Creating Life
To the Editor:
Although I am pro-choice, the experimentation with aborted fetuses that you report in "Fetal Ovary Transplant Is Envisioned" (news article, Jan. 6) seems to me a bizarre misuse of our medical technology.
Ethically, the concept of implanting fetal ovaries in infertile women goes beyond saving lives and moves into the creation of life.


Tranmire Dead at 90; Fought Link to Europe
Lord Tranmire, a prominent British Conservative who opposed Britain's membership in the Common Market, died Jan. 17.
He was 90.
Lord Tranmire, who was born Robin Turton, was an extraordinarily durable Member of Parliament, for the Thirsk area in North Yorkshire, from 1929 until he retired from his seat in 1974.
He liked to say that a member should be true to "principles first, country second, then party and constituents."
He was a joint parliamentary Under Secretary to the Foreign Office in 1954 and 1955 and Minister of Health from 1955 to 1957.
He was made a life peer, a baron, in 1974.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
Dec.
Consumer Confidence . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday
Gross Domestic Product . . . 4th Qtr.


Can Clamor for Change Be Stilled in Japan?
The defeat of Japanese electoral reforms on Friday did not just crush the ambitions of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and his awkward coalition: it also blocked the complex political revolution that he had helped set loose.
It remains unlikely, though, that the forces pushing for change will be turned back entirely.


A Reprieve Promised From Weeks of Freezing Temperatures
Weary from weeks of frigid temperatures, residents in the New York City metropolitan area huddling on street corners, scurrying down sidewalks and ducking into restaurants yesterday said they had one thing to look forward to -- the promise of warmer weather today.
"It's going to be in the 50's this week!" exclaimed Arthur Simons, a 59-year-old lawyer, half-jokingly after finishing a three-mile afternoon jog through Central Park for which he was bundled, head to toe.


AT CULTISTS' TRIAL, FIGHTS AND TEARS
The second week in the trial of 11 Branch Davidians accused of murder, conspiracy and firearms violations saw squabbling among defense lawyers and testimony from Federal agents who described the deaths of colleagues in a chaotic gun battle that erupted when they tried to arrest cult members last February.
Defense efforts to portray the gunfight at the cult's compound outside Waco, Tex., as an act of self-defense against a law-enforcement agency that was out of control were countered by agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms who uniformly talked of being "ambushed."


Abroad at Home; Tough but Smart
Kathleen Brown wants to be the third California governor in the Brown family.
But she comes across as very different from her father Pat, an old-fashioned liberal, and her brother Jerry, a cold futurist.
She is the essence of the New Democrat, pro-business, tough on crime and other problems: "Tough but smart," she says repeatedly as we talk in her State Treasurer's office.


Bentsen Warns Japan on Stalemate in Trade Talks
Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen warned Tokyo today that if it did not make concessions in trade talks with Washington, the United States would consider other measures for dealing with the huge trade imbalance with Japan.
In a hastily arranged stopover in Tokyo at the close of his Asian tour, Mr.
Bentsen met separately with Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii to deliver a personal message from President Clinton -- that progress in the so-called Framework trade talks of the last six months has been insufficient.


Time Inc. Considers Starting a Magazine for Gay Readers
Time Inc.
Ventures, the division of Time Inc. that develops new magazines, is looking into the possibility of starting a publication aimed at gay and lesbian readers.
The concept was brought to the division by Maer Roshan, the former editor in chief of the short-lived QW, a magazine for gay men and lesbians that closed in late 1992 after its principal backer died of AIDS.
The proposed magazine would include news, features and profiles, and would aim to encompass the spectrum of gay political opinion.


Rebuilding L.A.'s Transportation
The secret is out.
Los Angeles does have a mass-transit system, and it works.
The earthquake has now driven tens of thousands of commuters to give it a try.
It is hard to think now of any good that might rise from the rubble, while the city is still in shock.
But if the San Francisco-Oakland earthquake in 1989 is any guide, thousands of Angelenos will never again commute by car.
Their switch to mass transit will make Southern California a better place to live and work.
In this tragedy there is opportunity.
BART, the Bay Area Rapid Transit rail system, says 20 percent of the daily riders it gained when the Bay Bridge was out are still riding its trains.


In Wine Circles, a Run for the Roses
Wine Enthusiast, a magazine published by a wine accessories catalogue house, is mounting a challenge to the dominance of Wine Spectator, the nation's biggest periodical for wine consumers.
Adam M. Strum, publisher of the Enthusiast, wants it to match or pass the circulation, advertising power and editorial influence of the Spectator.
Both magazines, redesigned and fatter, were reborn in October.


2 Brewers Award Ice Beer Accounts
Two brewers have named agencies on their rosters to handle the introductions of their ice beer brands.
The Coors Brewing Company in Golden, Colo., named GSD&amp;M in Austin, Tex., to handle broadcast, print and outdoor advertising for its Coors Artic Ice brand, which is purposely misspelled for trademark purposes.
The brand will be available on Feb. 14 in nine markets including Tucson, Ariz.; Las Vegas, Nev.; Pittsburgh, and Syracuse.
Spending on the campaign, which will carry the theme "Nothing's bolder. Nothing's colder," was not disclosed.


Peres Says Israel Is 'Fairly Close' To Breaking Impasse With P.L.O.
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said today that Israel was "fairly close" to breaking the stalemate that has kept it from carrying out its agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization on Palestinian self-rule for the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
But there was no such optimism about a quick breakthrough with Syria in peace talks, which after a suspension of more than four months are scheduled to resume on Monday at a clandestine location in Washington.


2 Are Convicted in Atlanta In Airport Corruption Trial
A former Atlanta Councilman and a powerful businessman at Hartsfield International Airport were convicted this weekend on bribery, conspiracy and fraud charges after a three-week trial that raised legal and political issues that are likely to haunt the city for months.
A Federal court jury, after deliberating for only six hours, on Saturday convicted Ira Jackson, 63, a former airport commissioner and Councilman influential in overseeing the airport, on 83 counts of mail fraud, 43 counts of accepting bribes and 4 counts of tax evasion.
The violations were part of a scheme in which Mr.
Jackson illegally received more than $1 million, in addition to bribes, from an airport business to provide favorable treatment to airport businesses he regulated.


Today's Poland Would Rather Just Ignore Nazi Death Camps
To the Editor:
"Decay of a 20th-Century Relic: What Is a Fitting Future for Auschwitz?" (news article, Jan. 5) tells us that "Immediately after World War II, the first Auschwitz death camp, which is actually the smaller of the two, was turned into a museum," and, "In contrast, the Birkenau section was left virtually untouched."


Tuberculosis
Public health officials are still struggling to cope with the resurgence of tuberculosis in the region - especially among the homeless and people with H.I.V.
The number of new cases continues to grow, but apparently at a slower rate.
New York and New Jersey still accounted for 21 percent of the nation's 26,673 tuberculosis cases in 1992.
New York City spent about $40 million that year to prevent or treat tuberculosis. 10 times as much as it spent five year before.
Last year New Jersey spent about $8 million on tuberculosis control, up from $2.1 million in 1986.
Other New Jersey cities besides Newark have high rates of tuberculosis.
The 1992 rate per 100,000 people in New Jersey was 46.9; in Paterson it was 56.6.


BBDO Worldwide Appoints Executive
BBDO Worldwide has appointed a top executive from a sibling direct-marketing agency to head its operations in Hong Kong and China.
Candace Wong was named chairwoman and chief executive of BBDO Hong Kong and of BBDO/CNUAC, the agency's China venture in Beijing, Guangzhou, and Shanghai, effective immediately.
While the position in China is new, in Hong Kong Ms.
Wong assumes the responsibilities of Steve Chan, who headed that office; he becomes a senior consultant to the agency on the Chinese market.


Paramount Publishing to Cut Jobs and Books
In their first public discussion of plans for the soon-to-be-acquired Macmillan Inc., officials at Paramount Publishing said last week that they would reorganize divisions, reduce the number of imprints and published titles and lay off up to 10 percent of the two companies' combined work force of 10,000.
Barring any last-minute glitches, Paramount's $553 million purchase of Macmillan is to be completed by the end of February.
The result would give Paramount Publishing, the parent company of Simon &amp; Schuster, about $2 billion in annual revenues, comfortably assuring its position as the largest publisher in the United States and the second largest in the world behind Bertelsmann A.G. of Germany.


Silicon Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Telly Savalas, Actor, Dies at 70; Played Kojak in 70's TV Series
Telly Savalas, who added the phrase "Who loves ya, baby?" to popular language while portraying a New York detective in the 1970's television series "Kojak," died on Saturday of prostate cancer.
He was 70.
Mr.
Savalas died in his suite at the Sheraton-Universal Hotel in Universal City, said Mike Mamakos, a spokesman, The Associated Press reported.


Genlyte Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Eight Schools Take Part in Student Benefit
The annual Winter Benefit for the Emergency Fund for Student Dancers made for a welcome change of pace in the hothouse of the dance world on Friday night.
That New York City attracts aspiring dancers from around the world was borne out again by the variety of performers from the eight dance schools in the fund, which was created in 1989 to provide loans and services to their students.
Among the 13 pieces on the program at Marymount Manhattan Theater (221 East 71st Street), a single work from the Martha Graham Center for Contemporary Dance included students from China, Britain, France, Norway, Taiwan, Mexico, Spain, New Zealand and the United States.


In Los Angeles, a Day for Thanks and Helping Neighbors
On the street where last Monday's calamitous earthquake took its greatest toll, the congregants of the Northridge United Methodist Church gathered today to pray for friends and neighbors who lost their lives, their loved ones, their homes, their treasured possessions and their peace of mind.
"How much we need to be here today, to lean on each other, to walk together," the Rev.
David L. Richardson told the assembled men, women and children, who greeted each other with special fervor and sang hymns like "Standing on the Promise of God" as if they had never before paid attention to the words.


U.S. Code Agency Is Jostling for Civilian Turf
The National Security Agency is trying to establish a standard for electronically scrambling computer communications, a move that would go far beyond the agency's usual military and intelligence domain to include civilian activities like electronic tax returns and computerized medical payments.
The plan by the N.S.A., which may be announced as early as today, worries business executives and privacy advocates, who fear Government encroachment.
And some officials in the Clinton Administration believe that the N.S.A. is overstepping its bounds.


Suncor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ALBANY DEMOCRATS PICK NEW SPEAKER
Assemblyman Sheldon Silver of Manhattan was assured of selection as interim speaker tonight when his fellow Democrats decided that he should replace Saul Weprin, who was incapacitated last week by a severe stroke.
Mr.
Silver, the 49-year-old chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, is expected to be elected formally on Monday by the entire Assembly, where Democrats outnumber Republicans 2 to 1.
The Assembly minority leader, Clarence D. Rappleyea Jr., a Republican from Norwich, has said his party will not protest the rules change allowing the unusual election of an interim speaker.


METRO DIGEST
SILVER ASSURED OF APPROVAL AS SPEAKER
Assemblyman Sheldon Silver of Manhattan was assured of selection as interim speaker when his fellow Democrats decided that he should replace Saul Weprin, who was incapacitated last week by a severe stroke.
A1.
HEALTH PLAN WORRIES HOSPITAL OFFICIALS Medical education, and the Clinton Administration's proposals for changing it, are causing great concern among deans and doctors from New York's medical schools and hospitals.
A1.
THE NEW HEALTH CARE CZAR It is perhaps a logical career move for a political bungee jumper.
After managing a New York Presidential primary campaign and a Democratic National Convention, followed by a relaxing foray into the wilds of last year's New York mayoral race, Harold M. Ickes has become the Clinton Administration's health care czar.
A12.
NEW YORK CITY  'FUNKY NEW YORK' AND OTHER EXPORTS It turned out that what Hironobu Sekiguchi, a businessman from Tokyo, most wanted to buy on a shopping trip to New York was not even for sale until he mentioned it: the colorful uniforms -- made of Kente cloth and bearing the phrase "Harlem U.S.A." -- worn by the staff of the McDonald's on West 125th Street.
Mr.
Sekiguchi is the first real business contact corralled by New York State economic development officials to test a program to increase exports by black-owned businesses to Japan.
B3.
INDIVIDUALS MAKE A DIFFERENCE New York is a city of individual selflessness and collective resilience, of unsurpassed vitality and diversity, where if someone is singled out as one in a million, then statistically seven alternatives just as good are always available.
Metro Matters by Sam Roberts.
B3.
STABBINGS ATTRIBUTED TO 'RUDENESS' After stabbing a man who was walking with his wife and son in Midtown Manhattan, a Brooklyn man confessed to the crime and two other stabbings, saying that he was moved to attack people because of their rudeness, the police said.
B2.
REVERSAL URGED IN OUSTER OF ATHLETES Threatening legal action, Public Advocate Mark Green urged the state's largest high school sports body to reconsider its decision to eliminate city athletes from statewide competitions in track and field and four other sports.
C7.
REGION  A THAW, BUT A SHORT ONE Weary from weeks of frigid temperatures, residents in the New York area huddling on street corners, scurrying down sidewalks and ducking into restaurants said they had one thing to look forward to -- the promise of warmer weather.
But as thaws go, this one will be short.
B5.
RENOVATION OF HOUSING IS ORDERED Despite local opposition, a Federal judge has ordered the Town of Oyster Bay to allow the renovation of a small Bethpage apartment house so it can be used as a permanent home for the mentally ill, the first of its kind in Nassau County.
B5.
A PLAN FOR SCHOOLS BRINGS COMPLAINTS Teachers concerned about job security and parents who oppose the philosophy behind outcome-based education spoke out in force at hearings on a state commission's recommendations for remaking Connecticut's public schools.
Some members of the panel were more concerned afterward by a lack of enthusiasm they sensed for the plan to overhaul Connecticut's schools, which they are to submit to the state legislature on Feb. 1 after 19 months of work.
B5.
OIL LEAKS AT A NEW JERSEY COMPANY Thousands of gallons of oil leaked from a holding tank at a Bayonne, N.J., oil storage operation owned by a company that has been cited for polluting local waters, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency reported.
B5.
Neediest Cases B4  Chroncle B8


Needle Exchanges Can Work
The case for distributing clean needles to drug addicts in an effort to slow the spread of the AIDS virus is growing stronger.
The rationale for such programs is simple.
The AIDS epidemic is ravaging addicts who inject drugs.
The virus is spread through the sharing of contaminated needles and syringes.
Therefore, even without curing addicts of their addiction, one can slow the epidemic by giving addicts clean needles in exchange for used ones.
But needle-exchange programs have met fierce opposition from critics who object to any program that implies acceptance of drug abuse and worry that distribution of needles will actually encourage illicit drug injection.


Health Czar's Mission
Harold M. Ickes is charged with bringing order to a rather diffuse and chaotic tram, and thus restarting the Clinton health plan.
Page A12.


Market Place; One Likely Prize for Winner Of Paramount: A Stock Loss
As the battle for Paramount Communications Inc. lurches toward a finale, analysts are pointing out a strange paradox: the winner may be the loser.
Several media analysts are forecasting that whichever bidder -- QVC Network Inc. or Viacom Inc. -- is the victor in the vicious four-month-old fight, its stock is likely to fall sharply, if companies in comparable situations are any guideline.


Essay; Get Yer State o' U. Scorecard
You cannot watch a State of the Union address without a scorecard.
Here is a handy-dandy sheet of favorite plays and intricate defenses to paste in your hat as the President and Congress put on their annual pre-game pageant.
1.
Watch for the keyword themesetter.
Presidents say "The State of the Union is --" and then add "good" or "sound," or as one did in an unprecedented fit of candor, "not good." If Mr.
Clinton says something like "getting better," keep your eye out for:


Four Seasons' Sour Footnotes
The annual report for Four Seasons Hotels Inc. is as inviting as a turned-down bed in one of the company's five-star hotels.
The photographs are of dreamy places, the tone is reassuring and the ledgers show the company to be solidly in the black.
But the market is beginning to wonder how healthy the Toronto-based company really is.
The stock trades in Toronto at $12.75 Canadian a share, or about $9.70 American, 35 percent less than when the company last sold equity to the public in December 1992.


Topics of The Times; Ice Follies
We're havin' a heat wave, a tropical heat wave.
The temperature has finally climbed out of the single digits.
The news programs have scrubbed their spots on the return of the Ice Age.
For this we should heave a warm sigh.
Instead, we find ourselves with a head full of Andy Rooneyesque whiny questions.
To wit:


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
'In the Company of Men'  Pace Downtown Theater
Six male choreographers got together under the auspices of Choreographers' Collective and offered a lively program called "In the Company of Men" on Saturday night.
Although the presentations were varied and there was no overall theme, several choreographers contrasted states of strength and vulnerability.


Tuberculosis
Public health officials are still struggling to cope with the resurgence of tuberculosis in the region - especially among the homeless and people with H.I.V.
The number of new cases continues to grow, but apparently at a slower rate.
New York and New Jersey still accounted for 21 percent of the nation's 26,673 tuberculosis cases in 1992.
New York City spent about $40 million that year to prevent or treat tuberculosis. 10 times as much as it spent five year before.
Last year New Jersey spent about $8 million on tuberculosis control, up from $2.1 million in 1986.
Other New Jersey cities besides Newark have high rates of tuberculosis.
The 1992 rate per 100,000 people in New Jersey was 46.9; in Paterson it was 56.6.


At Age 30, Mullin's World Takes Some New Twists and Turns
Hardly anything feels quite right to Chris Mullin these days.
He knows the ball is round as ever.
The earth, too.
The basketball court remains flat.
But objects and places are different in ways he cannot see, only feel.
His shot doesn't automatically slide off his fingertips the way it used to.
He can't feel the presence of the man guarding him or instinctively know his exact position on the court when he receives a pass with his back to the basket.
The game moves at an uncomfortable pace, and life itself is a blur of events he can't yet comprehend.


Mays Takes a Swipe At the No-Show Bonds
WILLIE MAYS, appearing at a dinner in Manhattan last night to receive BARRY BONDS's National League most valuable player award, criticized his godson for not showing up.
"We gave him 47 million," said Mays, a special assistant to the San Francisco Giants' president, PETER MAGOWAN.
"He can pick up his award."
Bonds won the N.L. m.v.p. for the third time in four seasons.
Mays, a two-time m.v.p. and a Hall of Famer, didn't sound like he was joking in his barbs.


Grand Valley Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Federica Montseny, Spanish Minister, 88
Federica Montseny, the first woman to serve as a Cabinet minister in Spain, where she secured passage of a law in 1937 allowing women to have abortions, died on Jan. 14 in Toulouse, France, where she and other Spanish Republicans settled as exiles in the late 1930's.
She was 88.
Mrs.
Montseny was born in Madrid to a couple from Catalonia.
Her parents were both writers with an anarchist philosophy, and she became an anarchist herself.
As a teen-ager, she began writing for union publications.


Dividend Meetings


Sealed Air Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With Cold, Many Warm To Giving to the Neediest
In a city where nearly 5,500 families began the year as residents of public shelters, homelessness is a problem that sits uneasily on the conscience of even the most hard-hearted New Yorker.
With the prolonged cold spell that drove the temperature below zero, many people were moved beyond mere sympathy.
To bring some measure of comfort to the heatless and homeless, they have been giving to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Washington at Work; New Health Care Czar Preparing for Long Leap
It is perhaps a logical career move for a political bungee jumper.
After managing a New York Presidential primary campaign and a Democratic National Convention for his candidate, followed by a relaxing foray into the wilds of last year's New York mayoral race, Harold M. Ickes has become the Clinton Administration's health care czar.
He shrinks from the title, of course, as any modern czar is required to do.
"This is a team effort," he insists.
"That is not my role in any way, shape or form." But Mr.
Ickes is in charge of bringing order to what has been, by many accounts, a rather diffuse and chaotic team, and thus restarting the Administration's chief domestic initiative, the Health Security Act of (they hope) 1994.


A Test Case for Nuclear Disposal
There is probably no more useless tract of land in the United States than an arid 1,000-acre parcel of Federal land in the Mojave Desert 22 miles west of here.
About the only person who has ever made anything from it is Milton Blair, who leases this expanse of sand and creosote bushes from the Bureau of Land Management to run a few head of cattle.
Those who know him also say Mr.
Blair picks up litter along nearby Interstate 40 to make ends meet.


HOME INSPECTORS PUSHED TO LIMIT
Faced with tens of thousands of homes damaged in the earthquake that struck Los Angeles last Monday, the city's building department is overwhelmed in trying to determine which structures are no longer safe.
Working round the clock, about 1,000 inspectors and engineers from the department have been going door to door in the hardest-hit areas; by today they had visited more than 15,000 structures.


2 Angelenos Who Took a Second Hit
Piero Selvaggio had barely finished clearing the charred rubble of his Big Rock Canyon home, which burned to the ground in November's brush fires, when last week's earthquake tore through one of the restaurants he owns here, sending a red river of wine worth a million dollars coursing down Pico Boulevard toward the sea.
On the other side of town, Hung Lee was also a two-time loser.
His furniture store, stripped bare by looters in the 1992 riots, took a hard hit in Monday's predawn tremor.
Chunks of plaster fell from the ceiling, deep cracks laced the walls, and Mr.
Lee, already so deeply in debt that he had just leased his building to a tenant, wondered where he would find the money for repairs.


Gifts to the Arts and the Fame They Buy
Against the crackling sound of large-denomination bills being counted out, the Guggenheim Museum and the New York Public Library have tried to say the kind of thank-you that $10 million deserves.
The library, after receiving $10 million from the fashion designer Bill Blass the week before last, lost no time in affixing his name in gilt over the entrance to its public catalogue room.
The Guggenheim, made $10 million richer by the real-estate developer Samuel J. LeFrak two weeks earlier, went whole hog.
It named the entire building after Mr.
LeFrak and his wife, Ethel, an effusive gesture that left people wondering what exactly the museum could do for Ronald O. Perelman, the chairman of Revlon, who also dropped a tidy $10 million in the collection basket on Wednesday.
Even a warmly worded letter would not quite do the trick.


PRO FOOTBALL: Cowboys and Bills - There'll Be No More Kissing on This Second Date; Dallas Cruises Past the 49ers
Alvin Harper, like his coach, will never bite his tongue.
The Cowboys receiver stood above a small group of reporters on a five-foot platform after Dallas had just plastered the San Francisco 49ers and made a statement that would make Jimmy Johnson's prediction last week look bland.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; When 'Everything Went White'
JUST after throwing the pass, Joe Montana was triple-teamed by the Bills' pass-rushers -- caught from behind by Phil Hansen, pounded from his left by Bruce Smith, crushed from his right by Jeff Wright.
As he toppled forward near the Chiefs' 10-yard line early in the third quarter with the Bills leading, 20-6, his red helmet bounced off Rich Stadium's green rug.
"Everything went white," the quarterback would say later, his blue eyes still somewhat dazed.
"I had a real sharp pain in my head."


New York Hospitals Fear Harm In Plan to Reduce Specialization
For months, deans and doctors from New York's medical schools and hospitals have been making office visits to Ira C. Magaziner, President Clinton's top health care adviser, to take his temperature on the hottest topic in their lives.
On a recent flight to New York, a member of the city's Congressional delegation plied Hillary Rodham Clinton with news clippings on the same subject.
The issue causing such concern is medical education, and the Clinton Administration's proposals for changing it.
New York's huge research and teaching hospitals are particularly worried that the Administration's proposals would cut the number of residency positions for medical school graduates nationwide and limit the number of specialists.
Cutting 3,800 Residencies?
The New York hospitals say they share the Administration's goal: to lower overall costs and train more of the nation's doctors in basic care.
But because about 15 percent of the country's medical residents are now trained in New York State, the hospitals say any changes could affect New York disproportionately.
They also say their expertise in specialized medicine is a major drawing card in attracting doctors and making research breakthroughs.


Bills Don't Gloat as Montana Buckles
While pro football players may not be hero worshippers, they are hero respecters, and a quarterback who has achieved as much over the years as Joe Montana is admired by his peers.
So after the Buffalo Bills' 30-13 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs today for the American Football Conference championship and a Super Bowl berth, the victors were concerned over the health of the loser's quarterback.
Montana was knocked out of the game early in the third quarter when Phil Hansen tackled him low, Bruce Smith tackled him from the side and Jeff Wright fell on top of him.
Montana's head hit the ground hard, and he was dazed and did not play again.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 ACCUSATIONS IN MEXICO
The Mexican army is facing charges of torture and illegal arrests of suspected rebels in the south but the insurgency there is dying down.
A1


Trade-In of Guns Diverts Attention
To the Editor:
If the National Rifle Association wanted to dilute the increasing pressure for gun control legislation, it could not have found a better way than to promote, endorse and perhaps even finance the program that encourages the voluntary surrender of guns for cash, clothing or toys.


Proposal to Overhaul Schools Brings Opposition From Parents and Teachers
Teachers concerned about job security and parents who oppose the philosophy behind outcome-based education spoke out in force this month at hearings on a state commission's recommendations for remaking Connecticut's public schools.
Some members of the panel, the Commission on Educational Excellence for Connecticut, were more concerned afterward by a lack of enthusiasm they sensed for the plan to overhaul Connecticut's schools, which they are to submit to the state legislature on Feb. 1 after 19 months of work. 'If It Isn't Broken. . . .'
Barbara Toman, who represents the Parent-Teacher Association on the commission, said: "People are saying, 'The schools aren't broken in my community. They're not broken, therefore they don't need to get fixed.' "


U.N. Chief Defends Role On Air Strikes in Bosnia
Complaining that he was being unfairly blamed for a policy stalemate, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary General of the United Nations, emphasized today that he was ready to order the use of NATO air strikes in Bosnia and Herzegovina if his senior aide and military commander there asked him to do so.
But Mr.
Boutros-Ghali indicated that he would probably recommend against the use of pre-emptive air strikes and urge that NATO planes be used only to defend United Nations peacekeeping troops if they came under fire while going to the aid of the besieged Muslim towns of Tuzla and Srebrenica.


It Was Bills by a Mile On Thomas's Yards
People were saying all week that the Buffalo Bills and the Kansas City Chiefs were so closely matched that their American Conference championship game today would be decided by turnovers.
Wrong.
The Bills rolled to a 30-13 victory because Thurman Thomas was such a talented runner and his offensive line kept giving him the holes to make the most of his running skills.
Thomas's statistics were like a dream -- 33 carries for 186 yards and 3 touchdowns.
His longest runs went for 33, 12, 12, 11, 11, 11, 10 and 10 yards, an astounding output.


Correction
An article in Business Day last Monday about Japan's plan to open the public-sector construction market misstated a part of the plan.
Japan's prefectural and some local governments are encouraged to use open bidding for projects worth at least $21.3 million, but they are not required to do so.


Subway Policy Silences the Homeless; The Real Gospel
To the Editor:
A Jan. 11 report on the New York City Transit Authority's move to discourage subway riders from giving to panhandlers quotes Alan F. Kiepper, Transit Authority president, stating his intention to "preach the gospel we're putting out today about not giving to panhandlers."


Woman's Abduction Is Doubted by F.B.I.
Federal investigators in Michigan expressed skepticism yesterday over the account of a New Jersey woman who said she was abducted at gunpoint and driven to Detroit by two men who called themselves law-enforcement officials and who told her the police did not believe her version of her son's unsolved 1991 murder.
In a puzzling new development in the mysterious disappearance and death of 5-year-old Timothy Wiltsey, the boy's mother, Michelle Lodzinski, 26, vanished from her Colonia, N.J., home on Friday, turned up unharmed in Detroit the next day, called the police and said she had been abducted and released by men whose motives were unclear.
There was no corroboration of her account.


Judge Orders Renovation On Building For Disabled
Despite local opposition, a Federal judge has ordered the Town of Oyster Bay to allow the renovation of a small Bethpage apartment house so it can be used as a permanent home for the mentally ill, the first of its kind in Nassau County.
An advocacy group for the mentally ill filed a discrimination suit against the town last May, contending that by denying them a permit to renovate the building, the town was violating civil rights laws and the Fair Housing Act.


U.S. AGAIN WARNS BEIJING ON RIGHTS
Despite conciliatory gestures by China's leaders aimed at convincing the United States that they are improving their human rights record, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told reporters today that Beijing had not yet done enough to win renewal of trade benefits.
On the eve of a crucial meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, Mr.
Christopher said that if the Administration had to decide right now whether to extend the trade benefits, it could not do so.
Under an executive order signed by President Clinton last spring, China must make "overall, significant progress" on specific issues if it does not want to be penalized.


Jabaliya Journal; To Read All About It, Palestinians Scan the Walls
Four men, their faces covered by black hoods, darted out of an alley and positioned themselves in front of a graffiti-covered wall on Market Street.
One man, wearing black latex gloves, dipped a brush into a plastic bucket filled with gray paint.
He quickly painted over the old slogans on the concrete wall as another man began writing a new message with a can of blue spray paint, glancing frequently at a small slip of white paper.
A crowd of onlookers gathered to read the new announcement:


President's Address Will Emphasize Crime and Health
In his State of the Union Message on Tuesday, President Clinton will try to defuse criticism of his health care plan and make a new bid for middle-class support by emphasizing themes like the need for more individual responsibility and issues like Federal action against crime, aides said today.
Mr.
Clinton spent the weekend at Camp David going over the details of a speech that is not expected to include major new initiatives.
But aides consider this address pivotal and said that the President would move beyond the economic security issues he concentrated on last year in his first major speech to Congress.


First Repeat Back to Back
The Dallas Cowboys and the Buffalo Bills will be the first teams to meet in two consecutive Super Bowls.
But it will be the fourth time that teams have met in two Super Bowls.
Miami and Washington played in the seventh and 17th Super Bowls.
Pittsburgh and Dallas played in the 10th and 13th Super Bowls.
And San Francisco and Cincinnati played in the 16th and 23d Super Bowls.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; Variety, Camaraderie, Individualism
A Ming Dynasty handbook on Chinese music identifies 16 different musical timbres, from loose to crisp to gliding to profound to lofty.
That attention to sonic detail is still an essential part of traditional Chinese music, as Music From China demonstrated with grace and virtuosity in a concert Friday night at Washington Square Church.
Music From China, a New York-based group of recent emigrants from China, features Tang Liangxing, a virtuoso on the pipa (Chinese lute), who won a National Heritage Fellowship in 1993.
He shared the spotlight in a concert that began and ended with ensemble pieces but featured solos on pipa, zheng (zither, played by Yang Yi) and qudi, bangdi and changdi (transverse flutes) and xiao (a vertical flute), all played by Wei Laigen).


International Recovery Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tuberculosis
Public health officials are still struggling to cope with the resurgence of tuberculosis in the region - especially among the homeless and people with H.I.V.
The number of new cases continues to grow, but apparently at a slower rate.
New York and New Jersey still accounted for 21 percent of the nation's 26,673 tuberculosis cases in 1992.
New York City spent about $40 million that year to prevent or treat tuberculosis. 10 times as much as it spent five year before.
Last year New Jersey spent about $8 million on tuberculosis control, up from $2.1 million in 1986.
Other New Jersey cities besides Newark have high rates of tuberculosis.
The 1992 rate per 100,000 people in New Jersey was 46.9; in Paterson it was 56.6.


Unsung Nets Have Team in Tune
Sometimes when there are one or two All-Stars on a team, there's a tendency to overlook the other players.
Remember when the Chicago Bulls were known as Michael Jordan and the Jordanaires?
Well, the New Jersey Nets are currently on a five-game winning streak, their longest of the season, with the top performances coming from players other than power forward Derrick Coleman and point guard Kenny Anderson.


Unifi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Blues Get Defenseman
The St.
Louis Blues moved to strengthen their defense yesterday, trading three players to the Quebec Nordiques for defenseman STEVE DUCHESNE and a minor leaguer.
The Blues sent defenseman GARTH BUTCHER and forwards RON SUTTER and BOB BASSEN to Quebec.
Besides Duchesne, they also got right wing DENIS CHASSE, who plays for Cornwall of the American Hockey League.


Islamic Guerrillas in Algeria Gain Against Military Rulers
The armed Islamic insurgency that has been fighting for two years is swiftly gaining ground against a military-backed Government whose authority seems to be deteriorating daily.
Many of the army generals who rule the country, along with their supporters, have retreated to tightly guarded seaside compounds outside Algiers, frequently using helicopters to travel to and from offices and meetings.


New Fertility Science vs. Old Double Standard
To the Editor:
I am startled by the flagrant sexism of much of the controversy surrounding the use of new techniques to treat infertility in "Reproductive Revolution Is Jolting Old Views" (front page, Jan. 11).
Artificial insemination, a technique for helping couples in which the man is infertile, has long been available and frequently used without agonized debate over its ethics.
Now that a method exists to accomplish the same goal for infertile women, questioners demand to know who the "real mother" is.


Giuliani and the Eternal Diva Debate; Can a True Opera Fan Admire Both Callas and Tebaldi? Absolutely, the Mayor Says
On Saturday night, Rudolph W. Giuliani entered a realm that can easily match the New York City streets in animosity and extravagance.
It is a realm where most politicians are reluctant to tread, where fistfights have broken out and lifelong friendships broken up, a realm of high passion and low opinions -- the realm of the opera fan.
The Mayor was interviewed on "Opera Fanatic," a radio program on WKCR-FM.
He was prepared to take tough positions, answering questions on pressing issues: How good is the Metropolitan Opera?
Who was a better tenor, Jussi Bjoerling or Franco Corelli in his prime?
Should there be booing in the opera house?
And what about young Andrew Giuliani -- does he have a future in opera?


Dance in Review
Libre-Echange U.S. Choreographers/Montreal Dances  St. Mark's Church
Modern dancers have always been internationalists.
Ever since the turn of the century, they have gone from country to country, leaping across national and artistic boundaries with equal ease.
Therefore the Danspace Project of St.
Mark's Church honored a grand tradition on Friday night when it presented the first in a series of performances of works by choreographers from the United States who now live in Montreal.


LEADING CONTENDER IS SAID TO DECLINE TOP DEFENSE POST
Deputy Defense Secretary William J. Perry, the leading candidate to succeed Les Aspin as Secretary, told the White House on Saturday that he did not want the job, Pentagon officials reported today, but the Administration has mounted a major effort to change his mind.
Mark D. Gearan, the White House communications director, said tonight that the Administration considered Mr.
Perry "very much in the running" for the job.
He said preliminary vetting of his record had begun.
But a close friend of Mr.
Perry said the Deputy Secretary was "still quite reluctant on this."


Computers as Price Setters Complicate Travelers' Lives
For savvy consumers who pride themselves on knowing where the best buys are and how much to pay for them, life is becoming a great deal more complicated.
The same thinking that created airline fares that seem to change dizzily from one day to the next is spreading.
Now other businesses from cruise lines to hotels are taking a page from the airlines' playbook and using powerful computer technology to set prices continually based on the up-to-the-minute demand for their products.


Peacekeepers And Politics
In the wake of Congressional uproar over American involvement in Somalia, Bosnia and Haiti, some members of Congress are calling for a review of the war powers relationship between Congress and the President.
That is fine, but as the blue helmet of United Nations peacekeepers -- heavily subsidized by American greenbacks -- turns up in more and more places around the world, it is far more imperative that we redefine the relationship between the United States and the United Nations, and establish a Congressional role in that relationship.
As it stands now, the vote of our unelected representative to the U.N. has the power to commit billions of taxpayer dollars and to risk U.S. soldiers' lives without any say from Congress.
As joint United States-United Nations operations in Somalia, Bosnia and Haiti have demonstrated, it is not in America's interest to let the U.N. define our foreign policy.
While Congressional pressure did lead to certain mid-course adjustments in the Clinton Administration's ill-conceived, U.N.-driven policies, the reality is that Congress plays no formal role in U.N. peacekeeping decisions.


Oil Leaks at a Company Often Cited for Pollution
Thousands of gallons of oil leaked from a holding tank early yesterday at a Bayonne, N.J., oil storage operation owned by a company that has been cited for polluting local waters, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency reported.
The leaking oil posed no environmental threat, and only a small amount seeped from a containing tank surrounding the main vessel, Federal environmental officials said.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news and listings appear today on pages B8-9.


Today's Poland Would Rather Just Ignore Nazi Death Camps; Means of Preservation
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 5 article, we at the Polish Historical Society would like to suggest a novel proposal for preserving the relics of the Auschwitz-Birkenau camps and developing the site.


Legacy of Individuals Making a Difference
"WE were standing and waiting for the limousine," said the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, recalling an encounter last fall at the New York Palace hotel, where he had just been meeting with the President of Zaire after addressing the United Nations, "and a lady walked up and said: 'Oh, I'm so grateful, you've done so much. I really appreciate your people and what you mean.'
"Then she put this dollar bill in my hand and said, 'Oh, if you had not helped me get my bags off the elevator, I don't know what I would've done,' " Mr.
Jackson said.


Tokyo Stocks Plunge After Reform Loss
Fears that the political turmoil that struck on Friday could delay Japanese Government efforts to revive the recession-bound economy sent stock prices into a tailspin here today.
Trading was largely one-way -- in sell orders -- but calm, analysts said.
The Nikkei index of 225 leading stocks plunged 954.19 points, or 4.94 percent, to close at 18,353.24.
That is still up sharply from a month ago, when the Nikkei was trading at close to 17,000.


CHRONICLE
Not long after KATHLEEN CHALFANT , who plays six roles in the two plays that comprise "Angels in America" and ELLEN McLAUGHLIN , who plays the angel and three other parts, met, they discovered that they had something in common: their love for the writing of Virginia Woolf.
That encounter, at a rehearsal in 1989 for "Part I: Millennium Approaches" at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles, and a discussion about the writer, set in motion an unexpected collaboration.
The result: On Sunday, Feb. 6, Ms.
Chalfant will play all four roles in "The Party," the one-woman show that Ms.
McLaughlin, who is also a playwright, fashioned from three Virginia Woolf stories.


Ferrer Sworn as Bronx Borough President


U.N. SEEKS TO HELP TWO BOSNIAN BOYS
United Nations relief workers said today that they would try to evacuate two young brothers who were severely wounded here on Saturday, despite threats from Bosnian Serb forces to block such departures.
In an ultimatum signed by the minister for health of the self-styled Serbian republic in Bosnia, the Serbs said they would prevent medical evacuations from Sarajevo unless the Bosnian authorities released several Serbian doctors who were arrested while trying to leave the besieged city.
The message was faxed to the United Nations refugee-relief operation's headquarters here on Friday.
There was no indication that the Bosnian authorities would comply.


City Advocate Urges Change In Ouster Plan
Threatening legal action, New York City Public Advocate Mark Green urged the state's largest high school sports body yesterday to reconsider its decision to eliminate city athletes from statewide competitions in track and field and four other sports.
"It is the worst possible lesson to teach our children, that the way to win is to exclude your competition rather than attempt to defeat them," said Green, who sent a letter outlining his position to Karen Lopez, president of the New York State Public High Schools Athletic Association.


PRO FOOTBALL: Cowboys and Bills - There'll Be No More Kissing on This Second Date; Yet Another Chance for Buffalo
The frigid Buffalo weather froze the pond in Bruce Smith's backyard and last week a few of the kids in his neighborhood decided to try their hand at ice sketching.
Taking into account that the Kansas City Chiefs and their legendary quarterback, Joe Montana, would meet Smith and his Buffalo Bills at Rich Stadium this afternoon for the American Football Conference championship and a trip to the Super Bowl, the little darlings decided to leave the defensive end an indelible message.


Quake Damage Shakes Faith in Overpass Designs
The problem was graphically emphasized in the violent earthquake last Monday.
Despite decades of effort to build highways that could withstand California's most powerful tremors, vital overpasses and bridges collapsed, including two on the Santa Monica Freeway, the nation's busiest roadway.
Repairs are already under way on the three major highways that were heavily damaged.
Using large excavators fitted with jackhammers that rattle the earth like aftershocks of the quake, demolition crews working around the clock have removed about a third of the crumpled overpasses and bridges, and several major thoroughfares have reopened.


That's All, Fans: CBS Says Goodbye
Pro football faded into programming history on CBS at 7:09 P.M. yesterday after a 38-year run, joining other long-running series like "M*A*S*H*," "Gunsmoke" and "The Ed Sullivan Show" in the network's video vault.
After 13 years as CBS's lead announcing team, Pat Summerall and John Madden called the Dallas-San Francisco National Football Conference title game, exiting without fanfare, weepy goodbyes or mawkish self-congratulation.


No Headline
"We're not going to the Super Bowl just to be going. We have some unfinished business. The ultimate goal is to win the Super Bowl." -- BRUCE SMITH, Buffalo Bills defensive end.  [ C1:2. ]


Review/Theater; Acting Up a Storm As a Stormy Actor Known for Acting Up
If acting were measured by the Richter scale, Frank Langella's performance in "Booth," Austin Pendleton's psychodrama about the legendary theatrical family of the 19th century, would qualify for at least a 7.
Portraying Junius Booth, an alcoholic star in the last years of his career, he comes across as a cataclysmic force of nature, a man whose every gesture seems freighted with the potential for devastation.


'Funky New York,' and Other Exports
Ordinarily it would have been no big deal that Hironobu Sekiguchi chose to go shopping in New York City on Saturday afternoon.
He even made it clear he didn't have unlimited money to spend.
But on his trip, Mr.
Sekiguchi, a businessman from Tokyo, was driven about in a chauffeured car, attended by New York State officials and assorted publicly financed consultants and greeted by merchants like a long-lost friend.
He was in New York to find things to sell in his new boutique in Harajuku, a popular Tokyo shopping area, especially among teen-agers.
It is called See the Scene and specializes in what he calls "funky New York" merchandise.


Dance in Review
Hot Mouth  Performance Space 122
The year is young, but one of its performing highlights is likely to be a rousing concert that was presented on Friday night by Hot Mouth, a song and dance quartet.
The a cappella group is made up of Grisha Coleman, Viola Sheely and Jonathan Stone, all performance artists, and David Thomson, a dancer.


Patents; A Software-technology infringement case against Microsoft goes to trial in Federal court.
THE stakes are high in the first patent-infringement case against the Microsoft Corporation ever to reach trial.
Last week, Federal District Judge Edward Rafeedie impaneled a jury in the patent dispute between Stac Electronics, based in Carlsbad, Calif., and Microsoft, the Redmond, Wash., company that is the largest vendor of personal computer software in the world.
The trial, which started on Tuesday, is expected to last three to four weeks.


Sir Ashley Clarke, Former British Ambassador, 90
Sir Ashley Clarke, a former British Ambassador to Italy who became a leader in efforts to preserve Venice, died Thursday.
He was 90 and lived in Surrey and in Venice.
Sir Ashley, who was knighted in 1952, was Ambassador from 1953 to 1962, when he retired from diplomacy.


Irving B. Kahn, 76, a Founder Of Teleprompter and Cable TV
Irving B. Kahn, a founder of the Teleprompter Corporation and a pioneer in cable television, died on Saturday at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
He was 76 years old and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y., and West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Kahn had a heart attack while dining in a restaurant in Boston on Thursday, said his assistant, Brigid Buchanan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  U.S.
SHIFTS POLICY ON RUSSIA  President Clinton's top expert on Russia told Moscow that it must rapidly pursue economic reforms or risk a disastrous inflation rate.
A1


Notre Dame Gets a Most Unlikely Recruit: Gus Ornstein
Gus Ornstein, the heavily recruited quarterback from the Fieldston prep school in the Bronx's Riverdale section, announced yesterday that he had verbally committed to attend Notre Dame next season.
The 6-foot-5-inch, 205-pound quarterback committed to the Fighting Irish after visiting the South Bend, Ind., campus over the weekend.
His other visits were to Northwestern, Miami and Syracuse.


Interim Assembly Speaker Is Elected


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Bulls Back on Top  Scottie Pippen scored 23 points and the Chicago Bulls overcame a 14-point deficit last night to win their seventh straight game, 92-86, over the Detroit Pistons at Auburn Hills, Mich.
The victory boosted the Bulls into first place in the Eastern Conference standings, half a game ahead of the Atlanta Hawks and one game in front of the Knicks.
Pippen also finished with 9 rebounds and 9 assists, just missing his third triple-double of the season. (AP)


Bonn Journal; What's an Asia Hand Doing in Germany? Plenty!
When President Clinton nominated Richard C. Holbrooke to be Ambassador to Germany last summer on the same day he named former Vice President Walter F. Mondale Ambassador to Japan, some German officials who knew that Mr.
Holbrooke was an Asia expert wondered whether they had won second prize.
They wonder no longer.
Mr.
Holbrooke, 52, has been an instant success in this crucial American diplomatic post.


Kwan Is Young, Graceful And an Alternate, for Now
Of all the skaters, the youngest was the most gracious.
When 13-year-old Michelle Kwan was bumped from the Olympic figure-skating team in favor of Nancy Kerrigan, she said: "I think it's fair. What I've gotten already is incredible."
What she couldn't foresee was the arrest of Tonya Harding's former husband and her bodyguard, both charged with conspiracy in the attack on Kerrigan.
If Harding were removed from the Olympic team, Kwan would take her place.
But it may be a judge in a courtroom, not in an ice rink, who will make the final decision.


Market Place; Insurer's stock suffers quake damage despite little exposure.
AFTER the Northridge earthquake last week, some insurance stocks experienced their own seismic shock.
Investors' fears about potential losses drove down the price of the Unico American Corporation's shares by 11 percent, to $6.125, in over-the-counter trading last Monday.
The company is based in Woodland Hills, Calif., less than 10 miles from the epicenter of the quake.


Mouse Study Raises Doubts on Sunscreens
A NEW study using mice has raised questions about whether sunscreens can protect against melanoma, the deadliest of all skin cancers.
At the same time, experts are asking what it is about sun exposure that increases the chances that people will get melanoma and are re-examining strategies for protection.
In the new study, while sunscreens were found to protect mice from sunburn, they had no effect against melanoma.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.91
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.94
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.10
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.69
5.68
6.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.30
6.27
7.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.22
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.51
5.51
6.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


ARCO reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bruno's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Banishing the Busy Signal; The Telephone Revolution Refuses to Wait for the Beep
Rod Granger has banished the busy signal.
If you call him at his Manhattan office and he is on the phone, you get his voice mail.
If the line at home is busy, your call jumps the track to call waiting, and if he and his wife are out, there is an answering machine.
"We're busy-signal free," he said.
Mr.
Granger, a reporter for a cable-industry magazine, is a foot soldier on one front of the telecommunications revolution: the taming of the busy signal.
While not likely to be mourned in the same way as, say, the soda jerk or the downtown movie palace, the old beep-beep-beep, frustratingly familiar since the early days of the medium, is under siege -- a fact that communications experts and sociologists say is loaded with implications about everything from call-waiting etiquette to corporate espionage.


BOEING CO. (N)
The Boeing Company reported substantial declines in fourth-quarter revenues and earnings yesterday, which it attributed to continuing weakness in commercial airline sales.
But the company said that these factors were partly offset by increased income from customer financing and improved military and space earnings, despite about a 20 percent drop in sales in that segment.
Analysts said the quarterly declines -- drops of nearly 25 percent in sales and nearly 15 percent in earnings -- had been anticipated, and that Boeing's short-term outlook remained unchanged.


Setting Out on the Trail of the Wily Computer
IN their 14 years of marriage, Jonathan Katz and Toby Mardis have bought and sold a weekend house, purchased a home in a suburb of New York City, bought and sold four cars and had two daughters.
Yet the prospect of buying their first personal computer filled them with anxiety, insecurity and confusion.
Neither family tradition nor personal experience provided guidelines, and as the couple read and talked about the new technology, they found they had much to decide, like hundreds of thousands of other first-time computer buyers each year.
How much RAM and how many megabytes?
CD-ROM?
Modem, or fax modem?
A Macintosh, an I.B.M. personal computer or some form of clone?
Should they shop by brand or by price?
Should they buy locally or through mail order?
What software would they need?


Flagstar Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Valero Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Patterns
Black and Making It
Corey Roberts finished work in the mailroom at a maritime freight company at 5 P.M. on Wednesday and, like Meteor Man, climbed into another role: emerging designer.
Along with fashions by Carlos Nina Couture and Cherie J. Lawrence, his work was presented that night by the restaurant Lola, in honor of Black History Month.


Farrakhan Is Warned Over Aide's Invective
Four months after warily embracing Louis Farrakhan, the minister of the Nation of Islam, a number of prominent blacks are now urging him to distance himself from anti-Semitic comments made by a senior aide.
In recent days, Benjamin Chavis, executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and William H. Gray 3d, president of the United Negro College Fund, have condemned comments made two months ago by Khalid Abdul Muhammad, an aide to Mr.
Farrakhan, in a speech at Kean College in Union, N.J.


Schedule Is Not Kind As Rangers Go West
Fresh from their weeklong rest during the All-Star Game break, the Rangers hope to have Esa Tikkanen and Greg Gilbert back in the lineup tonight when they begin a three-game California trip by playing the Sharks in San Jose.
Before the break, Tikkanen missed one game with knee and shoulder injuries and Gilbert missed two with a shoulder injury.
Going into the trip, which takes them to Los Angeles on Thursday and to Anaheim on Friday, the Rangers are on a three-game winning streak with a record of 30-12-3, best in the 26-team National Hockey League.


Surplus Plutonium Called Big Threat
Huge stocks of surplus plutonium constitute "a clear and present danger to national and international security," said a report issued yesterday by the National Academy of Sciences.
But no country has found a long-term solution to that threat, it said, and events around the world make the problem more worrisome as time goes on.
The report disparages the idea of building new reactors to burn the plutonium removed from retired nuclear weapons or modifying existing reactors to use it.
Both ideas have been proposed by scientists who designed reactors and bombs.
The best method to dispose of the plutonium, the report said, may be to dig a hole several miles deep and bury it, although licensing such a storage pit would be difficult.


Amerada Hess Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hudson Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


American Freightways Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jenny Craig Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sealed Air Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Viatel Ltd., New York, to Cox Landey &amp; Partners, New York, to handle the multinational telecommunications company's account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japanese Market Gets Lift From Overseas Investors
Strong buying from foreign investors gave the stock market a lift today after a plunge on Monday caused by Japan's political crisis.
Concerns that Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's defeat in a crucial parliamentary vote would delay efforts to revive the faltering economy were behind Monday's steep decline.


Observer; Going For Eternity
Steven Jobs, onetime boy computer genius, was telling a radio reporter the other evening that when he started out he never feared his business might fail because the old crocks of the world would refuse to adapt to the personal computer.
Experience showed that children loved the things, and history, Mr.
Jobs said, taught that sooner or later old crocks always died.
In short, he was in a business with a future.
I sensed this too when personal computers first began burping and beeping all over the landscape.
Though I hadn't yet heard of Steven Jobs, it was obvious that these machines would have to be faced unless I wanted to become an old crock and pass away.


In Paris, Italians Are the Heroes
The French haute couture shows were predictably either very, very good or horrible.
A little less predictable was the fact that the heroes of the showing season were both Italian.
Gianni Versace of Milan and Valentino of Rome went to Paris with lustrous collections.
Versace incorporated modern elements in his distinguished-looking clothes, while Valentino achieved the requisite couture look in elegant clothes of quiet refinement.
Christian Lacroix upheld the glory of the French with a wildly imaginative collection that brought him the only standing ovation and caused him to be pelted with flowers like an opera diva.


Classical Music in Review
New Haven Symphony Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
For a listener who last heard the New Haven Symphony in the mid-60's, in a game but scrappy performance of Britten's "War Requiem," its concert on Friday evening was a happy surprise.
Under its music director, Michael Palmer, it sounded for the most part like a big-league band, at home in a big-league setting.


St. Paul Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PENTAGON DEPUTY IS CLINTON'S CHOICE FOR DEFENSE CHIEF
After searching unsuccessfully outside the Pentagon, President Clinton today nominated William J. Perry, the Deputy Defense Secretary, for the department's top post, choosing a candidate who had expressed initial reluctance to take the job.
Mr.
Perry is Mr.
Clinton's second announced choice to succeed Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who was forced to submit his resignation last month.
The President's first nominee, Bobby Ray Inman, a retired admiral and intelligence chief, abruptly announced last week that he did not want the job.


Aikman Gets the All-Clear Signal
Troy Aikman, given a clean bill of health by doctors at Baylor Medical Center in Texas, checked out of the hospital today and accompanied the Cowboys here for preparations for Super Bowl XXVIII on Sunday.
In the Cowboys' 38-21 victory over San Francisco in the National Football Conference title game Sunday, the 49ers defensive lineman Dennis Brown smacked Aikman in the helmet with his knee early in the third quarter.
The $50 million quarterback stayed in the game for one more play before leaving with what turned out to be a minor concussion.


McCann Buys Out Japanese Partner
McCann-Erickson Worldwide Inc. said yesterday that it had acquired the 49 percent of its Japanese joint-venture agency that it did not already own from its partner, Hakuhodo Inc. in Tokyo.
Terms were not disclosed.
Under the agreement, the 33-year-old agency, called McCann-Erickson Hakuhodo, will be renamed McCann-Erickson Inc. in Japan.
The agency, with offices in Tokyo and Osaka, ranks sixth in Japan with billings estimated to exceed $750 million from clients like the Coca-Cola Company, the General Motors Corporation and Nestle S.A.


Rollins Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
FARRAKHAN SPEAKS AGAINST VIOLENCE Addressing more than 10,000 black and Hispanic men in Harlem, Louis Farrakhan, the minister of the Nation of Islam, urged his audience to take steps to end black-on-black crime.
A12.
A number of prominent blacks are urging Mr.
Farrakhan to distance himself from anti-Semitic comments made by a senior aide in a speech at Kean College in Union, N.J.
A12.


Lyondell Petrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Focus on Crime
Along with health care, another domestic issue is expected to figure prominently in President Clinton's State of the Union message tonight: crime.
The President is likely to voice support for the latest popular tactic in the war on crime -- mandatory life sentences without parole for criminals convicted of a third violent felony.
Article, page B1.


Beverly Sills Is Named By Unanimous Vote To Head Lincoln Center
Thirteen years after her last opera performance and five years after stepping down as general director of the New York City Opera, Beverly Sills will return to the world of arts administration as chairwoman of Lincoln Center.
She was elected unanimously to the unsalaried post yesterday at a special meeting of the Lincoln Center board, and is to succeed George Weissman as head of the arts complex on June 13.
Mr.
Weissman will become chairman emeritus.
Miss Sills is the first woman elected to the post and the first chief trustee who had not been a board member.
She is also the first to approach the job from the performance world rather than from a corporate position.
As one of America's most popular opera singers from the mid-1960's until her retirement in 1980, she is a household name.
Her visibility will be useful to Lincoln Center in winning attention for the arts, both from the public and the corporate and government circles where she will be seeking financial support for Lincoln Center's programs.


Diagnostek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fact-Finding Trip on Harding Is Canceled
The executive director of the United States Figure Skating Association canceled a trip to Portland, Ore., last night, which was to have served as a fact-finding mission concerning the Nancy Kerrigan assault case.
Jerry Lace, executive director of the U.S.F.S.A., said the reason for the trip was to gather information from law enforcement officials and decide whether to begin an administrative process that could lead to the removal of Tonya Harding from the Olympic team.
Lace and Tom James, an attorney representing the U.S.F.S.A., were hoping to gain access to information from authorities not made available to the general public.


Judge Grants Panel Right To View Packwood Diaries
A Federal district judge today granted the Senate ethics committee the right to examine five years of Senator Bob Packwood's personal diaries, rejecting every facet of Mr.
Packwood's attempt to fend off what has become an ever-expanding, and ever more serious, inquiry into his conduct.
In a written ruling, Judge Thomas P. Jackson said that releasing the diaries to ethics investigators would violate neither Mr.
Packwood's Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable searches nor his Fifth Amendment right not to be compelled to incriminate himself.


Tests Show Growing Gap For Schools
Reading and math tests given to New York City schoolchildren last May show a widening split between middle-class and poor schools, according to school-by-school scores released yesterday by the Board of Education.
While scores were up slightly from the year before for the city, some of the poorest and lowest-performing districts showed considerable decline.
And even where there were improvements, the scores lagged below the levels of two years before.


Lee Alvin DuBridge, 92, Ex-President of Caltech
Dr.
Lee Alvin DuBridge, president emeritus of the California Institute of Technology, died on Sunday at a retirement center in Duarte, Calif.
He was 92 and formerly lived in Pasadena.
The cause was pneumonia, the institute said.


A Pre-Olympic Gold Drain as Budget Surplus Dwindles
Officials are expected to report a shrinking budget surplus, estimated at about $60 million, when the board of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games meets Tuesday.
People familiar with the budget numbers for the 1996 Games said the rising costs of staging the event have swallowed nearly half of last year's projected surplus of $117 million.
A spokesman for the Atlanta unit, Dick Yarborough, said there would be no comment on the budget until it was discussed with the board.


Suburban Towns And Politics of Salt
In this incorrigible winter, the most precious mineral in the communities ringing New York City has been neither gold nor diamonds but simple salt.
There was so little rock salt last week to thaw the ice-slicked roadways of New York State and New Jersey that cars skated into one another like novices at Rockefeller Center's rink.
More than a few drivers were left icebound, including Paul J. Feiner, supervisor of the Westchester County town of Greenburgh, who could not get his car out of its parking space for 40 minutes so he could run the town.


Detroit Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BELLSOUTH CORP. (N)
The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that its fourth quarter was the strongest operating quarter in its 10-year history.
Before one-time charges, it had earnings of $1.56 a share, an increase of about 35 percent from the corresponding 1992 quarter.
BellSouth attributed the results to an increase of 179,200 in the number of access lines provided to customers, up from a gain of 130,100 access lines in the 1992 quarter.


Regulators Thwart Plan for Big Payouts In Bank Conversion
The New York State Banking Department said yesterday that executives and trustees of the Green Point Savings Bank, based in Flushing, Queens, may not receive the multimillion-dollar compensation packages that they had arranged for themselves as Green Point converts from a mutual savings bank to an institution owned by stockholders.
"The trustees had fiduciary duties which in our view they did not satisfy," Derrick D. Cephas, the Superintendent of Banks, said in an interview yesterday.
"One of the difficulties in the way that the Green Point deal was structured was that the trustees had a divided loyalty. That is what we were trying to correct."


Bill Clinton's Vital Signs
Presidents who pay too much attention to public opinion polls run the same risk as ballplayers who dwell on their batting averages: they waste time they should be spending on hitting and fielding.
Still, President Clinton can be forgiven a peek at the most recent surveys marking the end of his first year.
They suggest that his vital signs are stable.
They also offer timely lessons as Mr.
Clinton prepares for a State of the Union address tonight that will define his second year and possibly the rest of his Presidency.
The most powerful lesson is this: Bill Clinton stands highest when he trains his attention on a tightly focused agenda; he suffers most when he allows his staff to behave sloppily and self-servingly and when he indulges his natural inclination to move in a thousand policy directions at once.


Russian Finance Minister Who Resigned (Sort of) Is Still Bargaining
The search for a Russian Finance Minister took on bizarre proportions today as Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin met with the recalcitrant reformer Boris G. Fyodorov and said his resignation as Finance Minister was still not accepted, even though he has refused the job twice.
Mr.
Chernomyrdin was described as surprised and upset by the negative reaction in the West to the announcement of a revised Cabinet without its best-known market reformers, Yegor T. Gaidar and Mr.
Fyodorov, who fought hard to restrain excess spending, credits and inflation.


The Worry: Germ Warfare. The Target: Us.
Senator John Glenn's Committee on Governmental Affairs, which begins hearings on radiation experiments involving human subjects today, should also consider the effects of past and present biological warfare testing on unwary citizens.
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary, who prompted the attention about radiation experiments, has no formal jurisdiction over the Army's biological testing program.
But she might have an interest in an early germ-warfare test.
It took place in 1951 near Newport News, Va., where she was growing up.


Faster Decisions Are Sought on Bosnia Air Strikes
The top United Nations general in the Balkans said today that he wants the decision-making process for NATO air strikes in Bosnia to be shrunk to no more than 30 minutes.
He said the shorter time frame would be needed if there was a large-scale attack on a United Nations "safe area" or if United Nations personnel were in peril.
"In the case of a massive attack against a safe area or anywhere else, the only means we have of reacting against this, of reacting immediately, is close air support -- on condition, though, that we are able to react immediately," said the officer, Gen.
Jean Cot of France.
"Immediately means three minutes. That would be perfect. Half an hour would be nice. But it's certainly not more than that.


Kelly Set for Cowboys After 2 Prime Games
Center Kent Hull of the Bills thought he saw Jim Kelly at his best when the quarterback completed 73 percent of his passes and threw for two touchdowns against the Raiders to put Buffalo in the American Football Conference championship game.
But after the Bills had beaten the Chiefs at Rich Stadium on Sunday to advance to Super Bowl XXVIII here against the Cowboys, Kelly had Hull reaching for more superlatives.


We Can't Cover Everyone for Every Ailment; Cooper Plan's Flaws
To the Editor:
"Compromise on Health Care" (editorial, Jan. 16) is on target in criticizing Representative Jim Cooper's managed competition bill for failing to provide universal coverage -- requiring a family earning $30,000 to pay $5,000 for health insurance is, as you say, "merciless."


U.S. Robotics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Brands Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jostens Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spanish Bank Bailout Hinges on Assessments
Regulators and bankers designated by the Spanish Government last month to bail out the Banco Espanol de Credito were putting final touches on a a plan to restructure the bank in preparation for a formal presentation Tuesday to Spain's leading banks, which will shoulder a major part of the rescue.
The outline of the plan, according to the bank's managers, calls for Spanish banks, through a deposit insurance fund, to contribute more than 500 billion pesetas -- about $3.5 billion -- for the restructuring of Banesto, as Spain's third-largest bank is known in this country.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan Set to Launch Rocket to Match West
IN 1543, a Portuguese ship bound for Macao was blown off course and landed on this island, exposing the isolated Japanese people for the first time to the gun.
In a few years, Japanese craftsmen were making muskets superior to the Portuguese ones.
Four and a half centuries later, this island in southern Japan will again be the scene of an effort to match the West.
On Feb. 1, Japan plans to launch its first major rocket built without reliance on American technology, marking, in some sense, its arrival in the top tier of space-faring nations.


Chess
Many top players are most pleased with their games in which it is difficult to discern where the opponent went wrong.
They value subtlety more than stormy execution.
That was true in the case of the Manhattan grandmaster John Fedorowicz, who picked his encounter with Alexander Ivanov, a Brookline, Mass., grandmaster, as his best production from the United States Championship, held Dec. 2 to 14 in Long Beach, Calif.
Fedorowicz was not alone in his judgment.
The committee for selection of brilliancy prizes, the grandmaster Yasser Seirawan and the international masters John Donaldson and Jeremy Silman, awarded him a shared second brilliancy prize of $125 offered by Paul M. Albert Jr., a director of the American Chess Foundation.


Alltrista Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Recovery Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Paper Board Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Varian Associates Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Fashion; Belgian Dares Paris Runways
With the aging of the mainstream couturiers -- Saint Laurent, Givenchy and Ungaro, for example, are all in their 50's or 60's -- there is constant concern about attracting younger designers to bring couture styles more up to date.
Two 30-year-olds showed collections this season.
Maurizio Galante of Rome emphasized the intricate handwork of the artisan in his second Paris show.
Gerald Watelet arrived unheralded on the last day and voila, there is a new name to cope with.
He went to hotel school, not a fashion academy, and worked in restaurants before starting his own couture collection in Brussels in 1988.
After five years, he decided it was time to storm the citadel of world fashion and, surprise, he was ready.
His mentors are Courreges and Saint Laurent, and he has carried their looks further into the modern era.


Man in the News; A Wide-Ranging Insider: William James Perry
In choosing William J. Perry as his nominee for Defense Secretary, President Clinton has turned to a highly skilled manager whose broad experience in Government, academia and high-technology companies has earned praise in Congress and in the Pentagon -- even from critics of the Administration's foreign policy.
As the department's No. 2 official, Mr.
Perry has been responsible for overhauling the $100 billion annual weapons budget, supervising the day-to-day business of the Pentagon and greeting foreign dignitaries, among other things.
This morning, for example, he met with the Defense Minister of Guatemala before heading to the White House to meet the press.


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Elevator Plummets in Manhattan Office Building


No-Frills Tutor for Handling Words
KIM KOMANDO is a personable and attractive woman who is not an expert typist.
That little flaw gives her more opportunities than are strictly necessary in a tutorial to demonstrate how to correct typing errors with a word-processing program, by backspacing over the error and tapping in the intended letters.
The tutorial, Komputer Tutor's Word Processing, is a videotape introduction to the basic features of three standard word processors: Wordperfect for DOS, Wordperfect for Windows and Microsoft Word for Windows.
You will not learn how to produce a multicolumn document with Cyrillic footnotes, but you will learn, in easy steps tailored to the individual programs, how to do things like type a document, save it, check its spelling and grammar, format and print it, do a mail merge, work with files and leave the program when the job is done.


SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP. (N)
The Southwestern Bell Corporation said yesterday that fourth-quarter earnings rose more than 10 percent, to a record $385.9 million, helped by a rapid expansion in its cellular business.
For the year, however, the company reported a loss of $845.2 million, or $1.41 a share, after incurring a charge of $153.2 million for refinancing $2.1 billion of long-term debt at its telephone operations.
The company also adopted new accounting methods last year, which resulted in a one-time, noncash charge that reduced earnings by $2.1 billion.


Intel Plans a Data System
The Intel Corporation plans to introduce an integrated hardware and software system today intended to allow personal computer users to share voice, video and data communications over special telephone lines.
Intel said yesterday that it had established marketing relations with Ameritech, A.T.&amp; T., Bell Atlantic, BellSouth and Pacific Bell to make it easier for customers to order those telephone lines -- called Integrated Services Digital Network, or I.S.D.N. -- which are needed to permit higher-speed data communications.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $200 million of medium-term notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 5.18 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The issue is callable in two years.


Knicks Not Equal to the Sum of Their Parts
Charles Smith is back.
The Knicks have obtained help for their ailing backcourt.
So what exactly is the matter with them?
Smith has played well since coming off the disabled list with a surgically-repaired left knee two games ago.
In 37 minutes, the 6-foot-10-inch forward has scored 26 points on 8-for-13 shooting and he has looked sharp at both ends of the floor.
The problem is, the Knicks lost both games.


BC Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Westinghouse Science Contest Honors 14 New York Students
Fourteen of the 40 finalists announced yesterday in the 53d Westinghouse Science Talent Search, the nation's oldest science contest, are from New York State, double last year's number.
Winners of the Westinghouse search are considered some of the brightest, most promising scientists of the future.
Five Westinghouse scholars have gone on to win Nobel prizes.
In 1992, 20 finalists were from New York State.
This year's finalists include 16 girls and 24 boys from 37 high schools in 31 cities and 21 states.
They were chosen from among 1,645 students who submitted independent research projects on subjects ranging from lead detection in soil samples to brain tissue's ability to repair itself after a stroke.
The judges also evaluated statements explaining each project as well as teachers' evaluations.


CHRONICLE
Another position has been filled in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's administration: THOMAS A. PALLOZZI, 29, has been named the executive chef at Gracie Mansion, it was announced yesterday by Joannie Danielides, the press secretary to Donna Hanover Giuliani.
Mr.
Pallozzi, who was until recently a banquet chef with Restaurant Associates, received a certificate with highest honors from the New York Restaurant School in October 1991, after completing an eight-month course.
"He was in our midnight program that starts at 11:40 P.M. and runs to 7 A.M., Monday through Thursday," Dr.
James Devaney, president of the school, said.


Spanish Bank Bailout Hinges on Assessments
Regulators and bankers designated by the Spanish Government last month to bail out the Banco Espanol de Credito were putting final touches on a a plan to restructure the bank in preparation for a formal presentation Tuesday to Spain's leading banks, which will shoulder a major part of the rescue.
The outline of the plan, according to the bank's managers, calls for Spanish banks, through a deposit insurance fund, to contribute more than 500 billion pesetas -- about $3.5 billion -- for the restructuring of Banesto, as Spain's third-largest bank is known in this country.


Coming Out of the Woodwork


A Mutiny in Little Lesotho Is Rattling Big South Africa
Even in southern Africa, the kingdom of Lesotho is rarely big news, but in the last week an intensifying army mutiny has given its neighbor the jitters.
The reason for the anxiety is not so much Lesotho itself, a nation the size of Maryland with an impoverished population of 1.8 million, but its location: the country is completely surrounded by South Africa, which has enough problems without a civil war in its midst.


Corrections
A report on Sunday in The City, section 13, about a series of writers' lectures at Marymount Manhattan College misstated the telephone number for ticket information.
The number is (212) 517-0564.
The series begins at 7:30 tonight with a lecture by Pico Iyer.


Coaches' Boycott Is Still Possible
The future of the postponed boycott of basketball games organized by members of the Black Coaches Association could be determined by the outcome of discussions with a potential mediator.
Representatives of the Community Relations Service of the Justice Department, after meeting last Saturday in Denver with leaders of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, are expected to talk soon with B.C.A. leaders in an effort to determine whether they can help resolve the organization's differences with the N.C.A.A.
"We have not been informed as to when we will meet," Temple Coach John Chaney said yesterday during a telephone conference call, "but I am expecting to hear soon."


On My Mind; Rabin and Sharon
Yitzhak Rabin, a renowned general in Israel's wars, looks at maps of Israel and its Arab neighbors, studies military and political realities, and decides current peace negotiations are the road to lasting peace and security for his nation.
Ariel Sharon, a renowned general in the same wars, looks at the same maps, studies the same realities and decides the negotiations are the road to years of Palestinian terrorism ending in war or the draining of Israel, or both.


Leftist Terrorists in Greece Kill Ex-Chief of State Bank
Members of the far-left November 17 organization, Europe's most elusive terrorist group, shot dead the former president of the state-run National Bank of Greece today.
His chauffeur was seriously wounded but was reported out of danger.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Derek Lilliquist, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Treasuries Lower in Slow Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were mostly lower yesterday as traders and investors said they were leery of trading ahead of President Clinton's State of the Union address tonight and Government note auctions today and Wednesday.
Charles E. Rhoden, a managing director and head of fixed-income investing for Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross described yesteray's market as "dull, dull and duller."


As if Things Weren't Tough Enough in Trenton


A Pentagon Promotion for Mr. Perry
After several other candidates spurned his offer to be nominated as the next Secretary of Defense, President Clinton has settled on a sensible and safe fallback choice: William Perry, currently Deputy Secretary.
Mr.
Perry brings three considerable assets to his appointment -- years of Pentagon experience, recent confirmation by the Senate and a soft-spokenness that may help avoid needlessly inflammatory clashes over defense policy.
Adding to his appeal, he was also willing to be talked into taking the job, a qualification that seems peculiarly important these days.


No Headline
Companies
Executives and trustees of Green Point Savings Bank will not be allowed to receive compensation estimated to be worth more than $85 million in connection with its proposed initial public stock offering.
The decision by the New York State Banking Department to bar the profits is an unusual one.  [ Page A1. ]


Huizenga Bids to Buy 3d Team: Dolphins
In a move that reflects the continuing strong market for sports franchises, H. Wayne Huizenga, the chairman of Blockbuster Entertainment, agreed yesterday to buy his third professional team, the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League, from the family of the late Joe Robbie.
Huizenga already owns two south Florida expansion teams: baseball's year-old Florida Marlins, which he acquired for a $95 million fee, and the National Hockey League's half-season-old Florida Panthers, for $50 million.


Clinton Speech On Television
Seven national television networks have scheduled live coverage of President Clinton's State of the Union Message tonight.
The address to a joint session of Congress, starting at 9 P.M.
Eastern time, will be broadcast by ABC, CBS, NBC, PBS and Fox and will be transmitting on the cable networks CNN and C-Span.


Baseball Game for Those Who Love Player Stats
BASEBALL season began again last week for Hal Richman and his legions of fans.
On Opening Day, the faithful cut work, sat on planes, fought the ice (a slugfest) and waited in line for hours outside a cinderblock building to meet the season head-on.
It was madness.
It always is.
Strat-O-Matic turns hundreds of baseball fans into cultists and even Hal Richman can't fully explain it, 33 years after his board game took off.
He simply accepts that every January, they will come. ("It's part of the happening.") "Fans" (never customers) trek to Strat-O-Matic's headquarters, just across the road from the Glen Head train station, happy to take a number.
They leave clutching the latest pack of player statistics cards, ready to indulge their obsession.


Deluxe Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Gunfire Shatters A Boston Haven For Teen-Agers
For years the Chez Vous Roller Skating Rink offered children a refuge from the streets of Dorchester and Mattapan, two of Boston's tougher neighborhoods.
The rink, 70 steps from a police station, was considered more than a safe place to skate.
Until changing hands recently, its management ran after school programs, found tutors to help neighborhood children with their school work, and opened its doors to a local minister to teach Sunday school.


Wham! Madden Gives Fox An Image
Who could have conceived that the Philadelphia Eagles' 21st-round draft choice of 1958, who believes it isn't too cold to play if your spit doesn't freeze before it hits the ground and doesn't think Nate Newton, the Cowboys' immense offensive lineman, is fat, would be paid nearly as much as Troy Aikman, the Cowboys' $50 million quarterback?
"George Seifert said to me the other day, 'Do I have to treat you like a player now?' " said John Madden, the Fox Network's new $7.5 million a year announcer, referring to the San Francisco 49ers' coach.


Four Dead, and Family's Charred Dream as Well
The fire engines had left, the scent of smoke was fading and Sonia Bishop stood on the sidewalk on Staten Island yesterday, looking up at the charred window frames of the apartment building across the street and trying to remember the sound of her son's voice.
"I miss him -- 'Mommy, Mommy, Mommy" -- said Ms.
Bishop, 22, her round, youthful face tight with grief.
"That's it: 'Mommy, Mommy, Mommy.' " Quivering with tears, she hugged the man next to her, and the two rocked back and forth on the slushy sidewalk.


Farrakhan Calls on Black Men To Act Against Street Violence
Against the backdrop of two recent events that have renewed the controversy surrounding his organization, Louis Farrakhan, the minister of the Nation of Islam, came to Harlem last night to address a crowd of more than 10,000 black and Hispanic men and to offer an urgent plea for his audience to take steps to end black-on-black crime.
In his nearly two-hour address, Mr.
Farrakhan only touched on the recent clash between worshipers at a Nation of Islam mosque in Harlem and on a speech delivered at Kean College in Union, N.J., by one of his senior aides that has sparked vehement condemnation from Jewish religious leaders and black political figures, including the Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson. .


Medusa Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Health Plan's Foes Tap Well of Public Fear
Hillary Rodham Clinton passed through town two months ago campaigning on behalf of health care reform, but "Libby" and "Louise" are on the airwaves now, courtesy of the latest advertising campaign of the Health Insurance Association of America.
Interested in health care reform but worried about the Clinton plan, the two appealing actresses share their fears again and again with the television viewers of Georgia.


Review/Music; Sufi Ceremony of Devotion, Without the Whirling Ritual
Merkin Concert Hall was packed on Saturday night for a concert of Sufi music from Turkey by the Cinucen Tanrikorur Ensemble, whose program included music from the ayin, the whirling ritual of the Mevlevi order of dervishes.
For the first part of the concert, the five-man group appeared in traditional black robes and conical hats and performed a complete ceremony, with a call to prayer, short instrumental improvisations and songs of praise and a final incantation from the Koran.
There were, however, no whirling dancers.
If, as it seemed, the audience was expecting the kind of kinetic, joyful improvisations of Sufi performers from previous concerts in the World Music Institute's series of Islamic music events, Saturday's concert was a letdown.
The ceremonial music, composed in traditional style by Mr.
Tanrikorur, turned out to be a sequence of stately, quiet, nearly monochromatic devotional songs, played and sung in unison by the ensemble: Hafiz Ahmet Calisir on vocals and small drums, Murat Tokac on ney (reed flute), Fahrettin Cimenli on bowed tanbur (a long-necked lute), Reha Sagbas on kanun (zither) and Mr.
Tanrikorur on oud and vocals.


U.S. REJECTS PLEA TO ACT IN BOSNIA
The United States and France clashed openly today over a French request that the Clinton Administration pressure the Bosnian Government to accept a European peace plan dividing Bosnia and Herzegovina along ethnic lines.
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said in an interview tonight that he had made the appeal at breakfast today with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but that Mr.
Christopher had rejected the idea outright.


U.S. Data On AIDS To Be Free
TO expand public knowledge about AIDS and to help ease the financial burden on private AIDS organizations, the Government will provide unlimited free access to its AIDS-related electronic data bases.
Any individual or organization will be given a password on request allowing free use of the AIDS databases.
They list articles, books and abstracts about AIDS and H.I.V., the virus that causes the disease, as well as information about licensed and experimental drugs.
In general, the data bases provide references and abstracts but not full texts.


First Interstate Chooses Riney
First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles said yesterday that it had selected Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco to handle its account, with billings estimated at $25 million to $30 million.
Riney was awarded the account after a four-month review that was narrowed to that agency and DDB Needham Los Angeles.


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Union Camp Corp. (N)
COMPANY REPORTS ** Union Camp Corp. (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1993
1992
Sales
793,778,000
744,344,000
Net inc
17,552,000
7,256,000
Share earns
.25
.11
Shares outst
69,804,951
69,638,583
Yr sales
3,120,421,000
3,064,358,000
Net inc
50,043,000
b76,233,000
Share earns
.72
1.10
Shares outst
69,740,458
69,604,174
b-Included an accounting gain of $ 40,806,000 from adopting S.F.A.S.
No. 106 and No. 109.
The latest periods' share earnings included gains of 6 cents a share in the quarter and 17 cents a share for the year, on the sale of land.
The year's share earnings also included a charge of 23 cents a share to align the deferred tax reserve with the recently increased federal income tax rate.
Year-ago periods' share earnings included a charge of 8 cents a share related to the refinancing of debt in the quarter, and the year included a gain of 10 cents a share from the sale of land and several nonrecurring items which had the net effect of reducing earnings by 4 cents a share.
Union Camp said that income from operations in the latest year was $ 217,038,000, compared with $ 182,292,000 a year ago, which included a $ 57 million special charge to cover future expenditures to enhance workplace safety.


Surprise Switch By Nutri/System
Nutri/System Inc., the franchised diet center company based in Horsham, Pa., has unexpectedly changed agencies for the second time in five months, moving the creative portion of its estimated $30 million account to Gray Kirk/VanSant Advertising in Baltimore from the Philadelphia office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding.
Mark Miller, the president of Nutri/System, said yesterday that after Foote, Cone was awarded the account in a review that ended in August, executives at Gray Kirk/VanSant, which was one of the finalists, continued to ask if they could submit work.


Safeco Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Paris, Italians Are the Heroes
The French haute couture shows were predictably either very, very good or horrible.
A little less predictable was the fact that the heroes of the showing season were both Italian.
Gianni Versace of Milan and Valentino of Rome went to Paris with lustrous collections.
Versace incorporated modern elements in his distinguished-looking clothes, while Valentino achieved the requisite couture look in elegant clothes of quiet refinement.
Christian Lacroix upheld the glory of the French with a wildly imaginative collection that brought him the only standing ovation and caused him to be pelted with flowers like an opera diva.


We Can't Cover Everyone for Every Ailment
To the Editor:
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York was right when he stated on national television that "we don't have a health care crisis in America" (front page, Jan. 14), provided he was referring to a crisis in unlimited medical care for everyone on demand.


Forcing Schools to Help Themselves
A New York State panel recently recommended that the state be given authority, through legislation, to take over failing schools.
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, isn't prepared to go that far but he proposes an aggressive program to intervene to help failing schools succeed.
The State Education Department annually places schools with high dropout rates and declining scores on math, reading and other achievement tests under "registration review." New York City has had 67 schools on the list since its inception in 1989.
Thus far only 12 schools have been removed.


Memos Fault Community Policing
A program that has put 3,000 more police officers on the beat has failed to significantly increase arrests of drug dealers and prostitutes and has done little to improve police relations with the neighborhoods the new special units serve, according to a series of internal police memos prepared between January and August 1993.
While the memos do not conclude that the concept of community policing is unworkable or ineffective, they do suggest that the city's program will need a substantial overhaul.


Company Briefs
CARMIKE CINEMAS INC., Columbus, Ga., has acquired six movie theaters in Virginia, West Virginia and Georgia from the GC Companies of Boston for an undisclosed amount.
MONTGOMERY WARD HOLDING CORP., Chicago, has bought all rights to the Ship 'n Shore brand name from Ship 'n Shore Inc., Aston, Pa., for undisclosed terms.


U.S. Issues a Warning to Russia To Keep Economic Reform Going
In a sharp change of tone, the Clinton Administration's top specialist on Russia, testifying on Capitol Hill, sternly warned today that the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin must press full speed ahead with economic reforms or risk an inflation rate high enough to "topple governments, sometimes with the ugliest and most dangerous of results."
Applying undisguised pressure on Russia after a Cabinet shuffle in Moscow that left foes of swift economic change in charge, Strobe Talbott, the Deputy Secretary of State-designate, told a Senate subcommittee that "gradual reform is a prescription for hyperinflation and economic collapse."


Dynatech Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article by Senator Bob Dole yesterday about the United Nations misstated the level of U.S. spending on the peacekeeping mission to Somalia.
He wrote $1.5 billion, not $1.5 million.


DPL Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Anti-Abortion Protests To Continue, Groups Say
Anti-abortion groups say they will not be stopped by a Supreme Court decision yesterday allowing the Federal racketeering law to be used against protesters who block access to abortion clinics.
"We will continue our activities that save lives," said Wendy Wright, communications director of Operation Rescue National.
"For us, this is the same old thing. For years, we've faced massive lawsuits and horrendous jail sentences. But we're accountable to God, not to the Government, and as long as people believe it's right to save unborn children, they'll be willing to pay the price."


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
St.
John's  This could be a make-or-break week for the Redmen.
They face Boston College tomorrow and then take on Minnesota on Sunday, with both games at Madison Square Garden.


15 Face Federal Charges In Poker-Machine Racket
A reputed former acting boss of the Bonanno organized-crime family and 14 associates were charged in a Federal indictment in Manhattan yesterday with crimes ranging from murder to extortion in what prosecutors called a lucrative gambling racket that forced hundreds of small businesses to maintain poker-playing video games.
Prosecutors said the case would deal a heavy blow to the Bonanno group, the smallest of New York City's five Mafia families, which have all been battered by Federal and state prosecutions, internal power struggles and the defection of high-ranking members who have become Government witnesses.


A Clue Is Found to a Puzzle In the Life of Single-Sex Fish
FOR the female fish, the need has always been clear and compelling.
If she is to complete her bizarre reproductive cycle of cloning her eggs into a brood of offspring -- all female replicas of herself -- she must have a male fish's sperm.
And she needs his sperm, not for its genetic content, as most would-be mothers do, but to serve as a simple chemical trigger that sets her embryos growing.
From the male's point of view, however, the bargain has seemed less than appealing.
Mate with a female but not pass on one's genes to future generations?
What a waste, what a risk and what a bore.


Court Rules Abortion Clinics Can Use Rackets Law to Sue
The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that abortion clinics can invoke the Federal racketeering law to sue violent anti-abortion protest groups for damages.
The opinion, written by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, gives abortion clinics a potentially powerful legal weapon -- including the prospect of triple damages -- to combat and possibly to deter the violence that has made it increasingly risky and expensive for the clinics to stay in business.


Construction Worker Falls to Death in Brooklyn
A dilapidated floor in a building under renovation in Brooklyn collapsed yesterday morning, sending a construction worker falling two stories to his death and injuring two other workers, the police said.
The building, vacant and nearly gutted, is part of a project by the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development to restore a number of abandoned buildings in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section.
But the buildings are often filled with decaying floors and beams, posing potential dangers to workers.


Man in the News; Groomed for Leadership in Assembly: Sheldon Silver
To his colleagues, there was a sense of inevitability about Sheldon Silver's ascendancy today to Assembly Speaker, one of the most powerful positions in state government.
The previous two Speakers had named him as chairman of the powerful committees they had just vacated, a sure sign he was being groomed for leadership.
He was popular among new members, whom he cultivated assiduously.
And for the last year, few other potential heirs emerged from the pack, proving the truth of an Albany maxim: the front-runner usually remains in front.


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Opera Manager Named To Cultural Post by Giuliani
Calling the arts an economic engine vital to New York City's recovery, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named a former manager of the Metropolitan Opera and dean of Columbia University's School of the Arts to be the city's Cultural Affairs Commissioner.
The Mayor appointed Schuyler G. Chapin, 71, who most recently served as a vice president of Steinway &amp; Sons, to run the $85.3 million-a-year Cultural Affairs Department, which finances and oversees 31 cultural institutions on city property, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Natural History.
The department also administers grants to 400 other private groups, running from large organizations like the Museum of Modern Art to smaller operations like the Boys Choir of Harlem.


Flood Damage Stops Revival of a Dance Piece
The Erick Hawkins Dance Company has canceled six performances of "8 Clear Pieces," a major revival of a 1960 piece by Mr.
Hawkins that was to have opened tomorrow, because of flood damage to the company's studio in SoHo.
A water pipe that burst on Sunday caused damage to costumes, props and scenery, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The company's annual season at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, will open tonight at 8 as planned, with a performance of a new work by Mr.
Hawkins, "Many Thanks."


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 18


Bridge
The Cap Volmac World Top tournament, which ended Sunday in The Hague, was sponsored by a major software company based in Paris and won plaudits from the players.
"Everyone here is of the opinion that this was the best field ever anywhere," reports Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J.
The 16 pairs included all those who would be considered the very best in the world, and there were no relatively weak pairs.
The Dutch pair that finished last helped the Netherlands win the world team title in September.
It is not easy to decide whether North-South should bid to six clubs on the diagramed deal, and the players were split down the middle: four bid the slam and went down, and the other four rested comfortably in four spades.
Twelve tricks can be made easily if both black suits divide 3-2, and there are some very slight extra chances.
This makes it slightly worse than 50 percent, and in this situation one needs slightly better than that to justify the attempt.


Critic's Notebook; A Lesson in Humanity From a Master of It
Robert Shaw's performance of Britten's "War Requiem" on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall, the culmination of a weeklong choral workshop sponsored by Carnegie and led by Mr.
Shaw, was, as expected, a sublime event, sure to live in the memory.
But to a listener who had followed the sessions leading up to it, the concert seemed almost beside the point.
For by then Mr.
Shaw, in his inimitably earthy manner, had presided over a weeklong humanistic exercise of the highest order.
It didn't seem so at the start.
The first rehearsals of the adult chorus, last Tuesday at the Manhattan Center in midtown, struck an observer who has always admired Mr.
Shaw's results as oddly mechanistic affairs.
Mr.
Shaw's method is to isolate aspects of the music: rhythm, for example, through the singing of beat numbers instead of text; or enunciation, with words chanted on a single pitch.


In Paris, Italians Are the Heroes
The French haute couture shows were predictably either very, very good or horrible.
A little less predictable was the fact that the heroes of the showing season were both Italian.
Gianni Versace of Milan and Valentino of Rome went to Paris with lustrous collections.
Versace incorporated modern elements in his distinguished-looking clothes, while Valentino achieved the requisite couture look in elegant clothes of quiet refinement.
Christian Lacroix upheld the glory of the French with a wildly imaginative collection that brought him the only standing ovation and caused him to be pelted with flowers like an opera diva.


Classical Music in Review
Jean-Pierre Rampal  Flutist Metropolitan Museum of Art  Michael Parloff  Flutist Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church
Two flutists played Bach over the weekend, leaving one listener as confused as ever about historical accuracy versus modern needs.
In a short lecture and recital at the Metropolitan Museum on Friday, a shiny 20th-century flute (in the hands of Jean-Pierre Rampal) and a discreet harpsichord on the 18th-century model (played by John Steele Ritter) offered Bach's B-minor Sonata.
At Sunday afternoon's church setting, Michael Parloff's up-to-date flute, a harpsichord and modern strings and winds seemed sometimes more interested in debate than harmony.


INSIDE
Ruling on Packwood Diaries
A Federal judge gave the ethics panel access to five years of Senator Bob Packwood's diaries.
Page A13.
Oliver Smith Is Dead
The prodigious designer of sets for the theater, ballet, opera and films died of emphysema at 75.
Page B9.


Books of The Times; Tristan and Iseult as Latin Lovers
Brazil  By John Updike 260 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
A decade and a half ago, in "The Coup," John Updike tried to stretch the bounds of his fictional territory by abandoning the American suburbs for the wilds of Africa; in conjuring up the imaginary kingdom of Kush and its imperious leader Colonel Ellellou, he created a novel that aspired to be both a Nabokovian comedy of manners and a wickedly satiric exploration of cultural myths.


U.S. Data On AIDS To Be Free
TO expand public knowledge about AIDS and to help ease the financial burden on private AIDS organizations, the Government will provide unlimited free access to its AIDS-related electronic data bases.
Any individual or organization will be given a password on request allowing free use of the AIDS databases.
They list articles, books and abstracts about AIDS and H.I.V., the virus that causes the disease, as well as information about licensed and experimental drugs.
In general, the data bases provide references and abstracts but not full texts.


Classical Music in Review
I Musici
Avery Fisher Hall
There is something paradoxical about I Musici, the conductorless chamber orchestra founded in Rome 42 years ago.
With a hefty catalogue of recordings and several famous alumni (including the violinist Salvatore Accardo), it is certainly a name-brand ensemble; yet its name, which translates as the Musicians, is as generic as can be.


Review/Theater; In a Setting Not Lacking in Intimacy, Two Unhappy Marriages Have Dinner
You have a choice.
The next time the neighbors are obliged to hold an informal dinner party, you can hide out in the pantry and observe the goings-on through a crack in the door.


Union Camp Corp. (N)
COMPANY REPORTS ** Union Camp Corp. (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1993
1992
Sales
793,778,000
744,344,000
Net inc
17,552,000
7,256,000
Share earns
.25
.11
Shares outst
69,804,951
69,638,583
Yr sales
3,120,421,000
3,064,358,000
Net inc
50,043,000
b76,233,000
Share earns
.72
1.10
Shares outst
69,740,458
69,604,174
b-Included an accounting gain of $ 40,806,000 from adopting S.F.A.S.
No. 106 and No. 109.
The latest periods' share earnings included gains of 6 cents a share in the quarter and 17 cents a share for the year, on the sale of land.
The year's share earnings also included a charge of 23 cents a share to align the deferred tax reserve with the recently increased federal income tax rate.
Year-ago periods' share earnings included a charge of 8 cents a share related to the refinancing of debt in the quarter, and the year included a gain of 10 cents a share from the sale of land and several nonrecurring items which had the net effect of reducing earnings by 4 cents a share.
Union Camp said that income from operations in the latest year was $ 217,038,000, compared with $ 182,292,000 a year ago, which included a $ 57 million special charge to cover future expenditures to enhance workplace safety.


Temple-Inland Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


We Can't Cover Everyone for Every Ailment; High Tech Is Humane
To the Editor:
David Spiegel's claim in "Compassion Is the Best Medicine" (Op-Ed, Jan. 10) that "humane care costs less than high-tech care and is what patients want and need," overlooks the fact that to a patient who desperately wants to live and needs kidney dialysis, a heart transplant or a ventilator, high-tech care is humane care.


Travelers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Health Insurance Lobbyist Sits Down With White House, but Critical Ads Continue
A top lobbyist for the health insurance industry met today with senior White House officials to see if they could work together on any parts of President Clinton's health plan.
But at the same time, the industry unveiled new commercials criticizing Mr.
Clinton's proposal.
The lobbyist, Bill Gradison, president of the Health Insurance Association of America, said, "It was a constructive, issue-oriented, very useful meeting." More Money for Advertising
Jeffrey L. Eller, a White House spokesman, said: "It was a cordial, constructive meeting. It covered a wide range of issues. We will continue to talk."


Grand Valley Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Oliver Smith, Set Designer, Dead at 75
Oliver Smith, one of the most prolific and imaginative designers in the history of the American theater and a former co-director of American Ballet Theater, died on Sunday at his home in Brooklyn Heights.
He was 75.
The cause was emphysema, said Richard D'Arcy, a friend.


Quake Could Be Costliest U.S. Disaster
Government agencies and the insurance industry are still tallying the cost of devastation from the earthquake here a week ago Monday, but Federal and state officials agree that it may be the most expensive natural disaster in American history.
James Lee Witt, the head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, said today that the cost of replacing the buildings that had been destroyed here and repairing the damage to structures, highways and water and power systems might exceed the record of $30 billion, caused when Hurricane Andrew struck South Florida and southern Louisiana in 1992.


The Return of High Heels
The high-heel shoe is back in the Paris repertory, having nudged clunky work boots out of the limelight.
Shoes can be as fragile looking as Christian Lacroix's spindly sandal, below left, or reasonably solid, as in the splayed-heel, two-tone sandals by Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel, below right.


In City of Motorcycle-Cop Mystique, an Officer, and Quake Victim, Is Laid to Rest
In Los Angeles, there are cops -- and then, as every television fan knows, there are motorcycle cops.
It all has something to do with the unofficial symbol of the City of Angels: the highway, the tie that binds here, the catalyst of life.


Grow Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sale Rules Proposed For Banks
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation proposed new guidelines today for the sale of depositor-owned savings institutions, deals that have come under criticism for enriching executives at the expense of depositors.
The boards of many of these mutual savings banks have converted them into shareholder institutions through the sale of stock or have sold the mutuals to big banks.
The directors of these mutual savings units have often used them to obtain large blocks of free stock and stock options for themselves.


Ziff to Offer A Computer Data Service
The Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, seeking to take advantage of its strength in computer publications, said yesterday that it would create an electronic information service that it hoped would become a model for publishing in the electronic age.
Ziff-Davis will provide the contents of its magazines -- including PC Magazine, PC Computing, PC Week, Mac User, Mac Week, Computer Shopper and Computer Gaming World -- in the new publishing service, the Interchange Online Network.


Lett Won't Allow 2 Plays to Break Him
Leon Lett was alone in the Texas Stadium parking lot Sunday night.
The Dallas Cowboys had just beaten the San Francisco 49ers in the National Conference championship game, and the shy defensive lineman had a smile on his face as bright as the sun.
What player wouldn't, knowing he was going to the Super Bowl?
Then Lett was asked about a play he has tried to forget, and the smile quickly disappeared.
The play was perhaps the most notorious of the National Football League season: On Thanksgiving Day, on a snowy field in Dallas, Lett tried to scoop up a blocked kick against the Miami Dolphins but never got control.
Miami recovered, got another chance at a last-second field goal and won the game.
The loss almost cost Dallas home-field advantage throughout the playoffs


Amphenol Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why '3-Strike' Sentencing Is a Solid Hit This Season
President Bill Clinton is not the first Democrat to embrace a new anti-crime proposal with a punchy nickname and a national appeal among conservatives.
For a month now, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a former center fielder who may face a hard battle for re-election this year, has been talking almost nonstop about "three strikes, you're out."
The proposal would mandate life without parole for criminals convicted of a third violent felony.
The appeal is plain: it would assure irrevocable punishment for the worst offenders at time when voters are demanding tougher action against crime.


Cirrus Logic Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Miler Alone on the Oval
It has been a lonely indoor season for the miler MARCUS O'SULLIVAN .
An engaging 32-year-old Irish-born athlete from Philadelphia, O'Sullivan shows up, gabs with his rivals, and as soon as the starting gun goes off, the other runners hang back, shunning O'Sullivan and making him run alone.
"I've been running by myself," O'Sullivan said yesterday, blaming the lack of company in part for a somewhat lackluster showing in four Mobil Grand Prix races this month.
His times, 4 minutes 5.1 seconds, 4:02.40, 3:59.72 and 3:59.16, aren't much to brag about for a man who ran the third-fastest indoor mile in history (3:50.94) in 1988.
If there is any consolation, it is that his times have been improving race by race and he has won them all, putting him in the lead for the $40,000 first prize as the overall winner of the Mobil series.


In Surprise, Gitano Says It's for Sale
The Gitano Group, the financially strained jeans company, announced yesterday that it had put itself up for sale -- a move that puzzled analysts and cast a pall over the struggling business's future.
The company said Wal-Mart Inc., its largest customer, had pulled out of a business partnership with Gitano because the giant retailer's policies prohibit it from doing business with companies that have pleaded guilty to violating Federal laws.
In December, Gitano pleaded guilty to falsely reporting the country of origin for blouses imported in 1991 and 1992.


It Won't Be Over by Halftime. Honest.
Repeat after me: This Super Bowl will be different.
Say it again.
This Super Bowl will be different.


People
*
Maureen Ryan, executive vice president and director of client services and operations at Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello U.S.A., New York, was promoted to president, succeeding Ron Pantello, who was appointed chairman.
He continues as chief executive. *
Richard Roher, the chief operating officer at Daniel S. Roher Inc., New York, was promoted to president, succeeding Daniel S. Roher, who was named to the new position of senior counselor.


Consolidated Papers Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Apple to Offer a Paging Plan for Newtons
In an effort to pick up sluggish sales of its Newton hand-held computer, Apple Computer said yesterday that it would begin offering the system with a paging service under a two-year lease program with Mobilecomm, a subsidiary of BellSouth that offers a nationwide paging system.
Apple also said sales of the Newton were better than had been speculated.
Gaston Bastiaens, vice president and general manager of Apple's Personal Interactive Electronics division, said the company had sold 80,000 machines through the end of 1993.
He said that the number did not include those sold by Sharp, one of Apple's partners in the Newton Project.


Lewis to Defend Title Against Jackson in May
Lennox Lewis will defend his World Boxing Council heavyweight title against Phil Jackson of Miami in May, Main Events, which promotes Lewis's fights, said yesterday in Totowa, N.J.
The promoter said the fight probably would be held in Atlantic City or Reno.


Taxi Drivers Facing New License Rule
New Yorkers facing suspension of their driver's licenses for drunken driving or too many moving violations have always had a last-ditch remedy, applying for a "hardship license," good only for driving to and from work and in the course of their jobs.
But beginning yesterday, one group of drivers is no longer eligible for those licenses: taxi drivers.


Canary Chicks: Not All Created Equal
HATCHLING canaries defy the truism that all baby animals are cute.
Born just 14 hours earlier and each weighing hardly more than an aspirin tablet, the three little birds now balled together in a nest are extravagantly repellent, squirming grubs of flesh and fuzz that look less avian than larval.
They seem too feeble to be taken seriously, yet simulate the arrival of a parent canary with a puff of air and they start behaving as young birds should: lifting their heads, opening their microbeaks and begging for dinner.
"If they don't do this, if they fail to open their mouths, they will not get fed," said Dr.
Hubert Schwabl, a behavioral ecologist at the Rockefeller University Field Research Center here.
"If they don't beg, their parents will ignore them and they will die."


Critic's Notebook; For Sundance, Struggle to Survive Success
"Success is a tricky mistress," Robert Redford said.
"It's nice to have, but it's a tricky thing to embrace." He ought to know.
Though he was talking about the Sundance Film Festival, the festival's problems are the kinds that usually nag at movie stars: How to survive the pressures of fame?
How to avoid being typecast?
Sponsored by Mr.
Redford's Sundance Institute and devoted to independent films, this is the pop icon among American festivals.
Every January, film makers -- and the agents and distributors who lust after them -- must show up here, or the industry will wonder what's wrong with their careers.


U.S. Data On AIDS To Be Free
TO expand public knowledge about AIDS and to help ease the financial burden on private AIDS organizations, the Government will provide unlimited free access to its AIDS-related electronic data bases.
Any individual or organization will be given a password on request allowing free use of the AIDS databases.
They list articles, books and abstracts about AIDS and H.I.V., the virus that causes the disease, as well as information about licensed and experimental drugs.
In general, the data bases provide references and abstracts but not full texts.


Classical Music in Review
Gregg Smith Singers  St. Peter's Church
On Saturday night, the Gregg Smith Singers presented a wide-ranging program of American choral music from the 1980's.
All the works tried a return to tonality typical of the decade; the most successful made the return oblique and ambiguous.
Hayes Biggs's "O Sacrum Convivium" took off from the motet of Tallis, yet it handsomely reconfigured early modes in a modernistic scheme of free tonality; Harold Owen's "In Te Domine Speravi" (1982) followed Messiaen in drawing a rich harmonic texture from complex consonant chords; and Brian Fennelly's "Bright Star," based on Keats, journeyed from a dizzying haze of sound at its outset to a serene near-tonal close.


Ex-St. John's Player Accused of Assault
The former St.
John's University basketball player Lamont Middleton was charged with assault and resisting arrest yesterday when he hit a police officer after the car he was in was stopped for a traffic violation in the Bronx, the police said.
Middleton, 25, who played for St.
John's in the 1991-92 and 1992-93 seasons, was a passenger in a car driven by Marque Edwards, 24, of Green Pond, S.C.
Two plainclothes officers stopped the car for a traffic violation at 1:30 P.M. on the Edward L. Grant Highway in the Morris Heights section, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Only Your Own DNA Makes a Perfect Clone
To the Editor:
"Reproductive Revolution Is Jolting Old Views" (front page, Jan. 11) contains an inadvertent error.


No Headline
"Our whole attitude toward the telephone has changed. In our grandparents' day, they would think nothing of waiting five minutes for a coast-to-coast call to go through. Now if we have to wait three seconds, it's like some form of archaic torture." -- DR.
JAMES KATZ, a sociologist who studies the telephone culture.  [ B6:1. ]


Northwest Natural Gas Co.  (NMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Man Is Killed in a Struggle With an Off-Duty Officer
A 29-year-old Long Island man was shot in the head and killed late Sunday in a struggle with an off-duty New York City police officer after the man jumped from a van that had been careering down the street where the officer lived.
The victim was unarmed, the police said, and the officer's gun may have gone off accidentally.


New Yorker Admits Errors But Denies Fabrication
The New Yorker magazine published an unusual apology yesterday admitting that there were "errors of reporting, checking and editing" in an article last week about Court TV, the cable-television network that specializes in trial coverage.
Steven Brill, the Courtroom Television Network's chief executive, said yesterday that "quotes are fabricated" in the original article and that the magazine's fact-checking system failed.


Giuliani Urges Street Policing Refocused on Crime
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the community policing program that was a hallmark of the Dinkins administration must be redefined toward fighting crime and away from putting neighborhoods in touch with social services.
Mr.
Giuliani made his remarks on a day in which the New York City Police Department released a series of internal memorandums that highlighted a range of problems with community policing.
The memos, some dating back to last winter, showed that some officers were faking reports that showed how often they walked their beats and that there had been a large percentage of disillusioned officers transferring out of the program.  [ Page B2. ]


Review/Dance; Debuts With Little to Disappoint
Young talent dazzled in a series of debuts at the New York City Ballet over the weekend, which also included the season's first performance of "Harlequinade," one of George Balanchine's rare story ballets and certainly his cheeriest.
Miranda Weese, a more-than-promising 19-year-old corps member, had her first big assignment on Sunday night at the New York State Theater in "Who Cares?" Ethan Stiefel, the company's golden boy, was seen for the first time in "Fearful Symmetries" on Saturday afternoon with Yvonne Borree, also making a debut.


Peco Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Rebuff Airlines in Industry's Effort to Restrict Landing Fees
The Supreme Court today rejected an airline industry attack on airport landing fees in a ruling that could strengthen the hand of airports seeking to exact more revenue from commercial airline operations.
The impact of the 7-to-1 decision was limited, however, by the Court's assertion that it would defer in future cases to the Department of Transportation's view of whether a particular airport's fees were "reasonable." The Government had not intervened in the particular dispute before the Court, involving the Kent County International Airport near Grand Rapids, Mich., leaving the Justices to make their own determination, with evident reluctance, of the reasonableness of the fees at issue.


Q&amp;A
Snowflakes
Q.
How is the construction of the six points of a snowflake coordinated so they all come out the same?


9 Hurt in Elevator Crash At Welfare Office Site
Nine people were injured yesterday morning when an elevator in a troubled Manhattan building that houses some of the city's Human Resources Administration offices plummeted two stories to the building's basement.
Six welfare workers and three clients in the elevator at 12 West 14th Street suffered non-critical injuries, including broken bones and bruises, said Louise Jenkins, a spokeswoman for the Emergency Medical Service.
All but one victim, who refused medical care, were hospitalized.


Yugoslavia Fishing for Hidden Caches
Will the "super dinar" fly?
With an economy in ruins from international sanctions, inflation and mismanagement, the rump Yugoslavia, consisting of Serbia and Montenegro, today issued a new currency, supposedly backed by German marks and gold reserves.
The hope is to lure people's hard currency savings into the Government coffers.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Appreciating Fluency in Other Dialects
To the Editor:
I became acutely aware of the need for bidialectism as a linguist trained at the University of Hawaii (apropos your Jan. 5 front-page article on black dialects).


Duke Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Rooting Against 4 Monkeys
SOME people call it the Super Bowl rematch "nobody wanted," but the Bills wanted it and so did everybody wearing a red-white-and-blue parka in Buffalo.
Some people still call the Dallas Cowboys "America's team," but in a nation crumbled by an earthquake, frozen by Arctic blasts, flooded by Midwestern rivers, wearied by the economy and terrorized by crime, the Bills are really America's team.


Parent Sets A Spinoff Of Lehman
The American Express Company said yesterday that it would pump more than $1 billion into its Lehman Brothers investment firm, then spin it off to its shareholders, finally closing the door on its unsuccessful effort to become a supermarket of financial services.
American Express also said that partly as a result of the planned spinoff its earnings rose nearly fourfold in the fourth quarter.


Abraham Gellinoff, for 16 Years A New York Justice, Is Dead at 91
Abraham J. Gellinoff, a State Supreme Court justice for 16 years, beginning in 1961, died on Friday at his home in Washington Heights.
He was 91.
He died of natural causes, said Steven Masket, a grandson.


N.Y.P.D. Clean
In recommending a new approach to police corruption in New York -- an independent audit commission to monitor the Police Department's anticorruption activities -- the Mollen Commission prompted a reasonable question: why should anyone think this approach would succeed where so many others have failed?
Success in controlling corruption lies in facing two unpalatable truths.
The first, that the police alone cannot fight corruption successfully for long, is by now all too obvious; it's why so many people say the solution lies in an independent special prosecutor.


GIULIANI REVAMPS MINORITY PROGRAM ON CITY CONTRACTS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city had eliminated a significant element of a Dinkins administration affirmative action program that has directed a fifth of city contracts to companies owned by minorities and women.
Mr.
Giuliani said that since his inauguration, he had effectively terminated a provision of the program under which companies owned by women or by members of minorities could be awarded city contracts, even if their bids were 10 percent higher than the lowest bid.
Calling that aspect of the program "indefensible," Mr.
Giuliani said he would take steps to officially terminate the provision.


Equifax Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan: The Old Order Fights Back
It was high-order treachery when 17 old-line Socialists sabotaged Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's do-or-die political reform bill.
But those who staged the ambush could yet turn out to be among its victims.
The Japanese public is tired of corrupt money politics and is deeply angry at politicians who stand in the way of reform.
Meanwhile the Clinton Administration has not helped Mr.
Hosokawa as he tries desperately to pass some version of reform.
On Sunday, at the height of the crisis, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen suddenly showed up in Tokyo to press Washington's dubious demands for import quotas and immediate economic stimulus.


Nationalist Vote Toughens Russian Foreign Policy
A year ago, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev stunned an international conference in Stockholm with a sword-rattling anti-Western speech that for a brief moment had diplomats thinking that Russia had reverted to its old imperialist ways.
Half an hour later, Mr.
Kozyrev announced that the speech had been a ruse to alert the world to the dangers posed by the nationalist opposition to President Boris N. Yeltsin.


Nynex to Cut 22% of Work Force
In the third big job reduction announced this month in the telephone industry, the Nynex Corporation said yesterday that it planned to cut 16,800 employees, or 22 percent of its payroll, in New York and New England by the end of 1996, but that it hoped to avoid sweeping layoffs.
The announcement continues a trend among phone companies to seek new efficiency in an increasingly competitive communications business by paring their payrolls.
On Jan. 13 the GTE Corporation said it planned to eliminate 17,000 jobs over the next three years, many of them through layoffs.
And on Jan. 7 the Pacific Telesis Corporation said it would cut 10,000 positions by the end of 1997.


Gifts Keep Alive Search for Other Life in Universe
JUST as Congress was pulling the plug, an infusion of private money has kept alive the search for intelligent life elsewhere in the universe.
Some of the nation's wealthiest entrepreneurs have donated $4.4 million to continue a project using radiotelescopes to observe 1,000 of the closest stars that most resemble the Sun, trying to detect signals from civilizations that might exist on planets that might be orbiting such stars.
The project, begun by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in October 1992 and intended to run a decade, was canceled by Congress last October, with Government support scheduled to run out in March.


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


King's Wrath: Morocco Family Tale of 2 Decades
Morocco is a country where human rights violations have been commonplace and speaking against the King is a risk few dare to take.
But after two decades in secret prisons in Morocco, Maria-Inan Oufkir feels that she has little to lose.
Her family's name is one that people in Morocco will pronounce only in a whisper.
For almost 20 years, the family was imprisoned by King Hassan II, said Miss Oufkir, a slight 32-year-old woman, who recounted their story in two interviews.


CHRONICLE
The fallout from KARL LAGERFELD's use of a verse from the Koran in his spring couture collection for Chanel continues to spread, despite apologies from the designer and the fashion house.
Now, Chanel has engaged a bodyguard for CLAUDIA SCHIFFER, the supermodel who paraded down the runway in a low-cut strapless bustier with what Chanel later said were fragments of verses from the Muslim holy book embroidered in gray pearls.
According to a report by Reuters, Ms.
Schiffer's mother told Bild, a German newspaper, that the model would not set foot on the streets without security because of alleged threats.


Meteoroids Hit Atmosphere In Atomic-Size Blasts
SECRET data from military satellites in orbit thousands of miles above Earth show that the planet is continually bombarded by big meteoroids that explode in blasts the size of atomic detonations.
The data, from spacecraft meant to watch for rocket firings and nuclear explosions, were declassified recently by the Defense Department and are to appear later this year in a book.
From 1975 to 1992, the satellites detected 136 explosions high in the atmosphere, an average of eight a year.
The blasts are calculated to have intensities roughly equal to 500 to 15,000 tons of high explosive, or the power of small atomic bombs.
Experts who have analyzed the data are publishing it in the book, "Hazards Due to Comets and Asteroids," say that the detection rate is probably low and that the actual bombardment rate might be 10 times higher, with 80 or so blasts occurring each year.


3 Oil Companies Show Profit Gains
The recent decline in oil prices is proving to be more boom than bust to the nation's oil companies.
Texaco, Amoco and Ashland Oil posted higher quarterly earnings yesterday partly because the price of the gasoline and home heating oil they sold did not fall as fast as the crude oil from which they were made.
The windfall helped offset declines from the exploration and production of crude oil, which fell from about $17 a barrel in September to about $14 in December.
Other oil companies are also expected to see higher earnings because of the price spread.


Silicon Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data Delayed On Short Sales
The release of data on open positions on short sales for issues trading on Nasdaq from mid-December to mid-January has been delayed.
The information, which was scheduled to be published in The New York Times tomorrow, will appear on Saturday instead.


Arco Chemcial Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harland (John) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nitroglycerin and Shoe at Center of Blast Trial Testimony
With a tale of a shoe stained with sulfuric acid and some speculation about frozen nitroglycerin, an F.B.I. forensic chemist resumed his testimony in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday.
The chemist, Steven Burmeister, was continuing testimony from last week, in which he identified objects found in various places associated with the defendants in the case and told the jury the results of F.B.I. laboratory analyses on them.
Most of the objects involved substances that can be used in the manufacture of explosives.


Bills Will Worry About History After They're Done With Game
The Bills arrived in town this afternoon confident that they were going to be able to put the past behind them and start with a clean slate heading into their fourth consecutive Super Bowl.
Coach Marv Levy, asked whether he and the team were prepared to be bombarded by questions about their losses in the last three Super Bowls, said: "Right now I'm not worried about history or perspective. I'm worried about Charles Haley, Troy Aikman and Emmitt Smith. They say when Presidents get to the end of their terms they start to worry about their place in history. I'm not at that point yet."


Genlyte Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Tug-of-War on Bank Regulation
Companies lobby the Government all the time, but in recent weeks the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department have turned the tables by lobbying the banks they regulate.
The Fed and the Administration are at war over Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen's plans to change the way banks and savings and loans are regulated.
Both sides are actively seeking the political support of financial institutions whose regulatory fortunes and futures they control.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 15 about the scene as President Clinton appeared on Russian television during his visit to Moscow, adjoining the main article about the day's events, misstated the year of his Presidential campaign.
It was 1992, not 1988.


Fear and Prayer in a Quake Tent City
When a strong aftershock struck at 8:15 in the evening, thumping the ground several times under the tent city in Lanark Park, Maria Rodriguez staggered out of the dinner line, wobbled a moment under the eucalyptus trees and then slumped to the ground.
"She's just had too many aftershocks," said Dr.
Jay Starks, a Salvation Army volunteer, after reviving Mrs.
Rodriguez with some cool water and calm words on Sunday evening.


They Went to Amazon Before Cousteau
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 7 report on efforts by Colombian scientists and conservationists to protect the Amazon River dolphins gives Jacques Cousteau perhaps too much credit.
Although he did much to inform and concern the public about the Amazon region, he was a latecomer to this part of the world.


Caremark International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wright Is Arrested
The man was all by himself at an interstate rest stop, not a car or another soul in sight, waving his arms wildly, so when RON MATEKAL , a Tooele County, Utah, deputy sheriff, happened by, he thought he ought to investigate.
As Sgt.
JOE BRADSHAW later told it, there was no physical resistance, but it took some doing to persuade the agitated young man to get into the patrol car.
It wasn't until they got to the sheriff's office that Matekal learned that he had picked up LUTHER WRIGHT , the former Seton Hall star who is a rookie with the Utah Jazz.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Tinkering with success, Visa tries to create new, invigorating installments of a longtime campaign.
SINCE 1985, Visa has been proclaiming, through advertising by BBDO New York, that "It's everywhere you want to be."
But where does Visa want to be?


Merrill and Paine Webber Show Accelerating Profits
Surprising no one, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and the Paine Webber Group said yesterday that fourth-quarter earnings were very strong, capping a third straight year of record profits.
A third brokerage firm, Smith Barney Shearson, a subsidiary of the Travelers Corporation, also posted strong results.
But investors could be in for a surprise, brokerage analysts said, if the financial markets are as busy over the next two months as they have been so far in January.


Tennis Center Scores Again
The controversial plans for the $180 million expansion of the National Tennis Center at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park have survived another hurdle by incurring no legal suits during a four-month period that followed the project's Sept. 23 acceptance by the City Council.
Although environmentalists had threatened to block the United States Tennis Association's plan to annex 42 acres of parkland for its self-funded project, the U.S.T.A. had not been notified of any impending lawsuits by yesterday's deadline.
"The 24th was the magic day, and as far as I know, there is no present legal impediment to the plans," said George Gowan, a Manhattan lawyer and general counsel to the U.S.T.A.


Some Research Must Have Voluntary Subjects
To the Editor:
According to David Rothman in "Government Guinea Pigs" (Op-Ed, Jan. 9), an institutional review board certifies that "the risks to the subject do not outweigh the benefits." Researchers and review boards cannot deal in "benefits," only "possible benefits." A review board makes certain that the language is not promissory, coercive or misleading.


Louis Sheaffer Memorial
A memorial tribute to Louis Sheaffer, a Pulitzer Prize-winning biographer of the playwright Eugene O'Neill, is to be held on Thursday at 6 P.M. in the Guild Hall of the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, 122 Pierrepont Street, in Brooklyn Heights.
Among those scheduled to participate are the writer Nora Sayre and William D. Phillips, editor in chief of Little, Brown.
Mr.
Sheaffer died on Aug. 7 at the age of 80.


Travelers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


By Design; Let the Games Begin
Athletic wear has come out of the locker room and onto the high-fashion runways.
And it isn't just a matter of sneakers and cashmere sweat pants.
Back in the 70's, Geoffrey Beene made whimsical evening dresses based on football jerseys.
Now racing-back tanks, referees' shirts, baseball jackets and prizefighters' shorts are inspiring designers for spring.


Suncor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounting Settlement In Australia
In one of the largest settlements agreed to by an accounting firm, KPMG Peat Marwick of Australia will pay $97 million to the State of Victoria, Australia, to settle charges involving its audit of a merchant bank that failed in 1990.
After five months of negotiation, the Victoria government and the firm announced the settlement in Melbourne, Australia, yesterday, with the sides saying in a joint statement that the agreement was better than "protracted and expensive litigation extending for some years." In agreeing to the payment, KPMG Peat Marwick did not admit to wrongdoing.


Grumman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quantum Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Personal Health
ONE friend tells me he needs at least eight hours of sleep each night to avoid feeling "dead tired" the next day.
Another says that if she gets more than six hours a night she wakes up "feeling like a lead balloon."
How do you know how much sleep is the right amount, and how can you adjust your sleep schedule if you fail to get enough sleep now and then, or night after night?


First Financial Management Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Same Old Tune: Rangers Know the Way to San Jose's Goal
A week off for the All-Star Game didn't stall the Rangers' momentum, it merely refreshed them, especially Mark Messier, their captain.
Messier scored twice early in the game to spark the Rangers to an 8-3 romp over the Sharks tonight at San Jose Arena before a sellout crowd of 17,190.


Silence Order Lifted for Trial Over Drug-Testing Program
A Federal judge today lifted his four-day-old order stopping lawyers from discussing with news organizations a class-action suit filed on behalf of pregnant, drug-addicted women against the Medical University of South Carolina.
The judge, C. Weston Houck of Federal District Court in Charleston, said he saw no reason to stop lawyers for the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy in New York from talking to reporters.


The 'Rescue' Racket
In reinstating a lawsuit by abortion clinics on Monday, the Supreme Court did not say the members of Operation Rescue and similar groups were racketeers.
But it did rule, unanimously, that the clinics had a legal right to try to prove they were.
If they can prove a pattern of criminal violence, the clinics will have acquired a useful legal tool against "rescue" efforts to shut them down.
Two concurring Justices warned that unless the courts were careful, some of these lawsuits could deter some abortion opponents from engaging in constitutionally protected speech or demonstrations.
Courts must be careful; but Congress needs to amend the law to make free speech safeguards explicit.


A Dispute Over Officer Numbers
Amid mounting criticism about the effectiveness of New York's community policing program, an old dispute resurfaced yesterday over whether the Police Department was putting enough new officers financed through special taxes on the streets.
Seeking to calm the disagreement, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday appointed a panel to settle the three-year-old dispute between lawmakers and police officials about how many officers are required on the streets under the 1991 anti-crime law known as "Safe Streets, Safe City."


People
*
Paul Meijer, creative director at PMSvW/Young &amp; Rubicam, Amsterdam, will join Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising, New York, in a similar position.
In addition to his responsibilities as a creative director, he will also head a new group being established to work on applications for new technologies and communications, including infomercials.


Chevron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bradshaw Heads for Fox TV
Terry Bradshaw, who was introduced by Jay Leno Monday night on "The Tonight Show" as "newly unemployed," has unsurprisingly found new work with the Fox Network, which will announce his hiring tomorrow.
The former studio analyst for CBS's "The N.F.L. Today," will be signing a four-year contract probably worth at least twice the $650,000 a year he was paid by CBS.
Bradshaw will be introduced by Fox along with Pat Summerall, who will team again on Fox's games with John Madden, and Ed Goren, the new executive producer, who has been a senior producer at CBS Sports.


Water-Main Break Creates Hole in L.I.R.R. Trackbed


Russia Seeks U.N. Talks on Bosnia As France Tries a New Peace Plan
Russia called today for an urgent meeting of United Nations Security Council Foreign Ministers in Geneva to discuss the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina as France prepared a new peace initiative based on the premise that Europe needs Washington's help to stop the fighting in the Balkans.
An aide to President Francois Mitterrand said the new French plan might involve additional mediators, perhaps an American and a Russian, in the peace negotiations.
Talks mediated by Lord Owen, representing the European Union, and Thorvald Stoltenberg, representing the United Nations, have made scant progress in recent months.


Bruce, Sir, Please Get That Man Off Me
Linebacker Mark Maddox faced his first moment of truth as the Bills' defensive signal caller when he asked defensive end Bruce Smith, one of the most feared and dominant pass rushers in the National Football League, to handle an offensive lineman so that Maddox could get a better shot at the ballcarrier.
"I said, 'Bruce, can you please keep that man off me?' " Maddox said.


Many Ideas but Not All to Detroit's Liking
Karl H. Hellman is Detroit's most feared kind of E.P.A. official: a "technology-forcing" bureaucrat.
As chief of the technology development branch at the Federal Environmental Protection Agency's main car laboratory here, Mr.
Hellman has the job of offering the auto industry new pollution-control techniques and trying to disprove auto makers' frequent complaints of "it can't be done."


STATE OF THE UNION: The Republicans; In G.O.P. Response to Clinton, Dole Denies There Is 'Crisis' in Health Care
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, tonight assailed President Clinton's health care plan as "a massive overdose of Government control."
"Our country has health care problems, but no health care crisis," Mr.
Dole said in a nationally televised response to the President's State of the Union Message.
Mr.
Dole called for more modest steps toward universal health insurance than he has supported in the past.


Holyfield-Moorer Site
EVANDER HOLYFIELD has given his approval to Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., as the site for his heavyweight title fight against MICHAEL MOORER on April 22.
Holyfield won the International Boxing Federation and World Boxing Association titles when he outpointed RIDDICK BOWE last November.
Moorer, of Britain, is rated the No. 1 contender by the I.B.F. and W.B.A.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Clippers Stop Sonics  Ron Harper scored a season-high 37 points and Danny Manning had 27 as the Los Angeles Clippers beat host Seattle, 111-103, last night, the SuperSonics' season-worst third consecutive loss.
The Clippers broke a 19-game losing streak at Seattle with their first victory here since Dec. 28, 1985.
Despite their three straight defeats, the Sonics' 30-8 record is still the league's best.
Since their 26-3 start after a victory over Utah in Seattle on Jan. 8, the Sonics are 4-5.
Harper hit 15 of 21 shots, including two of three 3-point attempts, to come within 3 points of his career-best 40 points.
Harper, who had 24 points in the opening half, also finished with 10 rebounds.
Heat 119, Hornets 98: Rony Seikaly scored 26 points and led a third-quarter run that sent Miami past visiting Charlotte.
Seikaly had 11 points during a 20-4 burst that put the Heat ahead, 84-57, with five minutes left in the third period.
Seikaly shot 10 for 12 over all and had 13 rebounds.(AP)


No Headline
"These changes are intended to do one thing. Get this department, shake it up, shake off the lethargy, shake off the drift and passivity and laissez faire that I sense in this organization." WILLIAM J. BRATTON, Police Commissioner of New York City.  [ A1:1. ]


Merck and Warner-Lambert Split on Results for Quarter
Two large drug companies reported mixed results for the fourth quarter yesterday as pressures on prices by large buyers continued to slow earnings growth in the pharmaceutical industry.
Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, posted a relatively strong quarter, but growth in profits was slightly reduced by Merck's acquisition on Nov. 18 of Medco Containment Services, the big managed-care drug distributor.


Cuomo Appoints a New Head Of New York Power Authority
Seeking to put the foundering New York Power Authority on a sharply different course, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo named S. David Freeman, who has brought radical innovations to several public power agencies, to head the authority yesterday.
Mr.
Freeman, 68, is a former chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority, at which he abandoned or shut eight nuclear reactors, writing off billions in capital investment, to concentrate resources on several others and push them into operation.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HOLLYWOOD PARK INC., Inglewood, Calif., has signed a letter of intent to acquire the Woodlands, a thoroughbred and greyhound racing facility in Kansas City, Kan.


Air Cleared Over Attack On Riley's Strategy
Concerned about a published report in which unnamed players were quoted as questioning the team's offensive philosophy, the Knicks held a clear-the-air team meeting after yesterday morning's shoot-around.
The 39-minute locker-room summit came in the aftermath of anonymous quotes from two players published in yesterday's editions of The Daily News.
The unnamed players reportedly complained about a lack of diversity in the Knicks' offense, saying that Coach Pat Riley's offense had become overly dependent on Patrick Ewing, especially late in games.


INSIDE
A Growing Power in Russia
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin of Russia, named a year ago as a compromise candidate, is increasingly calling the shots.
Page A6.
Era Ending at Conde Nast
Alexander Liberman will step down from one of the most powerful jobs in American journalism: editorial director of Conde Nast.
Page D1.
Turnaround at I.B.M.
I.B.M. posted its first profit in more than a year, in a sign that the company may be recovering.
Page D1.
Rebuff for Mexican Leader
Indian leaders met with Mexico's President, and they echoed the demands of rebels.
Page A3.


Johnson Is Getting Down to Business
To offensive lineman John Gesek, it was no big deal.
But that didn't stop the Dallas coach, Jimmy Johnson, from giving him and defensive end Chad Hennings an earful this morning about being late for a team meeting.
Johnson was visibly upset with Gesek in the team hotel, and Gesek said it was because he and Hennings were about two minutes late for a morning meeting.
Gesek, who slept through his wake-up call, said Johnson's words served as the wake-up call he had missed.
Apparently Hennings overslept as well.


Penn State's Women Roll
Jackie Donovan scored 25 points and Tina Nicholson 22 to lead the No. 1 Penn State women's basketball team to a 74-66 victory over No. 17 Ohio State last night in Columbus, Ohio.
With the game tied at 45-45 and 11 minutes 55 seconds remaining, Penn State (14-0, 6-0 in the Big Ten) went on a 13-6 run to take the lead for good, 58-51.
Tiffany Longworth sparked the run with two baskets, including a 3-pointer.


Cowboy Offensive Line Sheds Anonymity but Not Pounds
The Dallas Cowboys' center, John Gesek, took off a $5,000 Rolex watch, a gift from running back Emmitt Smith, and twirled it in his hands with pride.
He wasn't so enamored of the watch; it was the idea of feeling appreciated.
Appreciation is something offensive linemen secretly crave but rarely receive.
He smiled, turned the watch over and pointed to the inscription on the back.
It read:


STATE OF THE UNION: The Overview; Clinton Vows Fight for His Health Plan
President Clinton offered a broad new defense of his health care plan tonight and vowed to veto any health insurance proposal that did not provide coverage for all citizens.
In a State of the Union Message that outlined Mr.
Clinton's vision for domestic renewal without offering new legislative proposals or policy initiatives, Mr.
Clinton said that the nation must now build upon the economic successes attained during his first year in office and that "our work has just begun."


Chaos? Creativity? The Scardino Era At Playwrights
"People are saying to me, 'I hear it's chaos,' " Don Scardino said.
"I look at them and I say, 'It is?' "
"It" is Playwrights Horizons, the 23-year-old nonprofit theater on West 42d Street, which Mr.
Scardino serves as artistic director.
It was two years ago this month that he took over the post from Andre Bishop, who had moved uptown to Lincoln Center Theater, and for impatient, show-me-what-you-got theatergoers, that's about the length of time it takes for subscribers and other institution watchers to become impatient with a new regime, or nostalgic for the old one.


Air War Breaks Out Over Rerouting Plan; Newark Flights Are at Issue in 2 States
Pit a group of suburban New Jerseyans, irked at airplane noise and backed by an influential senator, against a group of scrappy New Yorkers, weary of even more noise from more planes, and what do you get?
A proposal for rerouting flights from Newark over Staten Island, Long Island and Westchester County, and a first-class border air war.
At issue is a plan, drafted by a New Jersey citizens group supported by Senator Frank J. Lautenberg and under study by the Federal Aviation Administration, which would direct flights that now take off over such northern New Jersey enclaves as Scotch Plains and Basking Ridge, east and south over the Atlantic Ocean instead.


2 Leading House Democrats Are Retiring
Two leading liberals in the House, each representing a fundamental constituency of the Democratic Party, announced today that they would retire after three decades in Congress.
The two, Representatives Don Edwards of California, first elected in 1962, and William D. Ford of Michigan, elected in 1964, are the 32d and 33d members of the House to announce that they will not run for re-election in November.


Russian Premier's Star Is Rising Fast
At a time when serious questions are being raised about the course of Russian politics, a former Communist Party bureaucrat who has been Prime Minister for little more than a year is more often than not these days making decisions for President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Still little known in the West, the official, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, was chosen in December 1992 by Mr.
Yeltsin to serve as Prime Minister, when a hard-line revolt in Parliament forced him to drop Yegor T. Gaidar, who had been the architect of his economic reforms.
Mr.
Chernomyrdin, a stocky 55-year-old, was a compromise candidate -- the classic "centrist" to substitute for the highly provocative Mr.
Gaidar.


A Classic Tuscan Dish With an American Twist
VARIATIONS on the Tuscan dish of tuna with peas and tomatoes are found in many Italian cookbooks.
Like all Italian dishes, it has no single correct version.
Sometimes hot pepper is an ingredient; sometimes onions; sometimes sage.
But I have never seen a recipe in which the tuna and peas are served over pasta.
What is so wonderful about American cooking is it allows a cook to do whatever sounds and tastes good.
And tuna in tomato sauce clings nicely to penne.


U.S. Urged to Bar Narcotic Lollipop for Children
A group of doctors asked the Government today to block final approval of a narcotic lollipop intended to calm children before surgery.
The lollipop, made by Abbott Laboratories under the trade name Oralet, was given tentative approval by the Food and Drug Administration in October.


Defense Spars With Chemist On Testimony In Bomb Case
The question was this: If you handle large amounts of nitric acid, isn't it almost inevitable that you will have some yellowing of the skin?
The answer: Yes, it is likely that you may have some irritation of the skin or some discoloration.
That was one of the often rather technical subjects that came up in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday as defense lawyers took turns trying to beat concessions out of an F.B.I. expert on explosive residues who is a key witness on the prosecution's side of the case.


Eating Well
MEATLESS does not necessarily mean low in fat.
It never has.
Cheese, cream, butter, nuts and seeds have plenty of fat and calories.
And just because a dish has the name of a vegetable in the title, don't assume it is more healthful than a sirloin steak.
Eggplant parmigiana comes immediately to mind.
More and more Americans are eating vegetarian meals, and makers of frozen foods are offering more meatless choices.
It ought to be easy to compare the nutritional value of their offerings for things like pizza, manicotti, and macaroni and cheese.
But after spending several hours in the supermarket, wearing wool-lined gloves and poring over the frozen-food case, making notes on almost 50 vegetarian foods, I found that it was not possible to draw firm conclusions.


Quake Provides Glimpse Of Future of Commuting
After last week's earthquake shook down vital highway arteries, creating huge traffic tie-ups, Jack Jacobson, an engineer who lives in the Antelope Valley, was less than thrilled about the prospect of a three-hour drive to work at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 50 miles away in Pasadena.
So Mr.
Jacobson worked at home all week, using a personal computer and video teleconferencing system supplied by his employer, which allowed him to conduct face-to-face meetings and exchange design documents with colleagues at his laboratory.


CHRONICLE
Another presidential medal at another branch of the City University will be awarded to a different kind of hero next month.
FERNANDO MATEO, the originator of the Toys for Guns campaign aimed at reducing urban violence, will receive the Presidential Medal of John Jay College of Criminal Justice on Feb. 2 from the school's president, GERALD W. LYNCH.


Nicaraguan Lawmakers Meet In Effort to Break Deadlock
Nicaragua's rival political factions attended the National Assembly together for the first time in 16 months today as the country's leaders tried to end a bitter deadlock that has contributed to the country's political instability.
Today, 90 of the 92 legislators discussed a measure to revise the national labor code.
But for now the fact that the session was held at all may be far more important than any bill the Assembly approves.


Roosevelt Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harris Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'93 Wages and Benefits Held to 3.5%, U.S. Says
Aided by moderation in the cost of health insurance, the nation's employers held wage and benefit increases to 3.5 percent last year, matching 1992's record low advance, the Labor Department reported today.
The quarterly calculation of the Employment Cost Index combined with a separate report on 1993 contract settlements to reassure economists that inflation is likely to remain subdued this year, probably only modestly above last year's 2.7 percent rise in consumer prices.


Phelps Dodge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Can We Afford So Many Unskilled Immigrants?; The Mood Turns Ugly
To the Editor:
"The Unfair Immigration Burden" (editorial, Jan. 11) states that Washington has failed to send enough money to California and other states to offset the cost of services for illegal immigrants.
This situation is clearly unfair and needs to be redressed.


Oka Journal; In Canada, Too, the Indians Look Back in Anger
Teharahkoken Cree, whose first name means "in between two moons," was describing the peace tree at the Mohawk-immersion elementary school a few hundred yards from the spot where a barricade made Oka a symbol of Indian rights in the summer of 1990.
The 6-year-old boy pointed to the "life sustainers" on the lower branches (corn, beans and squash), and then to the symbols for thunder ("our grandfather"), the moon ("our grandmother"), the sun ("our elder brother"), and finally, at the very top of the tree, to "the seat of the creator."


"DISNEY (WALT) CO. (N)
The Walt Disney Company yesterday reported net income of $368.6 million, or 68 cents a share, in the first quarter, in contrast to a loss of $96 million, or 16 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues in the quarter, which ended on Dec. 31, rose 14 percent, to $2.72 billion, from the comparable quarter a year ago.
Analysts said the increase in revenues was led by Disney's filmed entertainment division, which had sales of $1.43 billion, an increase of 18 percent from $1.21 billion in the comparable quarter a year ago.
The increase was due to the strong domestic sales and expanded international sales of Disney's "Aladdin" home video and the international release of "The Jungle Book" home video.


American Federal Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


I.B.M. Has First Profit In a Year
I.B.M. reported its first quarterly profit in more than a year yesterday, a sign that the struggling computer company may be starting to recover.
Fourth-quarter earnings of $382 million at the International Business Machines Corporation were in line with analysts' expectations.
But I.B.M. executives and analysts stressed that any recovery at I.B.M. would be a gradual process.


Metropolitan Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the Anti-Defamation League's report on anti-Semitism in America misstated a finding in some editions.
Although vandalism against synagogues and other Jewish institutions declined last year, the number of anti-Semitic acts over all increased, the report said.


Theater in Review
Birdbones  The Kitchen 512 West 19th Street Chelsea Through Feb. 6 A solo performance by Dudley Saunders; lighting by Alex Kahn; sound by John Frazier.
Presented by the Kitchen.


New Concerns Loom as Los Angeles Schools Reopen


Providence, at Home, Routs Syracuse, 96-82
Providence 96, Syracuse 82
Eric Williams scored 26 points and Franklin Western added 19, including 14 consecutive free throws, and Providence beat No. 14 Syracuse, 96-82, in Big East play last night at Providence, R.I.


Frank Morelli, 59; Led a Large Union For Public Workers
Frank Morelli, the president of New York City's largest public employees' coalition, died on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 59 and lived in Bohemia, L.I.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his office said.


Actors Take Leading Role in Helping the Neediest
At a time when donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund are lagging more than $100,000 behind where they were a year ago, several sizable gifts sent in recently by well-known contributors, many of them actors, have buoyed efforts to help the poorest New Yorkers.
For many of the contributors, the gifts were a continuation of a long tradition of helping the fund, which in turn assists seven social-service agencies in providing a range of services to the hungry, the disabled, the mentally ill and the homeless.


Mexico Leader, in Chiapas, Hears the Peasants' Wrath
At the invitation of Indian and agrarian leaders who did not join in the peasant uprising that has rocked Mexico, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari ventured to the embattled state of Chiapas today for the first time since the fighting began on Jan. 1 to hear about some of its problems.
To say the meeting lacked the sort of deference to which Mexican Presidents are accustomed would be to understate what went on.


Sports of The Times; Looking To Level The Field
ONE of the first lessons a young athlete learns is that sports life isn't fair.
Just when you're primed for the biggest race of your life, you pull a muscle.
A day before the big game, your team's most important player suffers an injury.
An official misses a critical call that costs you the game.
Sometimes you encounter an opponent who's bigger, faster, stronger and more skillful.
The beauty of competition is finding a way to win, finding a way to beat the unbeatable.
Last week, New York State's largest scholastic sports organization found an ingenious way to beat the unbeatable.
It eliminated them from the competition.


A Hatter Who's Mad but Still Coping
SOME undertakings in this city require faith and optimism.
Things like opening a school for Linotypists, becoming a Fuller brush man or shoeing horses.
Selling men's hats is like that.
What we are talking about is selling grown-up serious men's hats to grown-up serious men, Borsalinos, homburgs, fedoras, snap-brim felts -- not baseball caps to be worn with the bill to aft.
As late as the 1950's there were hundreds of men's hat's stores in New York City.
There were 14 on 125th Street alone and there were entire chains with names like Knox, Adams, Dobbs, Cavanaugh, that seem to have vanished like trolley cars.
Back then there were stores in almost every neighborhood that would block and clean men's hats.


The Women of Pakistan on the March


Basket, Then a Bounce
Less than 48 hours after MANUTE BOL scored his first basket of the season, the Miami Heat released him yesterday.


Yankees Won't Get Harnisch
Cross Pete Harnisch off the list of starters the Yankees might bring to the Bronx.
Although General Manager Gene Michael is enamored of Harnisch and has had several conversations with the Astros, Bob Watson, Houston's general manager, yesterday characterized trade talks with New York as dead.
Toronto is still pursuing Harnisch.
After Michael refused to budge Monday on the three players Houston wanted for the right-hander, Watson said he was finished talking with the Yankees.
Watson would not disclose which Yankees he wanted and said only that the potential three-for-one package included at least one minor leaguer.
But Watson did disclose that Michael was upset when he ended the discussions about Harnisch, 27, who was 16-9 with a 2.98 earned run average and who pitched for Fordham University.
"They're not meeting my price," Watson said by phone from Houston.


Lynne Murray Johnson; King Ranch Heir, 50
Lynne Murray Johnson, the wife of Belton Kleberg Johnson, an heir to the King Ranch in Kingsville, Tex., died on Sunday at her home in San Antonio.
She was 50.
The cause was cancer, said Janette Ganster, a spokeswoman for the Johnson family.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
In a sign of a possible turnaround, I.B.M. posted its first quarterly profit in more than a year.
But company executives and analysts cautioned that any recovery would be gradual.  [ Page D1. ]  I.B.M.'s chief executive has a big incentive to improve the company's stock price: options for 500,000 I.B.M. shares.  [ D2. ]


Change in Direction for Pentagon
With great fanfare, Defense Secretary Les Aspin set out last year to develop a mini-State Department at the Pentagon.
He created posts on human rights, peacekeeping and arms proliferation in an outward-looking effort to widen the Pentagon's influence in international policy.
Under William J. Perry, President Clinton's choice to replace Mr.
Aspin, the Pentagon is likely to take a hard turn inward, looking more intensely at issues like streamlining the unwieldy system of buying weapons and guiding the battered military industry to a soft post-cold war landing.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday misstated the surname of the new president of Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello U.S.A.
She is Maureen Regan.


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FoxMeyer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


To the Knicks' Joy, Mr. Smith Goes to the Hoop
Making his first start since returning from knee surgery, Charles Smith made the difference last night.
Smith converted a key driving layup with 20.2 seconds to play, and his season-high 25 points lifted the Knicks to a crucial 98-96 victory over the short-handed Phoenix Suns at Madison Square Garden.
The victory ended New York's two-game losing streak and provided a much-needed emotional lift on a day when the Knicks held a team meeting.


Los Angeles Schools Reopen, With Safety Lesson
Shaken by earthquake destruction that has deepened chronic financial woes, the Los Angeles public school system limped back into session today, but many schools remained without water and scores of others were too damaged to open at all.
Even where classes did resume, lessons on math, chemistry and language arts were displaced by a single subject: the Jan. 17 earthquake.
Faculty and students conducted earthquake drills, crawling under desks at the sound of clanging bells, and psyhologists were dispatched to some schools to help students deal with the disaster.
Many teachers urged pupils to describe the terrors of the past week as therapy.


Confronting a Hate Speech
Late last November a senior aide to Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, gave a hate speech at Kean College in Union, N.J., in which he castigated Jews, whites, homosexuals and the Pope.
The speaker, Khalid Abdul Muhammad, justified the Nazi Holocaust, called for the murder of whites in South Africa and sprinkled his rambling, three-hour speech with such phrases as "Columbia Jewniversity" and "Jew York City."
One is tempted to dismiss this diatribe as the ravings of an obscure hate-merchant at a campus remote from the limelight.
But it is unnerving that an audio tape of his speech picked up applause and laughter from his mostly black audience, and that only one professor promptly denounced the speech.
Florid racism and anti-Semitism have to be confronted, wherever and whenever they occur.


Hannaford Brothers reports earnings for 14wks to Jan 1


Quaker State Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Exercise Therapy Can Help Dizziness From Inner-Ear Ills
JEFFREY LEVIN was on a commuter train to Manhattan one morning in May 1992 when he suddenly felt unsteady and lightheaded, he said, as if "my head was in a bowl of Jell-O." Doctors told him the dizziness would probably pass, but Mr.
Levin only felt worse as the weeks went by.
He began to have trouble negotiating the busy floor of the futures exchange, where he was the chief economist.
He found it increasingly hard to concentrate in meetings and began to have memory problems, sometimes calling colleagues into his office and then forgetting why he had asked to see them.


TransCanada Pipe Line reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Burger King Narrows Review
The Burger King Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $180 million national account and had decided to separate the account into creative and media portions.
Both portions have been handled since 1989 by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York.
The finalists for the creative portion are Ammirati &amp; Puris, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, all of New York.
The finalists for the media portion are D.M.B.&amp; B., DeWitt Media Inc. in New York and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


R. A. Radley, 43, Dies; National AIDS Leader
R.
A.
Radley, a national figure in the fight against AIDS, died on Friday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 43 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was related to AIDS, which he had for eight and a half years, the hospice said.


Magna Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MCI Joins Mexican Phone Venture
MCI Communications said today that it was teaming up with Mexico's biggest banking company to build a long-distance network in Mexico, a move intended to create a seamless communications system that would cover most of North America.
MCI is forming a joint venture with Grupo Financiero Banamex Accival, known as Banacci, which owns Banco Nacional de Mexico.
Over the next three years, the two companies plan to build a fiber optic network that links Mexico City, Monterrey and Guadalajara.
Over the longer term, they plan to build a network that covers the entire country.


American Savings of Florida (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pittston Services Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Cereal sticker shock is forcing makers of well-known brands to emphasize their value.
THE Kellogg Company is responding for the first time to the competitive challenges posed by cheaper cereals that are growing in popularity among consumers who complain their favorite brands are overpriced.
Is Kellogg lowering prices?
No.
Is Kellogg going to stop raising prices?
No.
Is Kellogg packing more ingredients into cereal boxes and holding prices steady?
No.
In a spin control strategy, Madison Avenue style, the nation's largest cereal marketer is running an advertising campaign meant to persuade consumers that its flagship product -- also one of its lowest priced -- is a good value.


Paccar Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Can We Afford So Many Unskilled Immigrants?
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis claims in "The Politics of Nativism" (column, Jan. 14) that Julian Simon showed in The Wall Street Journal last year that immigrants do not take the jobs of the native born and that the average immigrant family pays $2,500 more in taxes annually than it receives in public services.


Threat at Holland Tunnel
Traffic at the Holland Tunnel was delayed for 45 minutes yesterday after a man warned a toll collector at the New Jersey entrance that he had a hand grenade in his car.
The police arrested the man when he emerged in lower Manhattan from the tunnel about noon but did not find any grenade, said Sgt.
John Mariano of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey police.
The man, who was unidentified, was charged with disorderly conduct.
All traffic was diverted to one tunnel for 45 minutes.


A Big Step for Seafood Safety
For several years now, Congress has bogged down in efforts to enact seafood-safety legislation.
Now the Food and Drug Administration chief, Dr.
David Kessler, has announced a plan to keep contaminated seafood off the market, using his agency's existing authority.
It is a big step forward.
Vice President Al Gore is right to recommend transferring meat and poultry inspections from the Agriculture Department to the more scientifically sophisticated F.D.A.
But Congress needs to insure that the new program can work.


George Keble Hirst, 84, Is Dead; A Pioneer in Molecular Virology
George Keble Hirst, a scientist who discovered a way to see the footprints of viruses, died on Saturday in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 84 and lived in Palo Alto.
He died of natural causes, his son Robert said.


Michigan National (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kemet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


C.I.A. HEAD SURVEYS WORLD'S HOT SPOTS
In a tour of the world's horizons from his perspective as Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey said today that his major concerns include the possibility of destructive hyperinflation in Russia, political and ethnic tensions that could fragment Ukraine and a military buildup in North Korea.
While none of these events pose an immediate danger to the United States, "the end of the cold war does not mean the end of conflict, nor the end to threats to our security and to that of our friends and allies," Mr.
Woolsey said during testimony at a public session of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.


Wine Talk
IT was lunchtime at a country house near Bordeaux.
The year was 1978.
One of the guests was opening a bottle of wine when we were all called outside to admire someone's new car.
The wine was forgotten for 45 minutes, until everyone moved back inside to the table.
In that brief time the house had been filled with the wine's bouquet.
No armful of flowers could have had so powerful an effect in such a short time.


Dr. W. M. Hewlett, Who Broke Barriers Of Race, Dies at 74
Dr.
William M. Hewlett, a pioneering black physician in Jamaica, Queens, died on Thursday at Jamaica Hospital.
He was 74.
The cause of death was prostate cancer, said Marjorie Jarvis Hewlett, his wife of 51 years.


STATE OF THE UNION: The Scene; Looking for Rhapsody? Try a Different Address
Thomas Jefferson helped compose the Declaration of Independence, designed Monticello, invented countless useful devices and refused outright to deliver a State of the Union speech.
He was perhaps our wisest President.
William Jefferson Clinton did not heed his example.
And so tonight, the Republic's most beloved lawmakers, jurists, Cabinet members, diplomats, television news stars, political advisers, advance men and makeup artists trooped to the Capitol under leaden skies, mostly because they had to.


Books of The Times; Growing Up Amid the Conflicts of Ideology and Life
Red Azalea  By Anchee Min  306 pages. Pantheon. $29.
In a movie theater recently, when "Farewell My Concubine" ended, the man behind me turned to his companion and announced, "Well, it might not be the most sophisticated film I've ever seen, but what it shows us about life in China. . . ."


A Shadowy Sanctuary on a Cloudy Day


President Seeking $6.6 Billion For California Quake Victims
President Clinton will ask Congress for at least $6.6 billion in emergency financing to help the victims of last week's California earthquake.
The White House request would add the full Federal bill for earthquake relief to the budget deficit, while the State of California would be asked to match just 10 percent of the total contribution, rather than the 25 percent that is usually required of states receiving Federal aid.


The Pop Life
Feliciano Anniversary
Long before there was the term world music, the Puerto Rican singer and guitarist Jose Feliciano was blending musical styles from the global jukebox.
His goal, he says, has always been to "get the races closer to each other."
"My influences are not only in Latin music, but in rock-and-roll and, of course, black music," he said from his home in Weston, Conn.
"I didn't learn to sing from Frank Sinatra or Jack Jones, whom I consider great singers, but my influences were people like Sam Cooke, Ben E. King, Ray Charles. I think I related to those singers more because we all suffered. I was born in extreme poverty and, like them, I had my own minority things to deal with, one of which is being blind. I had to really develop my skills before I became famous because at every turn, there was a 'no.' "


Excerpts From President Clinton's Message on the State of the Union
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's State of the Union Message tonight, as recorded by The New York Times.
Mr.
Speaker, Mr.
President, members of the 103d Congress, my fellow Americans: I'm not at all sure what speech is in the Teleprompter tonight, but I hope we can talk about the state of the Union.


In School; A public school in Harlem that takes the time, and the trouble, to be family.
On West 121st Street in Harlem is a public elementary school small enough for things to be taken into consideration.
For example, Malachi Reece is a perfectly decent, upstanding kindergartener who will not nap.
"Malachi don't nap to save his life," says a school secretary, Modupe Ballard.
So after lunch, while his buddies are sacked out, Malachi sits outside the principal's office drawing and making his letters with Ms.
Ballard.
"Is that Barney?" she asks, pointing to a picture that looked like a potato with four ziggy things in the middle.
"It looks just like Barney."


A Team a Master Builder Would Really Love
Four months after Michael Jordan jilted them for a batting glove and a chaw of tobacco, the Chicago Bulls awakened yesterday with the best record in the Eastern Conference.
Meanwhile, back at Madison Square Garden, Pat Riley was reading his offensively disgruntled Knicks the riot act.
"That's too bad," the Bulls' general manager, Jerry Krause, said by telephone from his home.
"You hate to hear those kinds of things."


Milk Helps to Combat Bone Loss From Coffee
WOMEN who drink at least one glass of milk each day throughout their adult lives can largely counter the bone-thinning effects of a lifetime of coffee drinking, according to a new study of 980 women past menopause.
The study, conducted by Dr.
Elizabeth Barrett-Connor and colleagues at the University of California at San Diego, showed that in women who do not drink milk, a lifetime habit of drinking as little as two cups a day of coffee containing caffeine results in a significant decline in bone density as they get older.


Metropolitan Diary
SCENE: A video store in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Cast: patron, clerk, manager (heard but not seen), and Bat Sheva Marcus, witness to the following scenario.


Prices Dip for Treasury Securities
Prices of government securities ended mostly lower yesterday after a less than sterling two-year note auction.
The yield on the 30-year bond jumped to 6.34 percent, its highest level in three weeks.
The yield at the auction of $17 billion in two-year notes was 4.11 percent, which came close to market expectations, but still left some investors and traders disappointed that retail interest was not as great as had been anticipated.


BayBanks Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helping Hands
To the Editor:  At the height of the Jan. 17 storm, descending from a Third Avenue bus that could not get to the curb at 72d Street, I found myself on a sleet-lashed, ice-glazed incline in danger, at age 86, of losing my footing.
From nowhere, a girl in her early teens was at my side, grasped my arm and helped me on the treacherous surface.
I spied another codger, heavier than I, about to crash land, when two younger men dashed to his aid.
Humanity dwells beneath the cool of New Yorkers.
KEN ACKERMAN  New York, Jan. 18, 1994


Off-Duty Officer Is Killed in Queens as Police Chase a Stolen Car
An off-duty police officer who joined fellow officers in chasing a driver in a stolen car was killed Monday night in Queens when the suspect's vehicle crashed into the officer's car at over 70 miles per hour, the police said yesterday.
Nicholas DeMutiis of the 106th Precinct in Ozone Park, Queens, became the first police officer to be killed this year in New York City.


Seymour Samuels; Community Leader, 74
Seymour Samuels, a founder and past president of the Queens Jewish Community Council, died last Wednesday at North Shore University Hospital.
He was 74 and lived in Bayside.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Hancock Holding Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
JOHN F. KENNEDY JR., who has been known to harbor theatrical ambitions, will be a host on a series of television programs celebrating unsung heros of New York, both individuals and organizations.
The series, called "Heart of the City," will run on WNYC-TV, Channel 31, for six Wednesdays at 9 P.M., starting March 23.
Each half-hour program will consist of three or four segments, with Mr.
Kennedy introducing each segment.


CAPITAL CITIES/ABC INC. (N)
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. reported a strong increase of nearly 21 percent in its fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, with net income jumping to $166.7 million, or $10.35 a share.
The company said its earnings were bolstered in part by stronger ratings for the ABC television network.
Operating profits from the company's broadcasting divisions rose 34.5 percent, to $278.6 million from $207.1 million in the corresponding period a year earlier.


Martin Marietta reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Northern Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Can We Afford So Many Unskilled Immigrants?; New York Burden
To the Editor:
"The Unfair Immigration Burden" (editorial, Jan. 11) makes clear that New York and only a handful of other states bear an unfair and heavy burden for immigration policies written and regulated in Washington.


British Business Legend Loses His Empire
Roland W. (Tiny) Rowland, the 76-year-old British financier who came to prominence for his failed attempt to buy the famed Harrods department store in London, effectively lost control today of Lonrho P.L.C., the 700-company conglomerate he ran like a personal fief.
The victor was Dieter Bock, Mr.
Rowland's co-chief executive and one-time ally turned bitter rival, who engineered the departure of Mr.
Rowland's four key allies on the board.


RENO TO TAKE OVER INQUIRY IN SLAYING IN CROWN HEIGHTS
Yielding to strong political pressure, Attorney General Janet Reno agreed today to take over the investigation of the slaying of a rabbinical student during the unrest in Crown Heights in 1991 and try to bring Federal civil rights charges against those who killed him.
Ms.
Reno's decision to convene a Federal grand jury came after the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, handed over the case, conceding that local prosecutors would not be able to make a state homicide case against Ernesto Edwards, a suspect who recently emerged in the death of the student, Yankel Rosenbaum.


The Talk of Vienna: President's Affair
The private lives of politicians are usually considered unsuitable for public discussion in most European countries, but the President of Austria broke that taboo recently by announcing in a magazine interview that his wife, to whom he has been married for 37 years, had left him.
When reporters asked President Thomas Klestil's wife, Edith, why she had moved out, she replied: "I had the feeling that I was being shut out of my role as the President's wife. I had to do it to preserve my self-respect."


The Elevator Was Broken, but Not the Ingenuity Button


Review/Television; PBS Offers a New Life of Malcolm X
Since Malcolm X's death in 1965, he has taken on a glow of glory.
For most of his career, he was a threatening figure to many whites and to blacks who put their hopes in integration and their faith in the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
But the ferocious image, which began to soften in Malcolm's last years, has been burnished by the times.
Spike Lee's 1992 movie, "Malcolm X," was a nomination for sainthood.
Tonight's tribute in the "American Experience" series, "Malcolm X: Make It Plain," is restrained by comparison, but the tone is never less than respectful and frequently slips into reverence.
Ossie Davis eulogizes its hero as "our own shining black prince."


MTV Networks to Test Home-Shopping Service
Looking to take advantage of increasing interest in shopping via television, MTV Networks this spring will test a home-shopping service directed at its young, music-oriented audience, the chairman of the company said yesterday.
The announcement comes as MTV braces for the most serious challenge to its hold on fans of music videos.
Four large recording labels -- Warner, Sony, EMI and Polygram -- are expected to announce within days their own music-video cable channel.


Dick Tracy Takes It on Chin: Wife Splits
First it was Donald and Ivana. Then Loni and Burt. Now Dick and Tess.
Yes, comic strip fans, it is true.
After 45 years of marriage, Dick Tracy and his wife, the former Tess Trueheart, are splitting up.
Tribune Media Services, which distributes the strip, has announced that Tess will hit her heroic husband with divorce papers on Feb. 7.


Johnson Won't Make A Visit to Indonesia
MAGIC JOHNSON's planned tour of Indonesia was canceled yesterday after immigration officials said they would block his entry because he has the virus that causes AIDS.
The retired basketball star and an all-star team were scheduled to play exhibition games Feb. 26 and Feb. 27 to promote AIDS prevention.


Nonya Cuisine: Asian but With a Light and Delicate Stripe
THE Shanghai Restaurant, a bakery in the Katong district of Singapore, offers a treasure-trove of freshly made pastries.
Like Singapore itself, the foods reflect an exotic and colorful blending of Chinese, Malay, Indian, Thai and Indonesian cultures.


Milk Helps to Combat Bone Loss From Coffee
WOMEN who drink at least one glass of milk each day throughout their adult lives can largely counter the bone-thinning effects of a lifetime of coffee drinking, according to a new study of 980 women past menopause.
The study, conducted by Dr.
Elizabeth Barrett-Connor and colleagues at the University of California at San Diego, showed that in women who do not drink milk, a lifetime habit of drinking as little as two cups a day of coffee containing caffeine results in a significant decline in bone density as they get older.


Off the Menu
Chef Shifts in SoHo
Tom Valenti, who has been the chef at Alison on Dominick Street in SoHo since the restaurant opened in 1989, is leaving in about a month to become the chef and a partner at Cascabel, at 218 Lafayette Street (near Grand Street).
"It was rough to leave, but I feel I needed a change," Mr.
Valenti said.
"I want to broaden my range with more American and Italian dishes." Cascabel, owned by John Zaccaro Jr. and other members of his family, has been closed since New Year's Eve.
Alison Price-Becker, the owner of Alison on Dominick Street, has not named a replacement for Mr.
Valenti.


Alco Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


STATE OF THE UNION: News Analysis; Economic Safety Zone
According to the polls, President Clinton stepped before the nation tonight with his political strength back where it stood when he was inaugurated a year and five days ago, before Zoe Baird, before tax increases, before Cristophe's haircuts, before Somalia and Haiti.
A big reason, the polls indicate, is "the economy, stupid."


Review/Film; The Blind Woman Gets Tougher In a Familiar and Deadly Formula
Whenever Hollywood trots out its favorite premise about the beautiful blind woman and the deadly stalker, the audience discovers something new.
So "Blink," the latest variation on this discreetly sadistic formula, brings its share of little revelations.
That even a mystery story can be overpowered by high-tech special effects.
That if a stalker wants to be scary he'd better show a little style.
And that beautiful blind women are a lot tougher than they used to be.
"Blink" finds something enticingly spooky in Emma Brody, who is first seen as the milky-eyed, bewitchingly lovely fiddler with an Irish rock band.
It helps that Emma is played by Madeleine Stowe, the actress who gave the most interestingly subtle performance in "Short Cuts" and who is always a study in contrasts.
With a deep, brassy voice that offsets her fragile beauty, Ms.
Stowe can be as sharp and unpredictable as "Blink" needs her to be.
But this film isn't content to explore Emma's colorful character.
It insists on having a gimmick, too.


AT LUNCH WITH: Ed Koch; How's He Doing? Fine. Just Ask Him.
IT sounds like a wail.
"I wish you were back," a woman in red says to Ed Koch who is in mid-swallow at his front table at Remi.


Civil Rights Statute Presents Legal Obstacles
The law under which Attorney General Janet Reno will seek indictments in the 1991 killing of a Hasidic student, Yankel Rosenbaum, in Crown Heights is a Federal civil rights statute that has previously been used against the killers of a Jewish radio talk show host in Denver and against students who bombed buildings to protest the Vietnam War.
Passed in 1968, the law was designed to permit Federal prosecutions of people who interfere with others' civil rights in a wide range of activities, and may be used only with the permission of the Attorney General.


David Chandler, 56, Newspaper Reporter Who Won Pulitzer
David Leon Chandler, a journalist and author, died on Sunday at his home in Denver.
He was 56.
The cause was complications from diabetes, said his literary agent, Jed Mattes.


Giuliani and Bratton Begin Push To Shift Police Aims and Leaders
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his new Police Commissioner began a top-to-bottom reorganization of the New York City Police Department yesterday, intended to give borough and precinct commanders more authority and staff to concentrate on quality-of-life offenses ranging from open-air drug markets to panhandling squeegee men.
The first phase of the reorganization came as Commissioner William J. Bratton forced out four senior commanders and said he would promote seven mostly middle-ranking officers with reputations for being aggressive and risk-takers.


Ralph E. Knutti, 92, Heart Institute Leader
Dr.
Ralph Eddy Knutti, a former director of the National Heart Institute of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., died last Wednesday at Chester-Crozier Hospital in Upland, Pa.
He was 92 and lived in Kennett Square, Pa.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, the institute said.


Smith and Thomas: Innovators in Pass Catching
Mention Thurman Thomas and Emmitt Smith Super Bowl XXVIII's sensational pair of running backs -- and the first thing that comes to mind is what both do best: snatch a handoff from the quarterback and run for glory.
But in this Super Bowl rematch between the Buffalo Bills and the Dallas Cowboys, the defenses will spend extra preparation time for Thomas and Smith as pass receivers.


Theater in Review
As You Like It  Playhouse at Saint Clement's Church 423 West 46th Street Clinton Through Feb. 19 By William Shakespeare; directed by Mark Rylance; sets and costumes by Jenny Tiramani; lighting by Frances Aronson; composer and pianist, Claire van Kampen; sound by Eric Liljestrand; choreography by Darryl Quinton; fight director, J. Allen Suddeth; production stage manager, Alyson Augustin; dramaturge, James Leverett.
Presented by Theater for a New Audience, Jeffrey Horowitz, artistic/producing director; Peter M. Kindlon, general manager.
WITH: Leon Addison Brown, David Dossey, Miriam Healy-Louie and Mark Rylance.


New York Police Officer Gets a Standing Ovation
President Clinton and a joint session of Congress gave a New York City police officer a standing ovation last night for his effort in fighting street crime in one of the toughest precincts in the Bronx.
The officer, Kevin M. Jett, who was recently promoted to detective, sat behind Hillary Rodham Clinton in the House gallery and was singled out by the President during his appeal to Congress for anti-crime legislation.


For Every Ingredient There Is a Season
"A GREAT restaurant in the old days was one where you could get anything at any time of year, but that's no longer true," said Michael Romano, chef at Union Square Cafe, at a meeting of chefs last fall to promote the use of local, seasonal and organic produce.
"What counts now is what is freshest, most locally available and seasonal."
It's a very old idea that suddenly seems radically new.


Community Police Officers Cited on Hours and Training
The thousands of New York City officers working in community policing do not work enough weekends or late at night and are not coordinating well with other police units and other city agencies, according to nearly two dozen internal police reports that analyze the program.
The 22 reports, prepared from November 1992 to August 1993, do not represent a wholesale indictment of the Police Department's major tactical shift to community policing, which was introduced by the Dinkins administration three years ago.
The reports, in fact, seldom draw broad conclusions.


I.B.M. Chairman's Reward Is Linked to Stock Price
I.B.M. stock tends to jump around, as it has this week, based on the hopes, expectations and concerns about the company's chances for a comeback.
Few investors have more at stake, in the long term, than the man leading that effort, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., who came to the computer maker from RJR Nabisco last spring.
After he signed on, Mr.
Gerstner received options to buy 500,000 I.B.M. shares at $47.875 a share, the market price in late April.


Progress Is Being Made On New York Competition
The two sides in a dispute over the ouster of New York City high school athletes from statewide competitions agreed yesterday to discuss a compromise that could restore New York State championships in five sports to include the city athletes.
The New York State Public High Schools Athletic Association, the state's largest scholastic sports organization, has agreed to meet with the city's Public Schools Athletic League and the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association to plan post-season state championships in indoor and outdoor track and field, swimming, wrestling, girls' gymnastics and girls' tennis.


Response on Wright
LUTHER WRIGHT, the rookie center of the Utah Jazz, was having a bad reaction to a prescription drug when he was arrested for disorderly conduct at a highway rest stop, his agent says.
Wright, 22, was arrested early Monday in Tooele County, Utah, and was jailed for 12 hours before he was released.


Political Rifts Slow Japanese Reforms
For five years now, Japan has immersed itself in the issue of how to rid the political system of the rivers of cash from private businesses that have led to scandal and corruption.
Four Prime Ministers have fallen in the process and a fifth may be consumed this week.
But when Japanese talk about "seiji kaikaku," or political reform, what they mean depends on who is doing the talking.
As Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa makes a last-ditch effort to revive the legislation that was defeated in the upper house of Parliament on Friday, a fundamental question persists on whether anything will change.


Dean Witter Discover &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Exxon and Mobil Are Aided By Lower Crude Oil Prices
Exxon and Mobil, two of the world's largest oil companies, reported mixed fourth-quarter results yesterday as earnings in their refining operations soared as a result of lower crude oil prices.
The two companies -- as was the case with Texaco, Amoco and Ashland Oil, which reported earnings Monday -- benefited by keeping the prices of gasoline and other refined products they sold from dropping as fast as the price of crude oil they bought.
Crude oil prices hovered at times around $14 a barrel compared with about $17 in the third quarter.


Health Reform -- "Now!"
Bill Clinton had one overriding task in his State of the Union address last night: to re-ignite a fire under the proposal for health care reform that he has chosen as the defining issue of his Presidency.
Victory will not come easily.
Bitter battles lie ahead in Congress and the country.
But no one who heard his demands for immediate action -- "now, not next year or the year after . . . now!" -- or his threat to veto any legislation that falls short of universal coverage can fault him for squandering the chance to state his case, plainly and passionately.
Like other Presidents before him, Mr.
Clinton could not resist a prideful review of his first year.
Nor could he resist offering a menu of other proposals.
Wisely, however, he devoted most of his energies to the big things that seem now to matter most to the American public -- which, besides medical care, include the economy, welfare and crime.
And in so doing, he deftly expropriated at least two issues -- welfare and crime -- that the Republicans had hoped to use against him and the Democrats in the midterm.


Craft Launched on First Moon Mission Since '72
In an unusual joint military-scientific undertaking, a small, unmanned spacecraft was launched yesterday on the first American mission to the Moon since 1972.
The Defense Department developed the $80 million mission to test advanced miniature sensors for anti-missile defense systems.
Since the spacecraft would be traveling interplanetary distances, scientists arranged to have it modified to orbit the Moon and map its entire surface, then to fly off to visit a near-Earth asteroid, Geographos.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about a bailout plan for Banco Espanol de Credito of Spain misstated J. P. Morgan &amp; Company's ownership interest in the bank.
The Corsair Partnership, an investment fund created by Morgan to invest in banks, owns about an 8 percent interest in Banesto, as the Spanish bank is commonly known.
Morgan holds a 10 percent stake in Corsair; it does not hold an 8 percent stake in Banesto.


Consolidated Edison Co. of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jury Stymied in Brother's Trial
The jury pondering murder charges against Lyle Menendez told the judge today that it was deadlocked after more than three weeks of deliberations and an earthquake, but the judge sent it back to try ruling out any of the counts.
The jury has the option of finding first- or second-degree murder or voluntary or involuntary manslaughter.
The deadlock came nearly two weeks after a mistrial was declared when a separate jury was unable to agree on a verdict in the case of Lyle's younger brother, Erik.
The jury has the next two days off and will meet again on Friday.
It has deliberated only a little more than three hours since resuming its work on Monday after the Jan. 17 earthquake. 'Open to Any Suggestion'
A note signed by the jury foreman this morning read: "We regret to inform the court that we are unable to come to a unanimous decision on any of these three counts. We are open to any suggestion or direction the court may have which would enable us to come to a decision."


Smith (A.O.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 21
Jan. 14
Jan. 22
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.5
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.5
2.9
Gasoline stocks
230.2
229.6
229.7
Distillate stocks
128.9
137.1
138.8
Crude imports, daily
5.4
5.9
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.5
2.1
2.1
Crude stocks
328.7
333.5
327.0
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
90.0
91.4
85.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Putting Car-Exhaust Tests on the Road to Reality
The way the Environmental Protection Agency tests the emissions of a car looks a lot more like a game in a video arcade than actual driving.
The driver sits behind the wheel of a car on a treadmill and, using only the accelerator and the brake pedal, tries to keep the car on a course that scrolls by on a computer screen outside the driver's side window.
Pressing the accelerator moves a dot on the screen toward the right edge; the brake moves the line to the left.
If the driver keeps the dot in the lines for the whole four-minute test, then the car has gone through a standard course and its emissions can be compared with the emissions from other vehicles and with the Federal standard.


In America; Are We Awake Yet?
Is there reason for hope, or is that naive?
Is the country really waking up to the enormity of its problems of crime and violence, or is this just another phase, driven by the media and lasting only until we are diverted by a killer blizzard, or a celebrity sex scandal, or a surprise locker-room attack by a Buffalo hitperson to the knees of Dallas Cowboy Emmitt Smith?


Michael Jackson Settles Suit For Sum Said to Be in Millions
Michael Jackson, the music superstar who was accused of sexual molestation by a 14-year-old boy, agreed today to pay the boy an undisclosed amount that was said to be in the millions of dollars.
In return for the financial settlement, the boy, who is unidentified, dropped the civil lawsuit he had instituted against Mr.
Jackson.
But a separate criminal investigation will continue.


UConn Soars Amid Visions Of the Top
They have never been this way before.
Not the Final Eight Connecticut Huskies of four years ago, the group of Tate George, Chris Smith and Scott Burrell.
Cliff Robinson's Huskies never came this way.
Nor did Toby Kimball's teams, nor Wes Bialosuknia's, nor Vincent Yokabaskas's.
Connecticut's 91-67 victory over Villanova tonight lifted its record to 17-1, the best start to a season in school history.
The blue and white bandwagon is starting to bulge.
And Donyell Marshall had a new hat above his dressing stall.


Penn State's Women Roll
Jackie Donovan scored 25 points and Tina Nicholson 22 to lead the No. 1 Penn State women's basketball team to a 74-66 victory over No. 17 Ohio State last night in Columbus, Ohio.
With the game tied at 45-45 and 11 minutes 55 seconds remaining, Penn State (14-0, 6-0 in the Big Ten) went on a 13-6 run to take the lead for good, 58-51.
Tiffany Longworth sparked the run with two baskets, including a 3-pointer.


Food Notes
Pastries on the Move
On Monday, Guy Pascal plans to close his cafe and bakery, Les Delices Guy Pascal, at 1231 Madison Avenue (89th Street).
"The rent was too high," he said.
Now, Mr.
Pascal said, "I will be doing everything at Bendel's." He runs the Salon de The at Henri Bendel, 712 Fifth Avenue (56th Street), which will expand its retail department and take orders for pastry.
Phone: (212) 373-6323.
Double Hot Chocolate
City Bakery's annual hot chocolate festival, with flavors like banana, mocha, chocolate malt and chili pepper, will be held in two places this year: at the bakery, 22 East 17th Street, and at its new store in the Sony Building Plaza, 55th Street and Madison Avenue.
City Bakery will add the hot chocolates to its menus for the month.
Coppola ad Vinum
Francis Ford Coppola was in town last week, not to promote his movies but to peddle his wines.
Among them was the 1987 Rubicon, the latest release of the red wine made at his Niebaum-Coppola Estate Winery in Napa Valley.


Armstrong World Industries Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Pondering Its Options As Japan Trade Talks Falter
Despite last week's warning by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen that Japan had to make more concessions on opening its markets, the latest round of trade negotiations between the two sides ended today with no tangible progress, American officials said.
"We are still very far apart; there is no real progress," said a senior American official who took part in meetings on Monday and today in Washington between the top Japanese and American trade negotiators.


Special Counsel Reports for Duty in Little Rock


Review/Theater; A Midlife Crisis as a Hallucinogenic Mystery Story
Though all sorts of music and exotic sound effects swirl throughout the production of Philip Kan Gotanda's "Day Standing on Its Head" at Stage 2 of the Manhattan Theater Club, the loudest noise one is aware of is very familiar: that of a man hitting middle age with a hollow thud.
The story of an emotionally inhibited Japanese-American law professor trying to come to terms with a hitherto unexamined life, Mr.
Gotanda's play deals with material common to the recent spate of confessional journalism inspired by midlife crises.
The traditional bugaboos of the middle-class fortysomething male -- lost idealism, sexual repression, the guilt of privilege, professional paralysis and the specter of mortality -- are all threshed out in ways that seem entirely too close to self-help books promoting the search for "the child within."


Review/Met Opera: Le Nozze di Figaro; Figaro Returns With His Bag of Tricks
Mozart and Da Ponte gave "Le Nozze di Figaro" a bit of everything: comic antics and deeply moving soliloquies; conspiracies that backfire and others that succeed, if only by accident; sexual tensions and passions that do their best to run wild, yet that eventually give way to the graceful veneer of classical decorum.
There is even subversive social comment in the uneasily casual relationship between the Count and his retainers.
Add to that some top-drawer Mozart, with hardly a wasted gesture in either the vocal or the orchestral writing, and you have a work that should be a high point of the opera season.
Those considerable joys are tempered at the Metropolitan Opera, where Figaro and his friends enact their drama in the resolutely ugly sets that Jean-Pierre Ponnelle designed in 1985.
When the production returned to the house on Monday evening, an interestingly balanced cast and astute conducting by Julius Rudel afforded ample musical pleasures.
But it was difficult to avoid either the distractions of the production or, on a cheerier note, the thought that each season carries its crumbling pillars and archways, its unrealistically placed portals and its drab costumes closer to the trash heap.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.S.
MAY SEND MISSILES TO SEOUL  The United States is planning to send Patriot antimissile batteries to South Korea, since North Korea has responded to pressure for nuclear site inspection by threatening to end the Korean peninsula armistice.
A1  A NEW POWER IN RUSSIA  Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, a former Communist who was chosen as Russia's Prime Minister during a revolt against reformers, has become increasingly influential in the Yeltsin administration.
A6


Capitol Hill Fight Erupting Over Ending Vietnam Curbs
As President Clinton makes tentative moves toward lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam, a fight has broken out on Capitol Hill over the politically sensitive issue, with some Republicans proposing to create strict conditions before the embargo can be removed.
Senator Robert C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican, says he is likely to introduce a measure designed to force President Clinton to maintain the embargo by setting conditions on Vietnam that are considerably stricter than those President Clinton set forth in September.


Special Pupils, Regular Classes, Thorny Issues
Flopping on the family couch, his glasses sliding down his nose, Aaron Moreland looked like any 9-year-old, perhaps a future doctor, pilot or accountant.
Yet he cannot read or write or follow basic third-grade drills.
And as his parents spoke of his learning disabilities, his attention deficit disorder and episodic tantrums, he nodded glumly and agreed, "The bad things."
In Aaron's case, the "bad things" mean wild behavior in his third-grade class.
When he is angry or frustrated, said his teacher, Margaret R. Bays, he wails and spits or crawls beneath his desk, barking like a dog.


Review/Music; Classical Weill: The Quartet
Although it is tempting to draw a line between Kurt Weill's "public" and his "private" composing, the String Quartet of 1923, which the Orion Quartet played at the Walter Reade Theater on Monday night, yields on examination almost all the idiosyncratic elements that were to churn mass audiences into a frenzy five years later.
It goes without saying that stage pieces like "Mahagonny" and "The Threepenny Opera" made Weill famous in a way that his earlier pursuit of the classical European tradition never would have.
The Quartet smoothly masters old ideas: stretched tonality, imitations of previous forms, studious use of imitative counterpoint and even some impudent use of different meters and speeds playing against one another.
But imbedded in these textures is the signature that was to be read more clearly in just a few years.
Popular dance rhythms and balladlike melodies are among them.
Listen carefully and you will also hear Weill's celebration of the march, used here with characteristic bitterness and humor.


Nalco Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Can We Afford So Many Unskilled Immigrants?; Spectrum of Support
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis in "The Politics of Nativism" (column, Jan. 14) questions the fund sources of the Federation for American Immigration Reform.
Let's set the record straight: FAIR receives grants from some 40 public and private foundations, which span the spectrum from liberal to conservative.
In addition, we have some 50,000 members nationwide.


Getting By on Less and Less in Haiti


CHRONICLE
CHRISTIAN FETTEROLF, a Hunter College student who was stabbed when he went to help a woman and her child as they were being mugged on the subway in May, will receive Hunter College's highest award at commencement tomorrow.
He will be given the President's Medal along with his degree, in ceremonies in the college.
Though he was hospitalized for eight days and needed surgery after the incident, Mr.
Fetterolf said yesterday that he had completely recovered and that if he were to face the same situation again, he would take the same action.


More Questions About Report of Kidnapping
Michelle Lodzinski, the New Jersey mother whose son had disappeared three years ago, continued to say today that she had been kidnapped Friday morning by two men who said they were F.B.I. agents and drove her in a black van to Detroit.
After detectives spent about two hours questioning Ms.
Lodzinski, the Middlesex County Prosecutor, Robert W. Gluck, said, as he had on Saturday night, that he was "somewhat skeptical" of her account of an abduction.


Meredith Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eugene Kamenka, 65, An Australian Thinker
Dr.
Eugene Kamenka, an Australian philosopher and social thinker, died last Wednesday in his home in Canberra.
He was 65.
The cause was bone cancer, his family said.


Bridge
If a player is in a hospital with a major physical problem, it does not follow that he, or she, must give up the game altogether.
He can, for example, read books and magazines, or solve double-dummy problems.
If these are not available he can construct bridge hands with pen and paper.
Mortega Rastegar of London was recently hospitalized after a stroke that cost him the sight of one eye.
But this did not stop him creating the diagramed deal.
North-South bid to a good seven-spade contract, using Gerber to locate aces and kings.
South is gambling on the spade queen, which modern slam bidding methods could locate.
South would be on firmer ground if North had jumped to four spades at his second turn.


Grenada Sunburst Systems(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Richard P. Seelig, 80, A Chromalloy Founder
Richard Paul Seelig, a founder and former vice chairman of the old Chromalloy American Corporation, died on Saturday at his home in Upper Nyack, N.Y.
He was 80.
Mr.
Seelig, a native of Berlin, trained at the Berlin Institute of Technology and came to the United States in 1936.
Before World War II, he helped start a small company in the field of powder metallurgy and components for the Norden bombsight.


Golden West Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NATO May Have Outlived Its Usefulness
To the Editor:
Re "The Charade in Brussels" (Op-Ed, Jan. 11) by Richard Perle: The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was not created to counter a "Warsaw Pact invasion." NATO was founded in 1949, the Warsaw Pact not until 1955, in response to NATO's expansion to include West Germany.


Roadway Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.04
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.96
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.14
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.73
5.69
6.47
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.34
6.30
7.25
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.25
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.51
5.51
6.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Walsh Report on Iran-Contra Case Is Only One Man's Opinion
To the Editor:
"Mr. Walsh's Summing Up" (editorial, Jan. 19) blindly accepts the outrageous conclusions reached in the final report of Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel in the Iran-contra matter.
You claim, erroneously, that former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d performed a "shoddy" investigation, purportedly to allow the destruction of evidence as a "damage control operation."


Angry Echoes of Campus Speech
Only several dozen students at Kean College actually heard the words spoken on Nov. 29 by Khalid Abdul Muhammad, a senior official of the Nation of Islam, in a speech that has since been roundly denounced as cruelly abusive of whites, Jews, Catholics, some black leaders and homosexuals.
In the intervening weeks thespeech has reverberated far beyond this campus and identified Kean with a sharp debate about tolerance toward different views as higher education confronts multiculturalism.


SunAmerica Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $250 million of medium-term notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 6.28 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is callable in three years.


Once Again, Reactions Differ in Crown Heights
The decision by the United States Attorney General to begin a Federal civil rights investigation in the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, has set off what every development in the case before it has: strong words, mixed feelings, differing suspicions and talk of politics.
In short, everything short of complete satisfaction that justice is going to be done.
Members of the Hasidic community, while expressing gratitude that Attorney General Janet Reno is going to explore a possible Federal prosecution of two or more people for the killing of Mr.
Rosenbaum, expressed dismay that there would be no inquiry into the actions of the police and officials of Mayor David N. Dinkins's administration during the three days and nights of unrest in Crown Heights in August 1991.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times yesterday about the National Library of Medicine's provision of free access to data on AIDS omitted the library director's given name and initials.
He is Dr.
Donald A. B. Lindberg.


CMS Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Residents Go Home, for a Moment, Near Quake's Center


Public &amp; Private; A Tale of Two Women
Valerie Wilson, a cop's daughter from Queens, was watching the news when she got a powerful sense of deja vu, the emotional equivalent of a shot to her midsection.
There was the story of Cathy Linn, a woman who said a police officer had arrested her for little more than asking for his badge number.
Ms.
Wilson says that happened to her, too, in 1988.
Ms.
Linn said she was beaten and badly injured in the incident.
Ms.
Wilson says that's what happened to her.
And Ms.
Linn said that in a patrol car the officer had repeatedly forced her face down into his groin.
Ms.
Wilson had alleged that, while she was in the back of a police cruiser, an officer had fondled her breasts.


METRO DIGEST
RENO TO PURSUE CROWN HTS. MURDER CASE
Yielding to strong political pressure, the United States Attorney General, Janet Reno, agreed to take over the investigation of the murder of a rabbinical student during the unrest in Crown Heights in 1991 and to try to bring Federal civil rights charges against those who killed him.
A1.


Army Bomb Unit Awards Medals for Somalia Duty


Standing Tall, Passers Are an Easy Target
Quarterback-concussion syndrome might not yet be a recognized medical term like, say, punch-drunk syndrome, which has its own entry in the Bantam Medical Dictionary.
But if quarterbacks in the National Football League continue to hit the deck as hard and as often as they have during the 1993 season and its accompanying playoffs, it might not be long before it is listed.
The fact that two of the four starting quarterbacks in last weekend's conference championships, Troy Aikman of the Dallas Cowboys and Joe Montana of the Kansas City Chiefs, both suffered concussions, is not surprising.


Assessing Community Policing
Internal reports detail a range of problems in the effort to make New York City's police more responsive to community concerns.
Page B3.


Press Ahead in Bosnia, 3 Nations Urge the U.N.
The United States, Britain and France urged Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali today to press ahead with plans to reopen the besieged Bosnian Government-controlled airport at Tuzla for mercy flights and send new troops to guard Srebrenica, a "safe area" for Muslim refugees in eastern Bosnia.
The United Nations representatives of the three countries also told Mr.
Boutros-Ghali that he already had the authority to call for NATO air attacks against the encircling Serbs if necessary, and that he did not need new permission from the Security Council.


U.S. Said to Plan Patriot Missiles for South Korea
The Clinton Administration is planning to ship Patriot antimissile batteries to South Korea, senior Administration officials said today.
The antimissile batteries were requested by Gen.
Gary E. Luck, the senior American commander in Korea, and the move is supported by the Pentagon.
President Clinton has not yet formally approved the request, but senior officials said he likely will.
On Monday, the White House began consulting members of Congress about the move.


Japanese Stocks Post Solid Gains
About the only question left unanswered on the Tokyo Stock Exchange was: what political crisis?
After plummeting on Monday in response to the Government's defeat in a critical vote in Parliament and concerns over the deepening recession, the stock market shrugged off the worries on both Tuesday and today to post solid gains.
The greatest source of support is coming from foreign investors.


Book Notes
Confidentiality Ruling
In a victory for writers who unearth information about criminal cases while researching books, Joseph Bosco, the author of a book on a crime that took place in New Orleans, has been declared to have the same First Amendment rights as an investigative journalist.
On Monday, a Louisiana appeals court ruled, 2-1, that under the state's law Mr.
Bosco qualifies as a journalist, meaning that he cannot automatically be forced to turn over confidential materials in court.
"I'm just thrilled, on one level," said Mr.
Bosco, whose 1993 book "Blood Will Tell" (William Morrow &amp; Company), describes the brutal beating death in 1984 of Janet Myers, a young housewife, and the subsequent trials of her husband and her lover.
Each implicated the other, and each was convicted in a separate trial.
"We have won a battle, I believe, for writers everywhere."


Robert E. Matteson; Disarmament Adviser, 79
Robert E. Matteson, a Government specialist in disarmament and intelligence from 1953 to 1972, died on Monday at his home in St.
Paul.
He was 79.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, said a grandson, Elliott Donnelley.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Dartmouth
When Roger Demment became head coach in 1991, he said, "Dartmouth and Hanover provide the ideal atmosphere for outstanding hockey and it is my goal to re-establish the tradition of exciting and winning teams here."


Theater in Review
In Bed with the Blues  The Adventures of Fishy Waters  Henry Street Settlement 466 Grand Street Lower East Side  Through Feb. 13 Written by and starring Guy Davis; directed by Shauneille Perry; sets by Kent Hoffman; lighting by Antoinette Tynes; costumes by Judy Dearing; stage manager, Charles M. Edmonds.
Presented by New Federal Theater Inc., Woodie King Jr., producer.


Review/Television; What? Eat Pretzels With All This on the Screen?
THERE'S a new 24-hour pit stop on the information superhighway.
It's the Television Food Network, servicing cooks and eaters day and night.
Sponsors are promised that the network will reach 22 million cable subscribers by the end of 1997.
A programming day consists of a six-hour package that is shown, with a little internal rearranging, four times every 24 hours.
So if you miss "How to Boil Water" at 6:30 A.M., or watch it but need a refresher, you can catch it at 12:30 P.M., 6:30 P.M. and 3:30 A.M.
Yes, you can learn to boil water at 3:30 A.M. in the comfort of your own entertainment space.
That's the future Vice President Gore must be talking about.


A Common N.F.L. Question: How Many Fingers Do You See?
What does Troy Aikman remember about the concussion that knocked him out of the Dallas Cowboys' 38-21 victory over the San Francisco 49ers Sunday?
"I don't remember," the Cowboys' quarterback said today with a straight face.
Then he smiled.


Conde Nast's Visionary to Bow Out
Alexander Liberman, editorial director of Conde Nast Publications for 31 years and one of the most influential editors in America, will step down from that job on April 1.
He will be succeeded by James Truman, the 35-year-old British-born editor in chief of Details, a Conde Nast magazine that under his leadership has become the hot magazine for hip young men.
Mr.
Liberman will become deputy chairman-editorial for the company.


Gant a Special-Team Man With a Mission
When the Dallas Cowboys punt to the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XVIII Sunday, there may be a battle within the battle -- a special-teams showdown involving Russell Copeland, the Bills' dangerous punt returner, and Kenny Gant, one of the Cowboys' two gunners, or outside cover men, on punt coverage.
"When they're racing down the field at you," Copeland said today, "you have to make the first man miss. Gant is usually the first man, and if you can't get by him they'll get you with sideways pursuit."


CBS walks a fine line between taste and tawdriness in promoting its Olympic figure skating coverage.
"SHE is a child of destiny," the actor Fritz Weaver intones as a figure skater appears on screen in one of 40 glossy commercials promoting CBS's coverage of the 1994 Winter Olympics.
"Virtually abandoned, the ice became her home," he says.
"And the world is about to become her family."


U.S. Inquiry on Solarz Is Ended Without Charges
A Justice Department investigation of former Representative Stephen J. Solarz that had delayed his nomination as Ambassador to India ended without charges this week, but the White House indicated that it was not yet prepared to nominate him.
The fate of Mr.
Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat and Asian affairs expert who had hoped the appointment would assuage his 1992 electoral defeat, has been the subject of months of mystery and conflicting reports in New York and Washington.


Review/Jazz; A One-Night French Horn Festival
The oddest thing about the first Julius Watkins Jazz French Horn Festival, which took place at the Knitting Factory on Sunday night, wasn't the appearance of four jazz-influenced French horn players, it was the music's tameness.
The players, Mark Taylor, Tom Varner, John Clark and Vincent Chancey, have fairly impressive avant-garde credentials, ranging from associations with Sun Ra, Muhal Richard Abrams and Henry Threadgill to John Zorn and LaMonte Young.
But they left those credentials at home, for the most part working a soft instrumental area that mixed jazz improvising with pop textures.
Mr.
Varner organized the festival, which is named for an early jazz French horn player in New York.
Of the four musicians, he turned in the most inspiring set.
Backed by Ed Schuller on bass and Steve Johns on drums, Mr.
Varner did some improvising, breaking up be-bop phrases with long melody notes.
He's at the point where lines, complicated but logical, hurtle to their destiny.
Mr.
Varner took apart the melody of Thelonious Monk's "Let's Call This," playing the theme alone, letting little bulbs of the melody hang glittering, breaking up the tune with silences.


Chairman Leaving Big Can Maker
The American National Can Company said yesterday that Jean-Pierre Ergas, who has been chairman of the company since 1991, would leave his post, effective next Tuesday, for personal reasons.
Industry analysts said his departure was caused in part by a steep decline in aluminum prices, which led Pechiney S.A., the French company that is the parent of American National Can, to declare a $75 million after-tax charge for trading losses in the metals future market last month.


Helmsley Has Served Her Time
Leona Helmsley finally became a free woman yesterday after serving 18 months in a Federal prison in Connecticut, one month in a mid-Manhattan halfway house, and two months in the relatively plush confinement of her penthouse apartment on Central Park South, where she had to return every night by a 9 o'clock curfew.
Beginning last night, the 73-year-old Mrs.
Helmsley could stay out as long as she liked.
But she suggested yesterday that any late hours were unlikely because she wanted to remain beside her ailing husband, Harry, who escaped prosecution himself because of his deteriorated physical and mental condition.


Muslims Again Try to Loot Aid Convoy
Crowds of hungry Muslims attacked an aid convoy in central Bosnia today with guns and a hand grenade, wounding six Government police guards and prompting United Nations officials to suspend deliveries of food along the region's main road, United Nations officials here said.
The attack, the second in two days, marks a low point in a desperate food crisis in central Bosnia brought on primarily by blockades over the past nine months by Serbian and Croatian militias bent on forcing the Government to accept partition of Bosnia.


From a Child's View
To The Home Section:
To support Ita Aber's comment on Picasso's "trying to get back to his childhood" ("The New Art Appreciation, Parental Division: Hang It," by Andrea Higbie, Jan. 6): In 1968, my mother and I went with my oldest son, Binyamin, to a Picasso exhibition in Chicago.
Binyamin was almost 4 years old.
We saw a yellow dash, a red squiggle, a dot of brown.
Binyamin said, "A rooster!" We looked at the title: "Rooster." And so on, through the exhibition.


Explosion at Queens Diner Traps Waitress in Rubble
An explosion apparently caused by a natural-gas leak tore open the floor of a Queens diner yesterday morning, plunging six employees and customers into a fiery basement and beginning a dramatic three-hour ordeal for a waitress pinned beneath huge slabs of concrete and steel.
No one was killed in the blast -- a fact that many of the scores of firefighters and rescue workers at the scene in Long Island City considered miraculous.
But five injured people were removed from the rubble shortly after crews arrived and were taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center, while the 24-year-old waitress, Pacida Llenos, known as Vicky, was taken to New York Hospital, where she was in stable condition last night.


Tough and Smart on Crime?
In a State of the Union address designed mainly to mobilize support for his universal health insurance proposals, President Clinton was careful not to slight an issue that, the polls tell us, troubles the public even more than health care: crime.
Mr.
Clinton spoke forcefully of the need to reinforce local police and to address the root causes of urban violence, including the dissolution of family and community ties, drugs and the easy availability of firearms.
His call for a safer society was intended to rob the Republicans of an issue they had hoped to use against him.
Hence the flummoxed, defensive tone in their next-day responses to his speech.


Bronx Man Arrested In 2 Murder Cases
With the arrest yesterday of a Bronx man, the police said they had solved two murders, committed nine months apart in the same South Bronx neighborhood.
John H. Alston, 33 years old, was charged in the Jan. 13 killing of Otis Pugh, 54, and the slaying of David Pagan, 33, last April 19.
"It appears the two murders weren't related," said Lt.
Thomas J. Sbordone, a spokesman for the Housing Authority police.


Candles to Light and Money to Burn
"PARABENS para voce" "Happy birthday to you" in Portuguese idiom -- are among the first words after "mamae" and "papai" that many children utter here.
In Brazil, children's birthday parties are big business and high art.
A family chorus around a homemade cake, a few pointy hats and silly plastic party favors no longer define party magic; at one celebration, 1,500 balloons were just the beginning.


Occidental Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why Yeltsin's Attacking Lenin
To the Editor:
Re "Yeltsin Extols 1921 Rebellion, Denouncing Its Repression by Lenin" (news article, Jan. 11): The most fascinating question about Boris N. Yeltsin's condemnation of the handling of the Kronstadt revolt is the one you never address.
Why did the Russian President choose the eve of the Parliament's opening to drag out and dust off 70-year-old slanders and attacks against the Bolshevik Government led by Lenin and Trotsky?
No doubt it's because Mr.
Yeltsin feels the threat of growing resistance to privatization and his plans to place Russia's natural resources at the service of Western capitalism.
Antiprivatization forces in combination got a significantly higher percentage of votes in the Dec. 12 elections than Mr.
Yelstin's fast-track capitalism.
His greatest fear must be that the will of the Russian people will congeal behind forces for a democratized, genuinely socialist course and sweep both him and the ultraright Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky into history's dustbin.


6 Are Injured in Explosion at a Queens Diner


Louisiana-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eric Reed  Pianist The Blue Note
Eric Reed, a young pianist who is best known for performing with Wynton Marsalis, seemed to be a musician in a hurry on Monday night.
On recordings, he can be an elegant, self-contained pianist; his newest album, "It's All Right to Swing" (Motown), is loaded with a restrained and thoughtful grace.
There isn't a suggestion of the impatience he shows onstage.


Brandt Dispute Unsettles German Socialists
With Germany's opposition Social Democratic Party hoping to make a comeback under a new leader after 12 years in the national elections next October, the last thing it wanted was to be confronted with the skeletons in its closet.
But it was the widow of their late former Chancellor, Willy Brandt, who brought them out this month, prompting a bitter debate that revealed much about the fragility of German unity more than three years after unification, and 50 years after World War II.


Review/Music; Sammy Cahn's Wit, In Songs and in Clips
"The word is only as great as the note it sits under," said the song lyricist Sammy Cahn when he appeared at the 92d Street Y's Lyrics and Lyricists series more than two decades ago.
That observation and many other of Mr.
Cahn's pithy remarks were recalled at the opening concerts of the series' 24th edition on Sunday afternoon and evening.
Although Mr.
Cahn died last January at the age of 79, film clips of the cocky, ebullient songwriter, who was known for his skill at coming up with a lyric for any occasion, brought his brash personality vividly to the stage of the Y.


It Can't Happen Here?
To the Editor:
A bill to amend the New York City administrative code for design and construction of buildings to resist earthquake effects has been before the City Council since 1993 (Intro. 726).
Its provisions, prepared by the New York City Seismic Committee, with the New York Association of Consulting Engineers and the Real Estate Board, have been used on a school addition in Port Richmond, S.I., and on 565 Fifth Avenue, recently completed.
The Council should hear this bill, tailored for local needs and for which an economic impact study was made.
IRVING POLSKY  New York, Jan. 17, 1994 The writer was executive engineer, Department of Buildings, 1977-91.


Sumio Uematsu; Neurosurgeon, 59
Dr.
Sumio Uematsu, a neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins Hospital who advanced the treatment of epilepsy, died on Tuesday at his home in Lutherville, Md.
He was 59.
He died unexpectedly in his sleep and the cause was not yet known, said his wife, Janet Uematsu.


Pop and Jazz in Review
World Saxophone Quartet  Sweet Basil 88 Seventh Avenue South (above Bleecker Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
The World Saxophone Quartet has in many ways been a victim of its own success.
Its members travel and work fairly regularly with other groups, making it hard for the band to perform.
And after losing its most impressive composer, Julius Hemp hill, the band went into a seeming decline, filling his spot with musicians who never lasted long.
And it hasn't released an album in four years.


Cooper Industries Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Letting an Expert Make the Bed And Change the Look With Pillows
IT'S an opportune time to be looking for good value in bedding accessories.
Carol Helms, a home-furnishings and design consultant, scouted dozens of stores and sales in the New York area to create four inviting and affordable looks for the bed -- whether you're dressing from scratch or refreshing what you have.
Where to Buy Them
ABC Carpet and Home, 888 Broadway (at East 19th Street); (212) 473-3000.
Bazaar Sabado, 54 Greene Street (at Broome Street); (212) 941-6152.
Barneys New York, Madison Avenue and 61st Street; (212) 826-8900; and Seventh Avenue and 17th Street; (212) 929-9000.
Bed, Bath and Beyond, 620 Avenue of the Americas (at 18th Street); (212) 255-3550.
Cobweb, 116 West Houston Street (at Sullivan Street); (212) 505-1558.
Distinctive Furnishings, 370 Bleecker Street (at Charles Street); (212) 255-2476.
Handblock, 860 Lexington Avenue (at 65th Street); (212) 570-1816.
Macy's; (212) 494-4181.
Saint-Remy, 818 Lexington Avenue (at 62d Street); (212) 486-2018.
Wolfman-Gold &amp; Good Company, 116 Greene Street (at Prince Street); (212) 431-1888.


Feud Between Canada Airlines Eases
Peace appears to be breaking out in a long war between Canada's two troubled airlines, which had been scrapping over routes, computer reservations and a proposal made to one of them by a big United States carrier.
Air Canada announced today that it would abandon all legal efforts to stop Canadian Airlines of Calgary, Alberta, from reaching a deal with American Airlines.
"It is now time for both Air Canada and PWA to move forward and focus on the task of rebuilding our industry," Air Canada said.


Gillooly Is Interviewed By Authorities
Tonya Harding's former husband, Jeffery Gillooly, spoke to Federal and state investigators at length today -- his first interview with the authorities -- in a possible prelude to a plea bargain.
Gillooly is one of four men charged in the assault on Harding's skating rival, Nancy Kerrigan, but he was the only one before today who had not provided investigators with his version of events leading to the Jan. 6 assault at the national figure-skating championships in Detroit.


Checks in Mail, Vanguard Says
The Vanguard Group said yesterday that it was sending out "hundreds" of replacement mutual-fund dividend checks through overnight mail to shareholders who have not yet received theirs.
In addition, the company will meet today with United States Postal Service authorities in Washington to determine why so many dividend checks the mutual-fund company sent out three weeks ago have still not arrived.


Conrail Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SUPER BOWL: Notebook; Dallas's Haley Probable At Defensive End Spot
A Dallas defensive end, Charles Haley, is listed as probable for Super Bowl XVIII Sunday, despite muscle spasms in his lower back that have bothered him all season.
Haley didn't practice today as both teams went through their first workouts of Super Bowl week.
He spent the afternoon with a physical therapist, as he often has since injuring his back in October.
Coach Jimmy Johnson said he expected Haley to practice Thursday.


Let's Look for Abuse Behind Depression
To the Editor:
I was glad to see "Childhood Depression May Herald Adult Ills" (Science Times, Jan. 11).
Depression -- an illness suffered by more than one in 10 Americans, many of them children -- deserves our close attention.
I was disturbed, however, by the perspective you take toward cures.
The focus on cognitive therapy masks more significant causes of depression than "habits of thought."


SUPER BOWL: Notebook; Dallas's Haley Probable At Defensive End Spot
A Dallas defensive end, Charles Haley, is listed as probable for Super Bowl XVIII Sunday, despite muscle spasms in his lower back that have bothered him all season.
Haley didn't practice today as both teams went through their first workouts of Super Bowl week.
He spent the afternoon with a physical therapist, as he often has since injuring his back in October.
Coach Jimmy Johnson said he expected Haley to practice Thursday.


C. W. Schurmann, Dutch Envoy, 91, At U.N. and U.S.
Carl W. A. Schurmann, a former Dutch representative at the United Nations and Ambassador to Washington, died on Friday at his home in Geneva.
He was 91.
A latecomer to diplomacy, Mr.
Schurmann showed a talent for reconciling conflicting opinions while fostering an atmosphere of congeniality.


U.S. OFFICIALS HINT AT NEW FLEXIBILITY OVER HEALTH PLAN
The Administration is willing to compromise on important elements of President Clinton's health plan, Federal officials said today.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told business executives that the Administration was willing to make some concessions on the structure of the purchasing groups through which most Americans would obtain medical coverage under the President's proposal.


CHRONICLE
PINCHAS ZUKERMAN was walking to a concert on Saturday evening in Vancouver, British Columbia, dressed in tails and carrying his violin, when an unkempt man with a plastic bag approached him.
" 'What do you do?' he asked me," Mr.
Zukerman said yesterday.
" 'I play the violin,' I responded. 'In the street?' he asked. 'No,' I said. 'Do you play jazz?' he asked. 'No,' I said. 'I play classical music, like Brahms.' "


Knicks Hope Offense Is on Right Trail Now
The Knicks headed west yesterday, hoping that their offense was headed in the right direction.
Amid criticism that the offense had become too predictable, the Knicks answered some questions during Tuesday night's 98-96 victory over the Phoenix Suns at Madison Square Garden.
Charles Smith enjoyed his best game of the season, with 25 points and 7 rebounds, uniting with Patrick Ewing and John Starks for an effective three-pronged attack.


G.O.P.'s 'No Crisis' Position
After months of struggling to stake out a position on health care, the Republicans now have a party line: there is no crisis.
Page A16.


CHRONICLE
The boycott of Colorado over a measure to forbid legal protection for homosexuals may be over, but the repercussions continue.
For example, HARLEY BALDWIN, owner of the Caribou Club in Aspen, was rebuffed several weeks ago when he tried to organize a benefit for Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS Research, during Aspen's Gay Ski Week, which began Saturday.
Executives of Amfar said thanks, but no thanks.


Reporter's Notebook; Earthquake Sends Crime on Vacation
Now the good news from the Great Quake.
On any given normal day in Los Angeles, the police make roughly 500 arrests, about a third of them for major crimes like murder, rape and robbery.


Aqueduct Canceled Again
Not to sound like a broken record, but racing was canceled at Aqueduct again yesterday and for the usual reason: snow.
It was the seventh time this year that the track's seven-race card and the five-race simulcast from Gulfstream Park had been disrupted because of seasonal weather.
That puts Aqueduct on course to beat the mark established at last year's winter meeting when 11 days of racing were canceled or disrupted by the weather.


Police Appeal for Help in Girl's Disappearance
Frustrated in their two-week effort to find the remains of Sara Anne Wood, the 12-year-old who disappeared last summer, the state police today made an unusual plea for help from anyone who was on vacation in the Adirondacks on Aug. 18.
The police asked anyone on vacation at that time to check their home videos for pictures of the light blue Ford Econoline van that Lewis Lent Jr., the suspect in Sara's abduction, was driving then.
Such a picture would provide evidence that the authorities say would help them bring charges against Mr.
Lent, who told the police that he abducted Sara as she was walking her bicycle here and that he buried her in the woods near Raquette Lake.


Four Patients At TB Center Are Arrested In Attack
Four tuberculosis patients in long-term detention at Goldwater Memorial Hospital on Roosevelt Island were arrested yesterday and charged with attacking several staff members and security officers, hospital officials said.
Howard Garrison, Goldwater's deputy executive director, said four employees suffered minor injuries in the late-morning incident, which took place in a secured unit that holds 19 tuberculosis patients who are detained for months at a time to take medication under supervision.
Officials from New York City's Health Department, which places the patients in the unit, said yesterday that they planned to reassess the detention program to increase safety.


Atlanta Journal; Boosterism Isn't Gone With the Wind
Sure, the Super Bowl rematch of Dallas and Buffalo has all the magic of Bucknell versus Colgate.
And, yes, there is the spectacle of blacks and whites haggling over the Confederate battle flag as if the Civil War were still going on.
But four days before Super Bowl XXVIII and 905 days before the 1996 Olympic Games in the City Never Too Busy to Preen, Atlanta is reveling in its status as a city on the rise, sometimes to the point of forgetting that it is only the host, not the show.


The Johnson Journey: Excoriated to Imitated
Five years ago, when Jimmy Johnson became the Dallas Cowboys' coach, you could hear snickering throughout the National Football League.
His brash style at the University of Miami would simply not work in the N.F.L., his critics said.
The difference in coaching strategies in college compared with the N.F.L. was as wide as the Grand Canyon.
The doubters enjoyed a hearty laugh when Johnson went 1-15 and 7-9 in those first two seasons.
And then the next year he was in the playoffs.
And then in the next one he won the Super Bowl.
And now he is back at the Big Show for another go.


Building Chief Was Officer In Company Under Inquiry
The newly appointed New York City Buildings Commissioner, Frank A. Luzi, was the treasurer and partner in a Boston asbestos-removal company that was indicted last August on charges that it falsified Federal records about employee safety.
Mr.
Luzi was appointed last month by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to head the Buildings Department, but the city's Department of Investigation has yet to finish a routine check of his background, mayoral aides said.


Sibley W. Hoobler, 82, Expert in Hypertension
Dr.
Sibley Worth Hoobler, a retired cardiologist who founded one of the country's first hypertension clinics, died on Tuesday in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 82 and lived in Cleveland.
His family said he had been wintering in Arizona as usual and died of a heart attack while playing tennis.


Anytime is Bedtime
WHEN Edith Wharton gave her "Age of Innocence" character Mrs.
Manson Mingott a first-floor bedroom hard by the entrance hall of the lady's Fifth Avenue mansion, she insured that Mrs.
Mingott's society friends were properly shocked.
In direct defiance of Victorian mores -- the bedroom then was a sanctum sanctorum, tucked away upstairs and free from intrusion -- the obese Mrs.
Mingott's bohemian quarters were considered scandalously convenient.
A century later, the attitude that a bedroom is just another room, to be used and enjoyed by all, is heartily endorsed by Min Hogg, the editor in chief of The World of Interiors, a British interior decorating magazine.
In her London apartment, Ms.
Hogg can often be found in her bedroom, dining supine.
While she nestles informally against an upholstered headboard, her drop-in guests eat from trays perched atop several thin cotton gauze comforters from India.


LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP. (NMS)
The Lotus Development Corporation reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings had doubled to $29.6 million, as strong growth from new software products lifted its results above Wall Street's estimates.
Shares of the company, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., rose $2.75, to $55.625, in Nasdaq trading.


Review/Dance; A Hawkins Premiere, To Internal Rhythms
If Erick Hawkins has taught audiences to see dance in a radical new way, it is largely because he has infused his works with a sense of time more commonly found in Asian theater.
Like a good Taoist, he knows how to balance activity with inactivity onstage, and just as often, music with silence.
But on Tuesday night, "Many Thanks," the premiere that opened the Erick Hawkins Dance Company's season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), was unexpectedly danced to no music at all.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Holly Cole  Pop Singer Fez at the Time Cafe
With her clear, bright voice, eclectic taste that runs from country to jazz, and an approach to a song that is often brashly ironic, Holly Cole is a pop-jazz singer with a distinctly contemporary point of view.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coaches Leaning Toward Mediation
The Black Coaches Association is leaning toward accepting an offer from the Federal government to mediate its dispute with the National Collegiate Athletic Association over basketball scholarships and other matters.
The association's director, RUDY WASHINGTON, met yesterday with a mediation team from the Justice Department to discuss how the process would work.
N.C.A.A. officials had a similar meeting with mediators in Denver last Saturday. (AP)


Norfolk Southern Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scouting Makes Room For Minorities
To the Editor:
A Jan. 9 report on the Scoutreach program created by the Greater New York Council of the Boy Scouts, which pays black and Hispanic men, most of them college students, to be Scout leaders in the inner city, does a great service by highlighting the critical need for male minority members to become involved as Scout leaders and serve as role models for our youth.


Hate-Literature Documents Weighed in Bombing Trial
More than 200 witnesses have testified in the World Trade Center bombing trial, but nothing has been heard from the four men actually on trial, who merely sit quietly in their business suits day after day, silently and impassively watching the proceedings unfold before them.
But in a debate held in the judge's chambers on Tuesday and made public yesterday, hints of the defendants' mental and spiritual world, involving powerful strains of anti-Americanism and hatred of Jews, emerged as lawyers debated what evidence should be allowed in the case in the remaining days.


Better Late Than Never
After months of ducking the difficult task, Attorney General Janet Reno has finally yielded to intense political pressure and agreed to take over the investigation of the killing of a rabbinical student during riots in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn in 1991.
She made the right decision.
Whether or not she is successful in bringing indictments or winning convictions, the public needs to be convinced that no avenue has been left unexplored in attempting to resolve this incendiary case.
The murder of the student, Yankel Rosenbaum, occurred after an accident in which a car in the entourage of the Lubavitcher rabbi struck and killed a black child.
Crowds of angry blacks subsequently roamed the streets; one group, shouting "Kill the Jew," fatally stabbed Mr.
Rosenbaum.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Federal regulators and lawmakers want to restrict the compensation paid executives and trustees when mutual savings and loans sell stock to the public or merge with banks.  [ Page A1. ]
The nation's recovery is being hailed by some economists for its noninflationary growth.
Although the recovery has skipped some regions and has frequently not increased jobs, these economists argue that it is a model expansion because it has been achieved without a big tax cut or a burst of Government spending -- traditional tools of stimulative policy.  [ D1. ]


Sports of The Times; Kerrigan And 'Super' Security
AS soon as Jim Kelly sauntered into the ballroom of the Stouffer Waverly Hotel yesterday, a bearded security guard in a blue satin windbreaker, Bob Hall, glanced down at about two dozen members of the news media below the small platform where the Bills' quarterback would sit at a table for a Super Bowl XXVIII interrogation.
"Please don't get on the podium," the security guard said.
"Please don't poke him in the face with your microphones."


Bitter Epilogue in Afghanistan
Remember Afghanistan?
Not so long ago, Democrats vied with Republicans in supporting a "good" war waged by freedom fighters against the Evil Empire.
In April 1992 its Communist rulers were finally evicted, and an interim Government assumed power.
Refugees began returning from camps in Pakistan and Iran; the State Department proclaimed a triumph for justice and self-determination.
Fast forward to 1994:


Blanks Fired at the Prince of Wales


Review/Jazz; A Former Band Pianist Steps Into the Spotlight
Cyrus Chestnut's engagement at the Village Vanguard this week is a special event.
It's his debut, his introduction into society.
Mr.
Chestnut, a 31-year-old pianist who has spent time in the bands of Betty Carter, Wynton Marsalis and others, has led his own trio in other clubs around the city, most notably Bradley's.
But now he has a new album out, called "Revelation," his first for an American label (Atlantic), and for his show on Tuesday night, the company packed the club and made the set an event.
Position in the jazz world is the product of all sorts of things, including record-company support, and Mr.
Chestnut seems on his way.
It helps that he's an overwhelming soloist, and on his first tune of the night, his elbows out, his hands swooping up and down the keyboard, he seemed omnivorous, an octopus engulfing the piano.
Mr.
Chestnut played as if he'd been storing up ideas for years, and he let loose salvos of double-handed figures, rushing torrents of notes and hammered phrases in the lower register.
Stop-time sections allowed him to place crystalline melodies against silence, seemingly bending notes that hung for a moment only to plummet into the rush of his lines.
Mr.
Chestnut is an exciting improviser.


Compaq Net And Sales Set Records
The Compaq Computer Corporation, continuing to outpace the personal computer industry in market share growth and consistent profitability, today reported record fourth-quarter earnings and sales that exceeded Wall Street's highest estimates.
In an apparent blow to the Intel Corporation, Compaq also disclosed that it had tapped Advanced Micro Devices as an additional supplier of microprocessors, the computer chips that function as the brains of personal computers.
But some analysts said that using Advanced Micro chips was a gamble because the Intel brand was so well known.


Chief of Continental Can Charged in Insider Suit
Donald J. Bainton, the president and chief executive of the Continental Can Corporation, was sued yesterday by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which accused him of tipping off a close friend in March 1992 that the company was about to report poor profits.
The friend, John R. Curtin, was also named as a defendant in the civil suit, which accused him of selling his shares in the company before the bad news became public.
The suit was filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


New York Stock Exchange Censures a Prudential Broker
The New York Stock Exchange yesterday censured a stockbroker with Prudential Securities in the Big Board's first regulatory case stemming from the firm's limited partnership fraud scandal.
The case, brought against a Prudential broker in Scottsdale, Ariz., also marks the first time in the scandal that a Prudential employee, rather than the firm, has been cited by a regulator in connection with the scandal, which involved the use of misleading information to sell limited partnership investments.


Kovalev Is Young, Slumping and Tradable
At the end of practice today, most of his Rangers teammates were already in the locker room, but not Aleksei Kovalev.
He stood by himself in a corner of the rink with a puck on his stick, bouncing it off the blade as if it were a paddle ball.
His face revealed a small smile.
The Rangers' youngest and most troubled player seemed content.
The night before, he was not happy with himself, and his face showed a frown.
Kovalev had no points in the 8-3 victory over the San Jose Sharks that extended the Ranger winning streak to four games.
In the last 10 games, Kovalev has no goals, and he has scored just one in his last 13 and three in his last 22.
Trade Rumors Abound
Everywhere he turns, Kovalev is confronted with trade rumors, the latest that he might go to Vancouver for Peter Nedved.
He turns 21 on Feb. 24 and is in his second season with the Rangers.
Kovalev is a former first-round draft choice from Russia who is coveted by many teams that project him as a future star.
For a team like the Rangers, best in the league so far and a contender for the Stanley Cup, it is tempting to trade this unripened talent for proven players who can help bring a championship this spring.


Longer Treasuries Pare Losses
Government securities recovered yesterday, with longer maturities paring about half of their losses for the week.
With no economic news on the calendar, traders and dealers focused on the five-year note auction.
Prices were generally higher, with the only downturn coming after the results of the note auction were released.
Some traders said the $12 billion sale of five-year notes was disappointing.
Market expectations called for a yield of 5.09 percent, while the auction came in at a high yield of 5.10 percent.


Christian Bishop in Iran Is Reported Missing
A leader of Iranian Christians has disappeared in Teheran after speaking out against persecution of Christians, a New York-based human rights group said today.
The leader, Bishop Haik Hovsepian Mehr, was last seen in the Iranian capital on Jan. 19 on his way to the airport, the group, Middle East Watch, said in a statement.


Spectrum Says It Is Target Of Investigation by S.E.C.
Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., whose shares plunged on Tuesday, confirmed yesterday that it was being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, possibly relating to management statements in May, when the company's stock price abruptly tripled.
Trading in the Manhasset, L.I., company's shares subsided yesterday.
Shares closed at $5.875, down 43.75 cents, in Nasdaq trading of 4.18 million shares.
On Tuesday, Spectrum shares dropped $1, to $6.3125, after dropping as low as $4.375, on trading of 19.6 million shares.
Confirmed a Report
The company's admission of an S.E.C. investigation confirmed an article in The Wall Street Journal yesterday.
In an interview with the newspaper, John Sculley, Spectrum's chairman, denied rumors of a management rift and reports of his imminent resignation.
He also said that there was no S.E.C. inquiry.


Jones Leads Wilson In Sound Bites Gained
"Jer-ree! Jer-ree!" shouted the fans from the lobby of the Hyatt Regency Hotel.
"Cow-boys! Cow-boys!" they yelled at the man in the cocktail lounge-turned ESPN2 studio.
The man was Jerry Jones, the omnipresent owner of the Dallas Cowboys, who is probably the most popular interview in the days leading up to Super Bowl XXVIII.


Council Votes Historic District In 38-Block Section of Queens
After years in which preservationists said their efforts were frustrated in Queens, the City Council voted unanimously yesterday to designate as a historic district an elegant swath of almost 500 apartment buildings and homes in Jackson Heights that in the early 1900's gave garden apartments their name.
The Council's vote creates only the second designated historic district in Queens.
The first is a much smaller district of 19th-century town houses on two blocks in Hunters Point that was designated 26 years ago, shortly after the city's strict landmarks law first took effect.


Economic Scene; An ugly subject: the prejudice against hiring homely people.
DO blondes have more fun?
Social scientists have yet to nail down the answer.
But economists now have good reason to believe that blondes make more money -- or at least the trim, attractive ones do.
New studies show that men and women (with any hair color) who are rated below average in attractiveness by survey interviewers typically earn 10 to 20 percent less than those rated above average.
One is tempted to write off the results as proof that idle econometricians are the Devil's helpers.
But the findings from Daniel Hamermesh of the University of Texas and Jeff Biddle of Michigan State are complemented by other research showing that obese women are also at a considerable earnings disadvantage.
And they could figure prominently in the very serious business of deciding who is protected by the three-year-old Americans With Disabilities Act.


For Kitchens: the Good, the Odd, the Silly
One's first impulse is to applaud the National Housewares Manufacturers Association, sponsor of the annual International Housewares Show here, for honesty.
In the huge four-day exhibition last week, the trade group gave the name "Design Oasis" to the one small display that showed off prize-winning product concepts by industrial design students.
Visitors were clearly intrigued by student prototypes like a small microwave oven with an expandable cooking space and rounded, heat-saving design that gave it the whimsical eye-appeal of early radio.
Other innovations included a plastic picnic cart that folds out into a table and a portable toaster powered by natural gas.


In the Shadows of the Casinos
Fortune smiled for so long on this coastal island city, a bedroom community to Atlantic City's casino industry, that it was perhaps inevitable that things would take a turn for the worse, like a gambler's hot streak that suddenly turns cold.
Brigantine, just 1,000 yards across the Abesecon Inlet from a gambling resort that draws 32 million visitors a year, has been transformed over the last 15 years by Atlantic City's success, growing from a sleepy island of summer visitors and retirees into a bustling community.


Machinists Pass United Deal
Members of United Airlines' machinists union approved a plan yesterday to give employees 53 percent control of the airline in exchange for cost savings and the flexibility to create a low-fare carrier.
The plan passed narrowly, receiving 56 percent of the vote.
The machinists union's leaders had strongly recommended that its 28,200 members approve the deal.


Corrections
A news analysis article yesterday about President Clinton's State of the Union Message misstated the timing of the economic recovery.
Although the labor market did not recover significantly until fall 1992, the recovery began in the second quarter of 1991.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about reaction at Kean College in New Jersey to a campus speech by a Nation of Islam official referred imprecisely in some editions to the significance of 1989 in the college's history.
It was the year Dr.
Elsa Gomez became president of the college, not the year Kean became a state college.


Hardest Medical Choices Shift to Patients
When Bonnie G. scheduled a sonogram in the middle of her pregnancy she was looking forward to what modern technology could offer her: a peek at her fetus and the chance to be reassured that her child -- a boy, she discovered -- would be fine.
Instead, the grainy television image the sonogram produced brought her disturbing information and forced her to make heart-wrenching choices that past generations never faced.
Almost Impossible Choices
Mrs.
G.'s test showed that her baby, due this April, had a blockage of his urinary system that had probably caused permanent damage to his kidneys.
While he could be born normal, the doctors said, he would most likely need dialysis or an organ transplant in childhood, and might be so sick that he would die shortly after birth.


CHRONICLE
RUDY F. DE LEON, one of the top aides to Les Aspin, the departing Secretary of Defense, is staying at the Pentagon and getting a promotion.
The White House has picked Mr. de Leon to become Undersecretary of the Air Force, the No. 2 position in that branch of the armed forces.
As the chief deputy to the Air Force Secretary, Sheila E. Widnall, Mr. de Leon will be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Air Force.


Bobsledder Has Friends in Low Places
Chip Minton is mingling with a different class of people these days -- having forsaken, for the time being, the murderers, robbers, gangsters, forgers, swindlers, thieves, thugs and assorted other felons and reprobates he is normally in contact with.
Why, one day not long ago, Minton, 24 years old, husky, with a scraggly red beard and an accent that remains true to his hometown of Macon, Ga., was sitting at a dinner table in Monaco with the United States bobsled team, of which Minton is now an Olympic-bound member, when Prince Albert came by.
"Hey, Albert, how ya doin'? I'm Chip Minton," he said.


Let's Look for Abuse Behind Depression; Other Therapies
To the Editor:
"Childhood Depression May Herald Adult ills" (Science Times, Jan. 11) states well the serious toll childhood depression can have and the way in which it is different from adult depression, namely, in its effect on social and emotional development still under way.


Russia Policy: A U.S. Riddle
The Clinton Administration's policy toward the former Soviet Union is being undermined, slowly but surely, by the takeover in Russia, Belarus and Ukraine by politicians advocating populist economics that American officials believe will lead to financial ruin and political turmoil.
Only two weeks ago President Clinton traveled to Moscow and Minsk to deliver his message: more economic reform will lead to more Western aid.
The leaders there nodded in agreement and the White House pronounced the visit a rousing success.


Credit Union Placed Millions With Seized Spanish Bank
The U.S.
Central Credit Union, which provides financial services for the country's 13,000 credit unions, acknowledged yesterday that it had deposited $255 million in uninsured accounts in Banco Espanol de Credito months before the Spanish Government seized the institution last month.
On Monday, Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, the Texas Democrat who heads the House Banking Committee, sent letters to U.S.
Central and to the National Credit Union Administration, the Federal agency that regulates credit unions, asking whether the credit union was "risking taxpayer monies by investing" in Banesto, as the Spanish bank is known.


Girls to Cortines: We Can Do Science, Too


Eagles Spread Wings In Garden
Given the opportunity to exchange their annual nightmare on Union Turnpike for an evening in The World's Most Famous Arena, the Boston College Eagles made a discovery last night that few of their predecessors have enjoyed.
Their response to the businesslike 85-68 victory over St.
John's was even more surprising than the ease of their victory at Madison Square Garden.


Ruling Gives Reprieve to Dog On Death Row
New Jersey's highest court, the State Supreme Court, today spared the life of the state's celebrated death-row dog, Taro, until March 1, apparently to give officials time to find some way to save the animal from execution.
One of those seeking a nonlethal solution to Taro's plight is the new Governor, Christine Todd Whitman.


Cray Research Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Centex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Esther Ralston, 91, A Featured Actress Of Silent-Film Era
Esther Ralston, a silent-screen actress and vaudeville star who was known for a time as "the American Venus" for her starring role in the 1926 film of that name, died on Jan. 14 at her home in Ventura, Calif.
She was 91.
The cause was a heart attack, said Jess L. Hoaglin, a friend.


Senator Asks End to Threats Against China
A leading Democratic voice on trade in the Senate says the policy of annually threatening China with trade sanctions is ineffective, harmful to the reform process in China and should be permanently scrapped this June if China meets the Administration's demands.
Senator Max Baucus, the Montana Democrat who chairs the Senate subcommittee on international trade, said in a speech prepared for delivery on Thursday that if the Clinton Administration actually carried out its threat to withdraw China's trade benefits it would be like dropping "the equivalent of a nuclear bomb" in terms of the economic and political fallout.


France Bluntly Calls for NATO To Relieve Two Bosnian Towns
France said today that the time had come for NATO to carry out its decision to relieve two Bosnian towns encircled by Serbian troops, using force if necessary.
In an unusually blunt statement, President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said the United Nations, which has the authority to call NATO troops into action in the former Yugoslavia, "must without delay give itself the means" to open Tuzla airport and relieve United Nations troops in the eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica.


Margaret E. Courain; Information Specialist, 66
Dr.
Margaret E. Courain, a retired information manager for the Federal Government and the pharmaceutical industry, died Jan. 13 at her home in South Orange, N.J.
She was 66.
The cause was cancer, said Jacqueline Algon, a friend.


Assessing Changes In Point-and-Shoots
IF your idea of a snapshot camera still runs along the lines of the Kodak Instamatic, it's time to catch up with the many changes in the field.
Amateur cameras these days can be as complicated as computers, which is no surprise given that most of them use electronic circuitry to control light meters, shutter speeds and many other aspects of picture taking.
These cameras, designed to do everything automatically except frame the shot, are called point-and-shoots, to indicate just how easy it is to use them.
They have also become remarkably small, with many only a little larger than a pack of cigarettes.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HANGER ORTHOPEDIC GROUP INC., Bethesda, Md., an orthotics and prosthetics concern, has acquired M-D Orthotics and Prosthetics, from Health Industries, Phoenix.
Terms were not disclosed.
NORTH AMERICAN BIOLOGICALS INC., Miami, a provider of human blood plasma elements, signed a definitive agreement to acquire Premier Bioresources Inc., Fort Worth, a supplier of plasma used for human therapeutics.
Terms were not disclosed.


Clinton Has a Plan That Would Pay Some People for Not Driving to Work
If President Clinton has his way, many commuters will have bigger paychecks if they give up their parking spaces.
The President will propose in the budget he sends to Congress next month that some employers who subsidize their commuters' parking bills be required to give the workers the same amount of money in cash if they relinquish their parking spots.
The aim is to reduce air pollution by encouraging people not to drive to work.


Girls to Cortines: We Can Do Science, Too


Front and Center for Front 5 in Bills' Game Plan
It took about three seconds for Thurman Thomas to surmise just what it would take for him to duplicate the 186-yard, 3-touchdown rushing performance he had last week against Kansas City in the game against Dallas this Sunday.
"It's not up to me," he said today. "It's up to my offensive line."


HOSPITALS' CHIEF TO REDUCE STAFFS
Under pressure from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the chairman of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday that he would eliminate 1,300 jobs immediately through attrition and layoffs to help close an unexpected $160 million shortfall in the corporation's budget this year.
The chairman, Luis A. Miranda Jr., said that the reduction in jobs, which he will submit to the corporation's 16-member board today, would save $10 million this year and $40 million next year without seriously harming medical care.
The job cuts, 2.7 percent of the agency's 49,000 employees, would include 300 managerial jobs and 1,000 other nonmedical workers, including unionized employees like orderlies, housekeepers and food-service workers.
Mayor's Office Endorses Plan
The Mayor's office last night endorsed the reductions, which represent the first move by the administration to make good on Mr.
Giuliani's campaign pledge to reduce the size of government without slashing services.
"I think it's a victory for everybody," said Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers.
"When you have to make up a deficit, you have to make tough decisions."


PEPSI INVESTING $350 MILLION IN CHINA PLANTS
Pepsi-Cola International, a unit of Pepsico, said yesterday that it would invest $350 million in the next five years to open 10 bottling plants in what it called "largely untapped regions of China." The new plants, which will be operated as joint ventures with local government agencies, will let Pepsi roughly double its sales in China.


More Arrests, More Therapy In Drug Plan
The New York City Police Department is developing a plan to fulfill Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's campaign pledge to sweep thousands of drug dealers off the streets, but without swamping the courts and prisons, the department's chief spokesman said yesterday.
While a major emphasis will be to increase low-level drug arrests, aides to the Mayor now favor sending an increasing number of nonviolent suspects into drug treatment rather than jail, said the spokesman, John Miller.


A Mean Political Hangover for Seagram in Ukraine
The Seagram Company arrived in Ukraine two years ago, eager to do business in a vast, untapped market where the people were known for their fondness for vodka.
The company was pushed along on a romantic notion -- that it was returning to the homeland of its founder -- and it had grand plans for a new vodka that could be sold here and exported to Russia, as well as to the West.
There would be a plush showcase store in decaying downtown Kiev.
The store, replete with fine Canadian maple and Ukrainian marble, towering ceilings and glittering chandeliers, was unveiled by the scion of Seagram, Edgar M. Bronfman, the chairman and chief executive, in July.


No Headline
"You have 750 million people around the world that will see the Super Bowl -- and Atlanta -- on television. Watching the games last weekend, you'd just hear 'Atlanta! Atlanta! Atlanta!' It just puts chills up and down your back." -- SPURGEON RICHARDSON an Atlantan who is paid to love it.  [ A12:4. ]


Winning a Prize for Best Fall. It's All for Charity.
There are two ways to approach ski racing.
You can sit in front of a television with the remote zeroed in on Alberto Tomba thundering down a slope.
Or you can stand at the top of a hill yourself, palms clenched tightly around your ski poles, ready to go.
Steve Dapper, a 46-year-old advertising executive from Bronxville, N.Y., has been a recreational skier for most of his life.
But earlier this month, he decided to take the plunge into ski racing -- albeit for a single charity event -- and survived despite it all.


Seton Hall Clicks on 12 3-Point Shots
With Arturas Karnishovas and John Leahy, established 3-point shooters, plus Andre Brown, a highly touted freshman, Seton Hall hoped to make the 3-pointer an integral part of its offense.
It hasn't quite worked out that way -- until tonight.
The Pirates caught Miami flat-footed, sinking a season-high 12 3-point shots en route to a 77-48 victory before 2,870 at the Miami Arena.


EG&amp;G Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


SUPER BOWL: Notebook; Dallas's Haley Probable At Defensive End Spot
A Dallas defensive end, Charles Haley, is listed as probable for Super Bowl XVIII Sunday, despite muscle spasms in his lower back that have bothered him all season.
Haley didn't practice today as both teams went through their first workouts of Super Bowl week.
He spent the afternoon with a physical therapist, as he often has since injuring his back in October.
Coach Jimmy Johnson said he expected Haley to practice Thursday.


U.S. Seeks to Curb Large Payouts To Mutual Savings Bank Officials
Federal regulators and lawmakers moved today to stop the reaping of huge profits by executives and trustees when mutual savings and loans sell stock to the public or merge with commercial banks.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said today that it would draft rules to protect depositors at mutual institutions that sell stock, as Green Point Savings Bank in Queens is trying to do.
A Federal district judge today temporarily put on hold Green Point's efforts to sell stock this week, saying that a suit against the bank by depositors may have merit.  [ Page D1. ] No Formaln Decision
In the executive branch, a Treasury Department official said that his agency was moving to halt action on all requests by mutual savings and loans to sell their institutions to commercial banks.
"We will certainly stop processing them today," said Jonathan L. Fiechter, the acting director of the department's Office of Thrift Supervision.
But he then stopped in midsentence and said that no formal decision for a moratorium had been made.
Mr.
Fiechter made his comments to reporters after testifying before a Congressional panel.


Browning-Ferris Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FINANCE MINISTER SHUNS YELTSIN PLEA AND QUITS CABINET
Warning that the economy should not be left in the hands of "Red managers," Russia's Finance Minister rejected the entreaties of President Boris N. Yeltsin today and said he would not remain in the current Government.
Boris G. Fyodorov, the young minister who had come to symbolize the future of Western-endorsed economic reform in Russia, predicted economic disaster, social explosions and Ukrainian-style hyperinflation as a consequence of the stated policies of Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin and the current Cabinet, which is dominated by Soviet-era managers who favor a slower, softer, subsidized transition to the market.


Devils Tie on Guerin Goals, Terreri Saves
Devils 3, Oilers 3
Bill Guerin scored twice and Stephane Richer delivered the tying goal at 8 minutes 24 seconds of the third period last night to lead the surging New Jersey Devils to a 3-3 overtime tie with the host Edmonton Oilers.
The Devils, 2-0-1 on this five-game road trip, were seeking a team record with a fourth consecutive road victory.
Their 59 points are third most in the National Hockey League.


King Hussein Says He Hopes to Meet Rabin
In a signal that his country would take a more prominent role in Middle East peace talks, King Hussein of Jordan said today that he hoped to meet "before too long" with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.
King Hussein has reportedly met in secret many times before with Israeli officials, but his statement today that he would meet openly with Mr.
Rabin indicated that Jordan was ready to move steadily forward in peace talks.


Sherry Mathis; Actress, 44
Sherry Mathis, an actress who performed on Broadway and in the daytime soap opera "Search for Tomorrow," died on Jan. 23 in Memphis.
She was 44.
The cause was cancer, said her brother William A. Mathis.


Clinton in Bind Over Visa for I.R.A. Wing Leader
President Clinton has found himself in a political bind over Northern Ireland, caught between powerful Irish-Americans in Congress and the British Government over whether to grant a visa to an Irish Republican Army wing leader.
On one side are Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and 38 other members of Congress who are strenuously urging the President to grant a visa to Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. political wing.
The British want the visa denied.


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hunt for Just the Right Words Has Clinton Straining for Any
That raspy State of the Union Message, it turns out, came only after practice, practice, practice, and by the time President Clinton woke up this morning, he could speak only in a whisper.
For his 63-minute monologue, this will be the price: two days of tea, lozenges and silence -- or as close to the latter as the loquacious leader can come, his aides said.
By the end of the day, all Presidential appearances through Thursday had been canceled.


Books of The Times; Exploring the Body and the Mind
They Whisper  By Robert Olen Butler 333 pages. Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.
"If you're an artist, you have to live completely in your body," Fiona Price tells Ira Holloway at Coney Island on their first date, near the opening of Robert Olen Butler's new novel, "They Whisper." She adds, in language too raw to be quoted here, that you have to tell your mind to stay out of it.


Baker Hughes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Williams Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Acid Rain Efforts Found to Undercut Themselves
New studies have uncovered a surprising and unsettling twist in continuing efforts to reduce the harmful effects of acid rain on ecosystems.
The benefit from cutting emissions of airborne sulfates that cause acid rain has been partly wiped out, the studies found, by parallel reductions in airborne alkaline particles that help neutralize the acid.


Review/Fashion; The Cheery Depression Look
SOME 65 years ago, there were men who loosened their ties -- just a bit -- stepped to the ledges of their office buildings and jumped.
Now, the look of the Depression era -- the fashion, that is, not the desperation -- is coming back.
The New York men's collections this week offered chalk-stripe suits, flecked fabrics, wide corduroys and tie patterns that look as if they had been taken from the counter tops of diners.
Almost every collection had one jacket of a solid tweed with little flecks in it.
You know the jacket.
Your grandfather had one.
"There's a new depression happening right now," the designer John Bartlett said somewhat cheerily.
"It's not a financial one but an emotional depression, with every friend of mine being on Prozac. The clothes from the Depression have a real elegance and a real innocence I'd like to recapture."


Union Carbide Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Benes Avoids Arbitration by Signing Pact
ANDY BENES, one of the pitchers the Yankees covet, reached agreement yesterday with the San Diego Padres on a salary of $3,005,000 for the 1994 season, a raise of nearly $1 million from the $2,050,000 salary he won in salary arbitration last year.
Benes, who had a 15-15 record with a 3.78 earned run average last season, had sought $3.1 million to the Padres' offer of $2.85 million.
The Yankees have longed for Benes, but have been unwilling to meet the Padres' price in players.
The right-hander not only led the Padres in victories last season, but also in starts with 34, shutouts with 2, innings pitched with 230 2/3 and strikeouts with 179.


AT HOME WITH: Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe; Focusing on AIDS, and Life
FIRST of all, simply say the word "AIDS."
"The best thing you can do for your kid who is 5, 6 or 7 is to introduce them to the term," Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe said.
"It doesn't have to be associated with sex; it doesn't have to be associated with drugs. It only has to be that you are introducing your child to this illness, and that you become comfortable talking about it."


FMC Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rodman Set to Play After Nose Surgery
DENNIS RODMAN of the San Antonio Spurs underwent surgery for a deviated septum yesterday.
Rodman was injured Saturday night against the Dallas Mavericks when he was accidentally elbowed in the nose by POPEYE JONES.
Blood streaming down his face, Rodman left the game for about five minutes before returning wearing a bandage.
Rodman, who leads the National Basketball Association in rebounding with a 17.8 average, will resume light workouts tomorrow and is expected to play in Saturday's home game against the Atlanta Hawks.
He will wear a protective mask. (AP)


Bethlehem Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lord, Dentsu Chosen By AST Research
AST Research Inc., the personal computer manufacturer in Irvine, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles to handle its account, which had been at Team One Advertising in El Segundo, Calif., for the last year and a half.
Billings were estimated at $15 million to $16 million.


Crucial Lawmaker Criticizes Clinton Welfare Plan
The Democrat who will preside over the Clinton Administration's welfare plan in the House of Representatives today denounced one of its central provisions: a work program that is set at the minimum wage.
The Congressman, Harold E. Ford of Tennessee, said that he supported rules requiring welfare recipients to work but that the jobs should pay at least $9 an hour.


NEC Technologies Begins a Review
NEC Technologies Inc., the computer and peripheral products manufacturer, said yesterday that it had placed its estimated $30 million to $35 million North American account in review.
The account has been handled by DDB Needham New York for the last eight years.
"We want to insure that we maximize our advertising investment and obtain the best strategic and creative perspectives available," said Geoff Spillane, a spokesman for NEC in Boxborough, Mass.
He added that DDB Needham would participate in the review, but declined to disclose the names of the other agencies that had been asked to compete.
William M. Weilbacher of the Bismark Corporation in Dennis, Mass., has been hired to manage the review.


Judge Halts Green Point Stock Offer
A Federal judge abruptly ordered the Green Point Savings Bank yesterday to halt its long-delayed initial public stock offering.
The order came just hours after New York State banking regulators gave the stock offering their final approval, brushing aside a request by the Republic New York Corporation to make a last-minute takeover bid for Green Point, which is based in Queens.
Republic had previously made several hostile attempts to block the stock offering and acquire the bank.


Journal; Crime Crusaders On Parade
The good news is that it's no longer the economy, stupid.
Crime now leads the pollsters' hit parade of hot issues.
The bad news is that most politicians will now do for crime what they did for the economy: pander to the public by offering quick fixes to postpone the complex process of halting what the unglib Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan calls "the manifest decline of the American civic order."


Forecast: Snow, Followed by Short Tempers
Bob Sarferty hates having to thaw the locks on his cookie-delivery truck with an acetylene torch.
He hates shivering in the cab because the heater quit.
He hates driving all day because his partner won't.
He hates bickering with stock boys in grocery stores because he tracks dirt on just-mopped floors.
He hates feeling the snow in the bottom of his shoe.
"Enough's enough," he said yesterday between stops at supermarkets on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
"On top of the snow, everyone has an attitude."


Scrutinize Health and Hospitals Budget Before Cutting Services
To the Editor:
The plan submitted by the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to close an expected budget gap of $160 million by imposing a hiring freeze, delaying new health initiatives and cutting contributions to affiliated medical schools (news article, Jan. 19) may be necessary.


BORDEN INC. (N)
As expected, Borden reported yesterday that it took a huge fourth-quarter restructuring charge that effectively wiped out its 1993 earnings and chopped its dividend in half.
The food company, which recently replaced its chief executive because of shareholder discontent, promised earlier this month it would embark on its fourth restructuring in less than five years.
The $846.4 million pretax charge, which works out to $632.0 million, or $4.48 a share, after taxes, primarily reflected losses expected when the company sells its North American snack food business.
Two smaller write-offs had to do with the cost of taming Borden's organizational chart and accounting changes.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
Sleep, Uninterrupted
Q.
My 9-month-old son, our only child, keeps waking my husband and me once or twice a night, even though he's neither hungry or wet.
I thought our son would have a more reasonable sleep schedule by now.
What can we do to help him sleep through the night so that we can get enough rest?


G.O.P. Stance on Health Turns to No-Crisis View
After months of struggling to find a position on health care, the Republicans now have a party line: there is no crisis.
"Our country has health care problems, but no health care crisis," Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, said in his nationally televised response to President Clinton's State of the Union Message on Tuesday night.


Market Place; Weighing the value of an obscure but valuable asset of R. H. Macy.
LOST amid the drama of Federated Department Stores' surprise bid to merge with its rival, R. H. Macy &amp; Company, is an obscure accounting issue that would seem to have big implications for a combination of the two retailers.
Federated's investors, Macy's creditors and Wall Street are wondering what will happen to the more than $1 billion in operating losses accumulated by Macy during its slide into bankruptcy.
In the Wonderland of American bankruptcy, those losses have become one of Macy's big assets.


New Look for a Fast Plane
IT was not the usual trip to the airport: no luggage to check in, no carry-on, no ticket.
Just an intriguing invitation to see how Andree Putman, the French designer, had put her distinctive signature on the interior of the Air France Concorde.
For Ms.
Putman, known for the chic face lift she gave the Morgans Hotel 10 years ago, the redesign marked the culmination of years of Paris-New York-Paris forays.
A frequent traveler on the supersonic airplane, she was in the habit of making a mental list of all the improvements she could make to the interior with just a flick of her minimalist wand.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  INQUIRY ON SOLARZ ENDS WITHOUT CHARGES A Justice Department investigation of former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn ended without charges, but the White House indicated that it was not yet prepared to nominate him as Ambassador to India.
A9.
HARDEST CHOICES SHIFT TO PATIENTS New technology offers medical patients a fantastic explosion of information and treatment possibilities.
But it has also increasingly required patients to make decisions that tear at their very souls.
A1.


Isles Lose Turgeon, Then Lose Game, Too
Just when it seemed the plight of the last-place Islanders couldn't get any grimmer, it did, and the latest setback hit long before the team got down to the unfulfilling business of trying to ward off tonight's 4-3 road loss to the Toronto Maple Leafs.
During the routine pre-game warm-up, Pierre Turgeon, the very player who was supposed to rescue the Islanders from their woes and reprise last season's role by leading them into a playoff position, had his cheekbone fractured by an errant puck.
There was no immediate report on how long Turgeon, who will undergo minor surgery in New York to repair the break to his right cheekbone, will be sidelined.


S.E.C. Backing a Change for Stock Quotes
In a report scheduled to be released today, the Securities and Exchange Commission is recommending that the minimum quote on stock prices be cut in half, to 6.25 cents from 12.5 cents, officials familiar with the details of the report said yesterday.
If adopted, the change would threaten to slice broker profit margins in at least some securities and could provide a break to investors buying and selling those securities.


Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brooklyn Union Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  RUSSIAN REFORMER QUITS  The man who had come to symbolize the future of economic reform in Russia stepped down definitively as Finance Minister.
In resigning, Boris Fyodorov warned that economic disaster would result if Soviet-era managers kept the upper hand.
A1


Hawks' Early Hot Hand Rattles Suns
Hawks 116, Suns 107
Stacey Augmon hit all six of his shots as the Atlanta Hawks made 81 percent of their shots in the first quarter, built an 18-point lead and then held off a late rush by the Phoenix Suns for a 116-107 victory last night at Atlanta.
The Hawks, improving their home record to 18-3, connected on 17 of 21 shots in the opening period and took a 40-31 lead as Augmon had 13 of his 23 points.


Arms for the Revolution: The Bulgaria Connection
During the cold war, members of the Soviet bloc provided covert assistance to fellow revolutionaries throughout the world.
The country most often accused was Bulgaria, whose leader for 35 years, Todor Zhivkov, was a hard-liner committed to Lenin's call for international revolution.
The accusations were routinely denied and were difficult to prove, if not impossible, especially when Western officials said the charges were based on "intelligence sources" that they could not disclose.


Americans Rebel At Official Art
To the Editor:
In "Use Junk to Bankroll Art" (Op-Ed, Jan. 17), Daniel Talbot, a foreign-film distributor, proposes to subsidize movies of artistic quality from the ticket prices of so-called Hollywood "junk" movies, in the manner of the French.
Mr.
Talbot ignores one fundamental question.
Who is to determine which films are truly works of art, worthy of a subsidy?


INSIDE
A Smooth Recovery Is Seen: Growth Without Inflation
Economists are hailing the U.S. recovery as a model expansion because of its growth without inflation and because it was achieved without a big tax cut or a burst of Government spending -- the tools of fiscal policy for the last three decades.
Page D1.
Liberals Left on Sidelines
As the President leans ever more urgently toward a centrist agenda on welfare, crime and the military, a forlorn band of sidelined liberals fight among themselves.
Page A16.
Solarz Nomination in Doubt
An inquiry against Representative Stephen J. Solarz has ended, but it is unclear whether he remains a potential Ambassador to India.
Page A9.


Men's wear looks back


Fina Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Girls to Cortines: We Can Do Science, Too


A Retailer's Value Rises In Chapter 11
Fidelity Investments' interest in Merry-Go-Round Enterprises, the trendy retailer that filed for bankruptcy protection earlier this month, has caused something tantamount to a riot in the market for distressed investments, spiking the price of the company's debt and equity to levels that analysts believe are unrealistic.
Fidelity has bought more than $50 million of Merry-Go-Round's debt, as well as a big piece of its equity.
Shares closed at $3.125 yesterday, an extraordinarily high price for the stock of a company in Chapter 11.


Bridge
Immigrants from Russia are starting to make an impact on the American bridge scene.
At a regional tournament in Orlando, Fla., earlier this month, Vladimir Fleyshgakker of Manhattan and Alex Ladyzhensky of Bradenton, Fla., won two major events and finished second in a third.
They were all pairs events, making it a very rare combination of successes.
On the diagramed deal Fleyshgakker as South landed in three no-trump, avoiding four spades, which would have been hopeless.
West led the heart ten, since his partner had made a weak two-bid in that suit.
South won with the ace and led a low club.


Winter Wears On


The Cowboys Are a Direct Reflection Of Their Coach
Michael Irvin played for Dallas under Tom Landry, the former Cowboy coach, for one season.
Irvin was a rambunctious rookie who wanted to prove he belonged, which may explain why he got into many fights his first season.
He was so scrappy that on a plane ride home one day, Landry pulled him aside for a heart to heart.
Landry told him to remember that he was a wide receiver and that wide receivers need their hands.
So if you are going to fight, Landry said, try not to use your fists.


Yugoslav Army Reported Fighting In Bosnia to Help Serbian Forces
Yugoslav Army units have been operating inside Bosnia in recent weeks, apparently in an effort to counter recent advances by Bosnian Government forces, United Nations officials and Yugoslav journalists say.
"We have seen troop movements of the Yugoslav Army in Bosnia, large numbers of troops and military vehicles," said a United Nations official who requested anonymity because of political sensitivities.
"The general feeling is that there is a pre-emptive attack coming."


GENERAL MAGIC ATTRACTS INVESTMENT BY N.T.T.
Japan's main telephone company has become the latest investor in General Magic Inc., the Silicon Valley start-up that is developing software for portable communications devices and services.
The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation said yesterday that it would make an undisclosed investment in General Magic and would license the company's technologies.
N.T.T. said it hoped to develop new services based on the software of the Mountain View, Calif. company.
Formed by engineers from Apple Computer Inc. in 1990, General Magic has attracted investments from Apple, A.T.&amp; T., Motorola, Matsushita, Philips and Sony.
General Magic is developing Telescript, which is software that will help people find information on vast computer networks, and Magic Cap, a user interface device aimed at making hand-held computing and communicating instruments easier to use.


Villas at an exhibition: the Italian garden. Anne Raver.


Reunion in Croatia


Thinking Globally; A Little City Trolls for Trade
With new trade agreements breaking down the barriers between continents and nations, consider the case of East Orange.
After decades of economic malaise, this city is making an unlikely pitch to be a center of global commerce.
East Orange, one of the New York area's oldest commuter suburbs, has no large manufacturers, holds little appeal to office developers and has not had the success of other New Jersey suburbs in luring business from Manhattan.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Kalanchoe Flowers
Q.
Please tell me how I can get my kalanchoe to bloom as profusely as when I bought it.
Other than not flowering, it's quite healthy. -- H. Bonterre, Bronx


Emiliano Zapata Journal; In the War Cry of the Indians, Zapata Rides Again
He rode a storm of righteousness and rebellion that still, more than 80 years later, makes men go to war.
Indian rebels in southern Mexico calling themselves the Zapatista National Liberation Army are just the latest proof that the spirit of Emiliano Zapata, a man turned myth even before he died, lives on in Mexico.


Phyllis Goodhart Gordan; Library Trustee, 80
Phyllis Goodhart Gordan, a benefactor and former trustee of the New York Public Library, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 80.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said Lucy Rastelli, a daughter.


An Architectural Eye on Classical Italian Landscaping
WHEN the American etcher and landscape painter Charles A. Platt took his younger brother on a six-month tour of the great Renaissance villas of Italy in 1892, he was intent on a bit of brainwashing.
His brother William had just apprenticed himself to the great park maker and landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, who exalted naturalistic landscapes.


Smooth Landing for Economy
For the first time in 30 years, the United States economy has pulled itself out of recession without benefit of a significant tax cut or burst of new Government spending.
And although the recovery has skipped some regions and left many workers still without jobs -- as President Clinton noted in his State of the Union address -- others have hailed it as a model expansion with noninflationary growth and falling unemployment.
Achieving a noninflationary recovery has been something of a Holy Grail in economic policy circles for decades.
While cutting taxes and increasing spending have proved useful in temporarily increasing economic growth, that growth often seemed to be coupled with the seeds of higher inflation.


Fostering Togetherness
To The Home Section:
The fact that siblings have different personalities is no reason to discourage togetherness (Parent &amp; Child: "Two siblings, two different personalities," by Lawrence Kutner, Jan. 13).
No two people have exactly the same temperaments, even husbands and wives.
And no two people should be expected to spend every moment together.
But if we protect our children from the boredom of participating in activities they do not particularly relish, they will never learn that many necessary tasks are boring but must be done just the same.
One of the reasons today's adolescents are out of control is that they demand constant stimulation and have never been disciplined to defer satisfaction.


Awaiting Quake Aid, and Riot Aid, Too
On battered streets where vacant lots display the unhealed damage of the 1992 riots, earthquake survivors in South-Central Los Angeles are again struggling to recover from disaster, even as public sympathy dwells on their wealthier neighbors in the San Fernando Valley.
Far from the epicenter and the limelight in this new catastrophe, these residents of the inner city stand patiently in long lines at disaster relief centers or sit on newly broken porches as they wait for Federal loans to be approved.


At Last, Maybe, A Vision
Theodore Roosevelt once said that a good political speech is "a poster, not an etching." More important than fine details are broad, bold themes that stand out from a distance.
But through most of American history, State of the Union Messages -- even Theodore Rove almost always been more like etchings than posters, often dreary, seldom memorable.
In recent years, only Ronald Reagan -- who, like Theodore Roosevelt, always claimed to prefer "banners of bold colors" to "pale pastels" -- managed to transcend the genre.
With "American heroes" seated prominently in the visitors' gallery, teary references to acts of courage and sacrifice, evocations of families and neighborhoods and communities and buoyant descriptions of America as "once again alive with hope and opportunity," "a soaring eagle, proud and free," Mr.
Reagan transformed his State of the Union addresses from lists of policy achievements and goals into evocations of national values and myths.
They were an essential part of his effort to attach moral weight to his conservative agenda.


PHILIP MORRIS COS. (N)
The continued effect of a cigarette price war and a costly restructuring took a big bite out of the Philip Morris Companies' profit in the last quarter of 1993, Philip Morris reported yesterday.
Revenue was down slightly for the quarter, at $14.7 billion, while profit fell nearly 72 percent, to $339 million.
Quarterly profit from non-tobacco operations rose nearly 13 percent from the previous year's level, aided by the purchase last year by the Miller Brewing subsidiary of Molson Breweries' American unit.
But domestic tobacco profit fell more than 23 percent in the fourth quarter, to $2.5 billion.


Calendar: Artists Of Many Stripes
Modern Illuminations  Humanities Gallery, Engineering Building, Cooper Union, 51 Astor Place; (212) 353-4273.
An exhibition of illuminated manuscripts and miniature paintings by Bernard Maisner will run Wednesday through March 11.
The show features images painted in gold leaf and egg tempera that are related to modern texts, and a display of Mr.
Maisner's tools.


Political Memo; 'New Democrats' Giving Liberals a Cold Shoulder
As Bill Clinton leans ever more urgently into a centrist agenda that urges an overhaul of the welfare system, the passage of tough anti-crime legislation and a strong defense, he has left a forlorn band of liberals standing on the sidelines, fighting among themselves.
Some social progressives are tattered and isolated, fretting together in think tanks and policy-study groups about the tough new punishment provisions in the Senate crime bill, the plan to end benefits to welfare recipients after two years and the huge military budget.


Essay; Kozyrev &amp; Talbott
Two relatively young and sophisticated men, both setting policy at their nations' foreign ministries, have changed their positions radically in the past few months.
Their shifts reveal much about the deterioration of Russian-American relations.
One is Strobe Talbott, longtime friend and Oxford roommate of Bill Clinton's.
He stepped down from the power and prestige of Time magazine columnist to handle President Clinton's dealings with the nations of the former Soviet Union, and was recently named Deputy Secretary of State.


Kodak to Offer a Discount Film and New Photo Equipment
In an effort to increase consumer interest in photography, the Eastman Kodak Company announced yesterday that it would introduce its first discount film to compete with private-label brands that have been nibbling away at the market share of its premium brands.
It also introduced some other new films, along with new cameras and duplicating techniques.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.04
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.92
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.13
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.71
5.73
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.30
6.34
7.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.25
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.50
5.51
6.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mayors Uneasy On Plan to Shift Aid for Transit
A Clinton Administration budget proposal for a 25 percent reduction in mass transit operating subsidies received a cool reception today from many mayors and city officials.
They said the plan would force them to increase subway and bus fares and curtail routes and services.
The proposal in the Administration's draft budget would reduce the current $800 million a year in Federal mass transit operating subsidies to $600 million.
It would earmark the remaining $200 million for capital improvements, meaning that the money would be spent more slowly on such things as equipment.
Cities had been using the $800 million to subsidize fares.


President Named By Industry Group
O.
Burtch Drake, executive vice president and chief operating officer at the American Association of Advertising Agencies, was named yesterday to succeed John O'Toole as president and chief executive.
Mr.
O'Toole, 65, who has held the position since 1989, will retire on Monday.
"Our focus will be what it has been under John O'Toole," Mr.
Drake, 52, said, "to help our members run their businesses and serve their clients better."


Executive Changes
AMOCO CORP., Chicago, promoted John L. Carl, senior vice president for finance and controller, to executive vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding Frederick S. Addy, who is retiring.
CHEVRON SHIPPING CO., San Francisco, a subsidiary of the Chevron Corporation, named Thomas R. Moore president, succeeding Douglas C. Wolcott, who is retiring.


Grants to Help Groups Form Ties With Choreographers
The New York Foundation for the Arts has announced the creation of a $3 million program to encourage long-term residencies and collaborations between choreographers and dance companies.
It will be called the National Dance Residency Program, and will enable 30 professional companies to work with choreographers over the next three to five years.
Ten troupes will be selected each year to receive one-time grants of $100,000 to work with recognized choreographers of their own choosing.
They must work together over a period of at least a year on the projects they decide upon.


General Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Utah Puts Wright on Injured List
The Utah Jazz yesterday placed their rookie center, LUTHER WRIGHT, on its injured reserve list for treatment of attention deficit disorder, which causes an inability to concentrate.
The 7-foot-2-inch former Seton Hall player was arrested in Tooele County Monday for disorderly conduct.
He was jailed for 12 hours before the Jazz posted his $100 bond.
His agent, SAL DiFAZIO, said the 22-year-old Wright apparently had experienced a reaction to the medication he takes for his ailment.


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Panhandle Eastern Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Duquette to Be Red Sox General Manager
DAN DUQUETTE, who had one year remaining on his contract as general manager of the Montreal Expos, will return home and realize his dream job as general manager of the Boston Red Sox.
The Red Sox will announce this morning that Duquette, a native of Dalton, Mass., will take over from LOU GORMAN, who was promoted to director of baseball operations.
The Expos will name their director of scouting, KEVIN MALONE, as Duquette's successor.


United Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stephen C. Kleene Is Dead at 85; Was Leader in Computer Science
Stephen C. Kleene, a mathematician whose work help lay the foundations of theoretical computer science, died on Tuesday in Madison, Wis.
He was 85 and lived in Madison.
The cause was pneumonia, said Terry Devitt, a spokesman for the University of Wisconsin in Madison, where Dr.
Kleene had been on the faculty until his retirement in 1979.


Review/Music: El Gato Montes; After Seven Decades, a Spanish Opera Regains Its Voice
Opera has its own version of multiculturalism, which in recent decades has led to an increasing awareness of such diverse national traditions as the Finnish and Czech.
Now, with the Los Angeles Music Center Opera production of "El Gato Montes" ("The Wild Cat"), which opened here last week, our complacent neglect of the Spanish opera may be in for a revision, too.
This zarzuela, written in 1916 by Manuel Penella and, the Los Angeles company says, never before sung in this country in its original language, is dramatic, vigorous and lyrically inventive.
The work has been championed by Placido Domingo, who has been singing in these performances and is artistic consultant to the Los Angeles Opera.
The production, which is imported from the Teatro Lirico Nacional la Zarzuela in Madrid, is also part of a conscious effort to attract Hispanic audiences to the opera house.
A.T.&amp; T. has given a three-year, $100,000 grant for this purpose, used to support this and future productions.
There is even an organization, "Hispanics for L.A. Opera," with Mr.
Domingo and his wife, Marta, as honorary chairmen; it numbers 300, though the company estimates are that only about a third are subscribers.


Crown Hts. Tension Persists Despite Healing Effort
Crown Heights, divided by antagonisms long before it was torn by violence in the summer of 1991, is a neighborhood that today continues to operate under the strains of suspicion and anger, poverty and fear.
The sensitive state of affairs in the Brooklyn neighborhood exists despite considerable efforts to promote healing between its black and Hasidic residents.
The Crown Heights Coalition, a collection of elected officials and neighborhood representatives formed after the unrest two and a half years ago, has been called ineffective, even irrelevant, by some blacks and Jews in Crown Heights, and it is struggling merely to remain intact.





Asarco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Danka Business Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Buffalo chicken wings or Texas ribs?
Staff members for four Senators -- ALFONSE M. D'AMATO and DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN of New York and PHIL GRAMM and KAY BAILEY HUTCHISON of Texas -- are waiting for the final score of the Super Bowl game between the Buffalo Bills and the Dallas Cowboys this Sunday to see who will dine on what next week.
Three of the four Senators -- Mr.
Moynihan, the only Democrat of the group, was occupied elsewhere -- held a news briefing in Mr.
D'Amato's Washington office yesterday to announce the terms of the bet.
If the Buffalo Bills win, the Texas Senators will provide barbecue from Big Al's, a restaurant in Dallas, and some Texas wine.
If the Dallas Cowboys win, the New York lawmakers will pay up with Buffalo chicken wings and Long Island wine.


SENATE URGES END TO U.S.  EMBARGO AGAINST VIETNAM
In a strong bipartisan vote intended to make it easier for President Clinton to end decades of rancor with a former enemy, the Senate voted today to urge that the trade embargo against Vietnam be lifted soon.
The White House had supported the measure behind the scenes.
After an emotionally charged debate about the lessons of the Vietnam War and the fate of missing servicemen, the Senate, by a 62-to-38 vote, agreed with the bill's chief sponsor, John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat and Vietnam veteran, who said it was time "to put the war behind us."


The Mayor's Badly Aimed Ax
In announcing his wrongheaded -- and hardheaded -- decision to eliminate New York City's minority contracting program, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani at least had the grace to say that one could disagree with his view that there is no need to remedy past discrimination.
Mr.
Giuliani manifestly dislikes remedial action, or he would not have struck down one of the most socially beneficial and cost-effective programs of its kind anywhere.
Since it was started by the Dinkins administration in 1992, companies owned by minorities or women have gotten contracts worth $270 million.


Art in Review
Martin Mull
David Beitzel Gallery  102 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 5
Despite reports of high prices paid for canvases by Dean Martin or Anthony Quinn, there don't seem to be any great painters among the Hollywood stars.
But the actor and comedian Martin Mull at least has the distinction of being sincere, informed and modestly talented.
Which is not to say original.


Struggling Isles Lose Turgeon for 2 Weeks
He has been benched and belittled, and not since his older brother Sylvain stuck him between two cans on a frozen patch of ice and commanded him to tend goal back home in Quebec has Pierre Turgeon been treated less like a superstar.
Now, injury has been added to insult for the Islander forward.
On Wednesday night in Toronto, Turgeon, just after blasting a practice shot in the warm-up before the game, was struck a glancing but damaging blow on the right cheekbone after a puck hit the crossbar and ricocheted into his face.


Inman Raised the Right Issue, the News Media
To the Editor:
Bobby Ray Inman, who withdrew as President Clinton's nominee for Secretary of Defense (front page, Jan. 19), reminds me of Ross Perot.
Both display an arrogant self-assurance, yet are stunned and "hurt" when anyone knocks them off their perch.
Both are, more than most, vulnerable to a suspicion that others are out to get them.


Shell Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Walls, Memories of the Slain Are Kept
Somewhere between one more killing in the inner city and the obscurity of the grave is a wall in Brooklyn.
Khem Hubbard recorded her brother's name there last week, in big silver letters.
Now Kyle Rasheim Hubbard, 19, shot to death on Jan. 6, 1990, will be remembered in a New York neighborhood where the dead disappear in the crowd.


Inman Raised the Right Issue, the News Media; South Africa Link
To the Editor:
The withdrawal of Bobby Ray Inman's nomination for Secretary of Defense brought to public attention the case of International Signal and Control, a defense and technology company.
James Guerin, the company's founder, was recently sentenced to jail for illegal arms sales to South Africa, as you report in "Inman Faced Scrutiny on Jailed Arms Dealer" (news article, Jan. 20).


Paul Berna Dies at 85; Wrote for Youngsters
Paul Berna, an author of children's books that were published in the United States and Britain as well as in his native France, died last Friday in Paris.
He was 85.
Mr.
Berna's books -- he wrote one a year from 1957 to 1973 -- are mainly mystery and adventure stories for older children.
His 1958 book, "The Horse Without a Head," about a gang of street urchins in a working-class Paris suburb, was praised for its portrayal of resourceful youngsters on a spree in the mean streets of their slum neighborhood.
The book became a British-made Disney film in 1963, with a script by T. E. B. Clarke.


Bills Move To Right On Passing Strategy
There was a time two years ago that the Buffalo Bills, operating from their no-huddle offense, would aggressively attack teams with their passing game, stretching the field and hitting big plays.
It was nothing for quarterback Jim Kelly to send receivers James Lofton and Don Beebe streaking down the field on deep post routes, and run Andre Reed across the middle, leaving opposing defenses in a quandary.
But in the last two years the Bills passing game has changed.
Lofton is gone.
Beebe is the lone speedster now, but not much of a threat without Lofton.


Battle With Echoes: Floridians Fight a Power Line
Out here in Tampa's back yard, where suburban sprawl thins into rural spread, the residents of Hillsborough County are wrestling with the Florida Power Corporation over its plan to string 40 miles of high-voltage power line across the flat landscape.
In many ways it is a perfectly prosaic conflict between development and environment, pitting just another local coalition of property owners, residents and county officials against just another company with "power" as its middle name.


Church &amp; Dwight reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Enron Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Curtice Burns Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Tandycrafts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Harding, The Games, And Us
"Attending the Olympics, representing the U.S., should go to persons in whom the U.S. is proud," a man in Naples, Fla., wrote to me recently.
He went on to say that the United States Olympians represent America and its values.
I thought about that.
I wondered if, just because someone is wearing a uniform that says "United States" on it, he or she is representing me.
Funny, but when I see people on the Yankees or Mets, or Knicks or Rangers, wearing a uniform that says "New York," I don't feel they are representing me, even though my home is New York.


Cuomo Now Backs Expansion Of Children's Health Coverage
After being criticized last year for not pushing to expand eligibility for a popular children's health insurance program, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed legislation today that would enable 13-year-olds and 14-year-olds to qualify for the coverage for the first time.
Proponents of the legislation said Mr.
Cuomo was apparently responding to pressure from the Democratic-majority Assembly, which has already passed similar legislation this year.
Some also said that in making the proposal, the Governor, a Democrat, might be trying to counter the perception that he has pushed his agenda to the right in an election year.


Lafarge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Rage in the Cage: Jordan Takes More B.P.
MICHAEL JORDAN will bat again against the Chicago White Sox general manager, RON SCHUELER, and face a college pitcher before the team decides whether to invite the former National Basketball Association star to spring training.
Jordan faced 75 pitches from Schueler, a former major league pitcher, this week.
After the workout underneath Comiskey Park, Schueler said, "He'd have to fall on his face not to do it, but I'm not ready to say for sure yet" whether Jordan will go to Sarasota, Fla., next month.


Thousands of Quake Victims Moving Out of Tent Cities
Thousands of people have moved out of the emergency tent cities that went up in the days after the earthquake.
City officials had vowed not to repeat the mistakes made in Florida after Hurricane Andrew, where tent cities remained occupied for nearly two months.
While 4,631 people were camped out in the five tent cities on Sunday night, the number was down to 1,463 by Wednesday night, a spokeswoman for the National Guard said.


Forecast Is New Clinton Weapon In Debate Over Balanced Budget
The White House today seized on a striking new set of Congressional projections showing shrinking budget deficits to reinforce its argument that there is no need for a Constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget.
Still worried that the amendment could win Congressional approval in a vote as early as next month, President Clinton's top economic deputies hailed as evidence of their progress an estimate by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office that the deficit would drop to $171 billion in the fiscal year 1995 -- $113 billion less than the analysts predicted last January.


Reviews/ Film; About Prostitutes Plying The Manhattan Streets
The line between reality and make-believe is painfully apparent in Amos Kollek's pseudo-documentary film, "Bad Girls." In the movie, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, Mr.
Kollek portrays a middle-aged writer named Jack who is researching a book about the lives of prostitutes in mid-Manhattan.
Jack sets up shop in a seedy hotel near Times Square and goes about interviewing his subjects.
Approximately half the women in the film are actresses playing streetwalkers whose reminiscences Mr.
Kollek captured on tape but who could not appear in the movie.
The rest are actual prostitutes who tell their stories directly to the camera.


Solid Sales Increases For MCI and A.T.&amp; T.
A.T.&amp; T. and the MCI Communications Corporation both reported solid increases in sales and operating earnings for the last quarter of 1993 today, but MCI continued to gain on its larger rival by growing twice as quickly as the long-distance industry as a whole.
Meanwhile, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's equipment business grew faster than Wall Street analysts had expected, largely because of sharp increases in international sales of big switching and transmission systems.


Alex. Brown Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Piper Jaffray Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Virginia, Innocent Man Stays in Prison
To the Editor:
Your brief Jan. 16 account of the action of the outgoing Governor of Virginia, L. Douglas Wilder, in commuting to life imprisonment the death sentence of Earl Washington Jr. does scant justice to a troubling situation.
Last fall, Mr.
Washington was headed for the electric chair on charges of rape and murder, despite powerful reasons to doubt his guilt.


HON Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Phillips Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Esquire Gets Former Conde Nast Publisher
Hearst Magazines has hired Ronald A. Galotti, the former publisher of Mademoiselle, Conde Nast Traveler and Vanity Fair, for the newly created post of publishing director of Esquire and Esquire Gentleman.
Mr.
Galotti will become the top executive on the business side of the two publications with Alan Stiles, the publisher of both magazines, reporting to him.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sounds Around Town
On Familiar Ground
Jose Feliciano, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Jose Feliciano is back in the area where his career began 25 years ago at Folk City in Greenwich Village.
Folk City is long gone, but the building across West Third Street is now the Blue Note, and Mr.
Feliciano is there, bringing back memories of the year 1968 when he had his first big hit, "Light My Fire." This is his first appearance at the Blue Note.
Backed by Kenny Owens on bass and Tiger McNeil on drums, Mr.
Feliciano performs at 9 and 11:30 tonight, tomorrow and Sunday.
At tables, there is a $37.50 music charge and a $5 minimum; at the bar, the charge is $25.
JOHN S. WILSON Teacher Onstage
Joe Morello Quartet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
Joe Morello, who was the drummer in Dave Brubeck's Quartet during its glory years, 1955 to 1967, has spent the years since teaching and running drum clinics, mostly in New Jersey, where he lives.
He performs from time to time in New Jersey and on rare occasions crosses the Hudson to appear in New York City.
This weekend is one of those rare occasions.
He is heading a quartet that can be heard on his first record as a leader in a dozen years: "Going Places" (DMP).
His group includes the pianist Greg Kogan, a veteran of the big bands of Buddy Rich and Lionel Hampton; Ralph Lalama, a regular in the Village Vanguard Monday Night Orchestra, who plays saxophone and flute, and the bassist Gary Mazzaroppi, who is at Fat Tuesday's every Monday night with the guitarist Les Paul.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 8, 10 and midnight and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
Admission is $20 and there is a $10 minimum.
J.
S.
W.
Emerging Strength
Mulgrew Miller Trio, Down Beat, 70 Grove Street, at Seventh Avenue, Greenwich Village, (212) 620-4000.
Mulgrew Miller has developed slowly and steadily over the last decade to emerge as one of the strongest pianists in contemporary jazz.
He was influenced by such veterans as McCoy Tyner and Wynton Kelly, took on the heritage of Duke Ellington as the pianist in Mercer Ellington's band and added the polish with Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers.
His trio at Down Beat puts him in the company of the bassist Richie Goods and the drummer Tony Reedus.
Shows are at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight tonight, tomorrow and Sunday.
The price at tables is $10 and at the bar $7 each night and there is a one-drink minimum as well.
J.
S.
W.


30 Years Later, 3d Trial Begins in Evers Killing
Exactly 30 years after the start of his first inconclusive trial on the charge of murdering the civil rights leader Medgar Evers, Byron De La Beckwith, a lot older but no less outspoken in his white supremacist views, went on trial today for the third time.
The case is being heard in the same Hinds County courtroom that it was 30 years ago, amid the same brass sconces, chandeliers and intricately carved eagle pediments that survived a 1986 renovation.


From Recession, California Is Emerging Into Earthquake 'Boomlet'
With damage estimates from the earthquake running as high as $30 billion, and people all around Los Angeles still edgy over the aftershocks rumbling underfoot, it comes as little surprise that a wide variety of service businesses -- from the mundane drywall contractor to the more exotic massage therapist -- are being besieged.
Local newspapers are full of classified advertising promoting "earthquake-safe chimneys," "seismic rehabilitation" and "professional estimates" for the Federal Emergency Management Agency's aid applications.
Desperate commuters, intent on slicing time off drives that have been tripled because of damaged highways, have cleaned out the inventories of motorcycle dealerships.


Public Service Co. of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Sets Terms on Visa for I.R.A. Political Chief
Despite appeals from 40 members of Congress, the State Department plans to tell the leader of the political arm of the I.R.A. that it will grant him a visa only if he first renounces violence, Administration officials said today.
That requirement would in effect deny entry to Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, according to several senators who have urged President Clinton to grant the visa.
Mr.
Adams has declined to denounce the Irish Republican Army for its campaign of violence to end British rule in Northern Ireland.


Murphy Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In 2 Lines of Jeeps, 115,000 Are Recalled
The sidewalks are slippery, the parking lots are skating rinks, but at least your trusty 4 by 4 sport-utility vehicle will keep you safe and secure in this winter of schussing down the interstate and bumping through the moguls on Main Street, right?
Not so fast.
Chrysler says it is recalling 115,000 of its big, boxy, secure-looking 1993 Jeep Grand Cherokees and Grand Wagoneers, built between December 1992 and last summer, to repair a defect that could cause a loss of steering.


Art in Review
Mark Morrisroe
Pat Hearn Gallery  39 Wooster Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 19
An understandably elegiac tone suffuses this exhibition of photographs by Mark Morrisroe, who died in 1989 at the age of 30.
Morrisroe participated in the effervescent cultural scene of the Lower East Side in the 1980's, and his pictures reflect the bohemian tone of much of the art of that time.


Art in Review
Oliver Herring
Max Protetch Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 19  Paula Cooper Gallery  155 Wooster Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 5


Sara Lee Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


After Respite, Bombs Echo Across Afghan Capital


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 12


Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg. Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


18,000 Investors Submit Claims to Prudential
About 18,000 investors have submitted claims so far to a fund established by Prudential Securities to compensate hundreds of thousands of customers for losses suffered because of fraud in the sale of limited partnerships, according to a report by the fund's administrator.
The tally of claims underscores the big task Prudential faces in complying with the terms of its October settlement with securities regulators that required it to set up the $330 million fund.
The report also provides details of what investors making claims stand to receive.


Stock Fund Investment Soaring in January
Having ended 1993 with a record volume of stock-fund investment, the mutual fund industry got off to a great start in 1994, fund managers and executives said yesterday.
"This is by far a record month," said Neal Litvack, an executive vice president of Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual fund company, adding that the net inflow of cash for all Fidelity funds was about twice the level of last January.


Wang Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United and Delta Narrow Losses for the Quarter
The UAL Corporation and Delta Air Lines reported improved results yesterday for the most recent quarter, but still lost money in what is usually a money-losing quarter for airlines.
UAL, the parent company of United Airlines, said it lost $64 million in the fourth quarter of 1993, while Delta reported a loss of $141 million.
Losses for both airlines were narrower than in the similar quarter of 1992, in part because of lower fuel prices, improved productivity and an increase in traffic in November during the strike by American Airlines' flight attendants.
United competes with American at O'Hare Airport, Chicago's and the nation's busiest field, and Delta has a hub along with American at Dallas-Fort Worth.


Justin Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boston Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Spoken Word
PETE HAMILL, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The journalist speaks about his new book, "The Drinking Life." Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
OPERA LECTURE, Metropolitan Opera Guild, Rose Building, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, 10th Floor, Manhattan.
Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" will be discussed by Dr.
Jack Sacher, a professor of music at Montclair State College, Montclair, N.J.
Tomorrow at 11:45 A.M.
Tickets, $8.
Information: (212) 769-7021.


College Accreditors Feeling Criticism
For almost a century, the oversight of colleges, universities and professional schools in this country has rested largely with a group of private accrediting organizations, whose judgments usually went unchallenged and carried the academic equivalent of the Good Housekeeping seal of approval.
But within the last few years, the judges have been scrutinized by members of Congress, Federal and state officials, college presidents, faculty members and the press, and criticized for exercising either too much or too little authority.


VLSI Technology Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Ben McDonald, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Basque Peace Hopes Rise as the Separatists Wane
Faded posters and graffiti on the walls of this port city still call for the independence of the Basque country, while occasional assassinations and car bombings are a reminder that the separatist movement known as E.T.A. has not yet been crushed.
But after 25 years of violence that has taken more than 800 lives, hopes of peace are now stirring in this mountainous region of northern Spain, inspired as much by recent police successes against the guerrillas as by increasing public opposition to both E.T.A.'s methods and objectives.


Fred Friendly Honored In Broadcasting Awards
A Gold Baton, the highest honor in the Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University Awards, was presented to Fred W. Friendly, the former CBS News producer, for lifetime achievement in broadcast journalism in a ceremony last night at the university.
The annual awards, given for outstanding reporting in television and radio news, included 12 winners of Silver Batons for work in 1992-93.
Among those winners were CNN for its coverage of fighting in Bosnia, the ABC News program "20/20" for a report that reconstructed an Army surgeon's efforts to save the life of an American soldier wounded in the Vietnam War, and the PBS series "Frontline" for a report on the financing of Presidential campaigns.


Balboni Returns to K.C.
STEVE BALBONI returned to the Kansas City Royals, agreeing to a minorleague contract.


Duracell International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Asarco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cornell Coach Re-Signs
Coach JIM HOFHER of Cornell has signed a multiyear extension on his contract, the university's Athletic Director, LAING KENNEDY announced yesterday.
Terms of the new contract were not released.


MEXICAN PARTIES AGREE TO REFORMS
Bowing to pressure for political change that has been heightened by the peasant uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, Mexico's governing party agreed today to much tougher campaign spending limits and a more impartial choice of election officials.
In a formal pact that was the first under the five-year-old Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to include the main leftist opposition, the country's leading political parties agreed to reduce the amount of money candidates can spend by 80 percent.
They also pledged new steps to equalize their access to the news media and to impose new limits on the political use of Government funds and programs.


Schlumberger Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SCI Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sounds Around Town
Drummer Plus Essentials
Leon Parker, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Parker, a drummer, has stripped his kit down to essentials: a few drums and one or two cymbals.
He'll use his hands, or sticks or brushes, and he generates intensity without much volume.
He swings deeply, and this group, featuring the tenor saxophonist Mark Turner, offers a look at a young musician who is on his way to generating his own style.
Shows are Sunday night at 10, 12, 2.
There is a $12 cover and a $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS An Old Language
Jay McShann, Tramps Cafe, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
He's taken for granted, but he shouldn't be.
Mr.
McShann, who is best known for leading a big band in Kansas City that featured Charlie Parker, is an astounding pianist.
He's great at playing blues, and he's also a terrific boogie player.
He'll be leading a band that includes the saxophonist Frank Foster.
Mr.
McShann offers a glimpse of a prewar musical language.
Sets are tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 and 11:30.
The cover is $20 and there is a two-drink minimum each show.
P.
W.


Reviews/ Film; Finding Illumination In the Shadow of Death
The smiling, laughing people seen in "Living Proof" have sad news in common.
These men, women and children are all H.I.V.-positive, which should make "Living Proof" a somber documentary instead of the relentlessly upbeat group portrait that it is.
But the individuals who are interviewed in Kermit Cole's film, which opens today at the Cinema Village, share a determination to make the best of their troubles.
"For the first time I'm really living," says one interviewee, who speaks for all of them.
"And maybe for the first time I'm really happy."
That idea is echoed throughout this film, even when Mr.
Cole has to strain to emphasize it.
Much of "Living Proof" was shot in a photographer's studio, where Carolyn Jones and George DeSipio are seen working on a series of portraits.
The subjects, posed for their sittings as if this were a fashion spread, would radiate serenity and optimism even if the film did not indulge in cheerful gimmicks, like jokey high-speed cinematography in a couple of scenes.
It comes as a relief when the speakers are allowed to stop sounding so sunny and reflect candidly on their situation.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 5 about Palestinian tolerance of dissent misstated the ethnic origin of Saladin, the 12th-century military and political leader, who is a character in a play recently staged in the Gaza Strip.
The historical Saladin led armies that included Arabs and other groups, but he was of Kurdish descent, not Arab.


IBP Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


New England Electric Sys reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
AEROSPATIALE, Paris, the French aerospace and military company, sold its 13.7 percent stake in the rocket maker Societe Europeenne de Propulsion to institutional investors.
It did not disclose the amount of the proceeds.
REUTERS AMERICA INC., New York, a division of Reuters Holdings P.L.C. of London, purchased a 79 percent stake in Reality Technologies Inc., King of Prussia, Pa., for $13.8 million.
Reality Technologies develops personal investment software.


Rabin Welcomes Offer by Jordanian King to Meet
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that "important progress" had been made by King Hussein of Jordan when he said in Washington that he hoped to meet openly soon with the Israeli leader.
King Hussein is believed to have met secretly with Israeli leaders many times in the past.
But his expressed willingness on Wednesday to go public was viewed by officials here as sign that he was ready for bolder steps in the Middle East peace negotiations.


Media General Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


To the Four Winds
To the Editor:
Your article on the prospects of Beverly Sills to become the new chairwoman of Lincoln Center (arts pages, Jan. 22) states that Lincoln Center's corporate fund "disperses" money to 10 organizations.
Surely, it does not.
The word conjures up the image of recklessly squandered $1,000 bills fluttering in the breeze.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chief of Hospitals Details Plan to Dismiss Managers
The chairman of the Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday that New York City hospitals would lay off hundreds of middle-level managers but would not dismiss any unionized workers as they seek to eliminate 1,300 positions.
"We're not talking at this point about layoffs of union workers," said Luis A. Miranda Jr., the chairman of the corporation.


Kerr-McGee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After 13 Seasons And 8 Pro Bowls, Long Calls It Quits
In a surprise decision the Los Angeles Raiders defensive lineman Howie Long retired today after 13 seasons in the National Football League.
"I'd much rather have people saying the guy went out as a Pro Bowl player than say he should have gotten out two years ago," said Long, who made his decision on Wednesday night.
"I don't think I could bear not playing well."


Kim Sang Man Dead; Korean Publisher, 84
Kim Sang Man, the former publisher of South Korea's most influential newspaper, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Seoul.
He was 84.
Mr.
Kim was associated with the paper, Dong-A Ilbo, for 45 years, starting in 1949, serving as executive director, president, publisher, chairman and, since 1981, chairman emeritus.


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Airgas Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ambiguity Of Evidence In Bomb Case
There are days in the World Trade Center trial when the ambiguity of the evidence leads both the prosecution and the defense to appear equally eager to present it to the jury, but for contrasting reasons.
That was the case yesterday as the Government had a translator read English versions of bomb-making instructions found in the possession of one of the defendants.
The evidence, introduced into the case weeks ago by prosecutors and then dropped until yesterday, consisted of the many books and manuscripts found in the luggage of Ahmad M. Ajaj, whose role in the plot as described by prosecutors is the most marginal of the four defendants.
Mr.
Ajaj, a 27-year-old Palestinian, was arrested on passport violations when he arrived at Kennedy International Airport from Pakistan on Sept. 1, 1992, and he remained in jail until after the trade center bombing took place six months later.


Inside Art
Off the Wall in Los Angeles
While the museums in Los Angeles were miraculously unharmed during last week's earthquake, heads rolled from pedestals, glass windows shattered, paintings flew off walls and storage bins flooded at art galleries in the Santa Monica area.
Among the artists, one lost an entire body of work.
"We're putting ourselves back together," said Burnett Miller, a gallery owner.
Mr.
Miller said he arrived at his gallery two hours after the earthquake hit, and discovered an inch of water, the electricity knocked out, his library books off the shelves and paintings face down in water.


F.C.C. Retreats on Infinity Purchase
Penned in by a recent court decision that struck down Federal restrictions on "indecent" broadcasting, the Federal Communications Commission is on the verge of letting the company that employs Howard Stern buy a big Los Angeles radio station for $110 million.
The decision marks a retreat from the punishment that some officials had sought for the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation for Mr.
Stern's raucous broadcast commentaries about sex and scatological topics.
A Costly Delay
Last month, the agency delayed approving Infinity's application to buy KRTH-FM, rejecting pleas from the company that a postponement of the deal past Jan. 1 could cost it millions of dollars in penalties.


Danaher Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tecumseh Products Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nets' Williams Arrested on Weapon Charges
When the Nets return from their trip to the West Coast next week, Jayson Williams will face a date in court on charges involving the firing of a semiautomatic handgun at the hubcap of an unoccupied vehicle in the parking lot of the Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Jan. 15.
Williams, a 6-foot-10-inch reserve center-forward, who played at St.
John's, was questioned and then arrested last Saturday on charges of reckless endangerment, weapons possession and discharging a weapon in public.
He was released on his own recognizance by East Rutherford Borough Municipal Court Judge George Savino, according to the police, and is scheduled to appear before the judge next Wednesday.


Russian in Chemical Arms Expose Arrested
A Russian scientist who wrote about Moscow's chemical weapons program and who has refused to testify at his own trial on charges of divulging state secrets was arrested today, his wife said.
The trial against Vil S. Mirzayanov is being closely watched by the international scientific and human rights organizations.
The trial has been closed because the prosecution's evidence is based on nearly 50 classified and top secret documents and, according to the defendant, depends on the expert testimony of "parties with vested interests in the military-industrial complex."


Inman Raised the Right Issue, the News Media; Reliable Sources?
To the Editor:
You could accept Bobby Ray Inman's word over Senator Bob Dole's or William Safire's.
You could believe that the retired admiral failed to pay Social Security taxes for the woman who cleans his house because he believed she was an independent contractor, or because he did not want to harm her with the Internal Revenue Service or the law might be changed.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
A Debut to Forget  It certainly wasn't the way Jim Schoenfeld wanted to make his debut as coach of the Washington Capitals.
Replacing fired coach Terry Murray just minutes before Washington's game with the Sabres last night, Schoenfeld watched as his new team was blasted at Buffalo, 7-2.
It was Washington's fourth straight loss.
"You never want to start out like this," Schoenfeld said. (AP) Red Wings 4, Blackhawks 3: Ray Sheppard scored 51 seconds into overtime as Detroit beat Chicago and set a club mark with its sixth consecutive road triumph. (AP)


Review/Photography; Gestures as a Vocabulary for Reading Personality
Working with a medium both silent and still, photographers have long recognized the expressive power of gestures: that the way people hold their hands or their heads, whether they slump or stand stiffly, can offer eloquent testimony about their personalities.
"Gesture and Pose," a far-ranging show at the Museum of Modern Art, offers a varied selection of images in which photographers use the vocabulary of gestures to interpret personality or as a formal element.
The show presents works from the museum's collection by a diverse group of photographers, including Roy De Carava, Garry Winogrand, Tony Ray-Jones and August Sander.
The organizer of the show, Peter Galassi, the chief curator of the museum's department of photography, makes no explicit attempt to analyze the many ways photographers have employed gestures, but in his selection and organization of pictures he suggests a few major categories into which such uses fall.


Market Place; Silicon Graphics' Hot Run Goes On
Lately Silicon Graphics Inc. has had the kind of upward momentum associated with the hit movies produced with its wizzy high-powered work stations, like "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" and "Jurassic Park." After the company outperformed Wall Street's earnings estimates last week and the stock jumped 15 percent, analysts scrambled to upgrade ratings and future earnings forecasts.
And the sudden resignation yesterday of the chairman, James H. Clark, the company's visionary founder, did not dampen the enthusiasm of those who like Silicon Graphics.
Little Impact Seen
Dr.
Clark, a former Stanford University professor who started the company 15 years ago with six graduate students, had been complaining for some time about being out of the flow and employees and analysts have been wondering when he would go.
He said yesterday that he would leave Feb. 28 and start a new venture to develop software programs for interactive television and other electronic services.


Chicago &amp; North Western Holdings Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Taking Leaf From Mr. Smith, Hoskokawa Defends Reform
Frantic to salvage political reforms, Japan's embattled Prime Minister appealed for a telephone, fax and write-in campaign to force Parliament to realign the electoral system by Saturday.
Page A10.
Benefits From Bank Sales
The highly profitable sales of mutual savings banks have a difficult question: Who should reap the benefits?
News Analysis.
Page D1.
Backing for Whitman Tax Cut
Republican leaders in Trenton promised quick passage of the first part of Governor Whitman's plan to cut income taxes 30 percent.
Page B1.
Poet vs.
Novelist
To settle a lawsuit brought by the poet Stephen Spender, Viking has tentatively agreed to alter parts of David Leavitt's recent novel "While England Sleeps," people close to the negotiations said.
Page C3.


Corrections
An editorial on Monday incorrectly identified the Metrolink commuter rail system as part of the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority; it is an independent agency.
A Topic of the Times the same day misquoted lines from a poem by Robert Frost.
The lines should read: "Some say the world will end in fire,/ Some say in ice."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.04
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.90
2.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.12
3.02
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.67
5.71
6.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.26
6.30
7.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.18
7.23
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.48
5.50
6.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Enron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Destec Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Messier Beats the Clock in Overtime
This was a dazzling hockey game, a sizzler, played beween bi-coastal rivals representing show-business capitals.
They played it at the Forum, under all those Lakers championship banners, and it had a Showtime quality, did it ever.
The Rangers won it, beating the Kings by 5-4, with 1.5 seconds left in overtime on a goal by Mark Messier, who lurked behind the Kings net before darting out in front and knocking Sergei Zubov's rebound past Kelly Hrudey, the goalie for the Kings, who probably deserved better.


Harding Concedes She Learned Of Attack but Then Kept Silent
Tonya Harding admitted today that she learned several days after the Jan. 6 assault on her skating rival, Nancy Kerrigan, that "persons that were close to me" had been involved in the attack.
She also said she delayed informing authorities, who first interviewed her on Jan. 18.
In her first public comments about the attack that took place at the national championships in Detroit, Miss Harding chastised herself for the delay and apologized to Miss Kerrigan, saying, "I am embarrassed and ashamed to think that anyone close to me could be involved."


A Million Mrs. Bobbitts
Lorena Bobbitt's response to being continually raped, sodomized and beaten by her husband was uniquely bizarre.
But her situation was commonplace.
What happened to Mrs.
Bobbitt happens, in varying degrees, to more than a million American women every year.
In 1992 the Senate Judiciary Committee issued a staff report titled "Violence Against Women: A Week in the Life of America," a depressing litany of sexual assaults, physical abuse, knifings and shootings.
The victims are women; the perpetrators are, for the most part, their husbands and lovers.


Trinova Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In the Fading Light Of the Brilliant Henie
Depending on the viewpoint, Fritzi Burger had the great luck or misfortune of being the world's second-best figure skater in the late 1920's and early 1930's.
She finished second to Sonja Henie at the 1928 Winter Olympics, and had to settle for a silver medal again in 1932.
Four more times, Burger competed against Henie in various European and world championships.
All four times, she settled for second place.
"I had two husbands," Burger said. "She even beat me at that. She had three."


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Expecting a Fizzle, G.M. Puts Electric Car to Test
General Motors is preparing to put its electric vehicle act on the road, and planning for a flop.
With pride and pessimism, the company, the furthest along of the Big Three in designing a mass-market electric car, says that in the face of a California law that requires that 2 percent of new cars be "zero emission" vehicles beginning in late 1997, it has done its best but that the vehicle has come up short.
It will cost too much and will not go very far between lengthy visits to a charging station.


Cabot Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; Cello Piece Pays Tribute To Departed Composers
Near the end of Christopher Rouse's Cello Concerto, which was given its world premiere here on Wednesday night by the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra, the cello sings a simple, haunting melody from William Schuman's song "Orpheus With His Lute," accompanied by sustained tremolos in the strings.
A few moments later, the English horn enters with another melody, Arnalta's lullaby from Monteverdi's "Incoronazione di Poppea," which bears an uncanny resemblance to the Schuman.
The lullaby is almost jarringly sweet and comforting, hovering in sonic space as the percussion creates a quivering, otherworldly haze.
It is a remarkable moment in a strongly conceived elegy, a composition that, like many of Mr.
Rouse's other works, is preoccupied with death and loss.
The composer's Trombone Concerto, which was given its world premiere by the New York Philharmonic last year (and which won the Pulitzer Prize), was written in memory of Leonard Bernstein and quotes Bernstein's "Kaddish" Symphony.
The new work was commissioned by Betty Freeman for the Los Angeles Philharmonic and Yo-Yo Ma (who was the soloist in its first performance with the orchestra, conducted by David Zinman); it is partly a response to the deaths of the composers Andrzej Panufnik and Stephen Albert as well as Schuman, and quotes from them.


Vulcan Materials Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The stakes are a bit higher when Gov.
EDWIN W. EDWARDS of Louisiana places bets: he won more than $200,000 gambling in 1993, according to an amended personal financial statement filed Wednesday with the state ethics board.
The statement, which is required by law, asks only for the range of income derived from various sources, and not for specific amounts.
Governor Edwards, known for his predilection for craps, listed his gambling winnings in the highest category: $200,000 or more.
He visited gambling resorts in Nevada at least twice last year.


Official Rebuts Becker
The president of the International Tennis Federation has rebutted allegations by BORIS BECKER that some players are getting away with drug use.
Becker was recently quoted in a German newspaper as saying that use of recreational drugs such as cocaine and marijuana was common and that it was a "joke" that no player had tested positive.


RENO'S TOP DEPUTY RESIGNS ABRUPTLY, CITING DIFFERENCES
The second-highest official at the Justice Department, Philip B. Heymann, announced his resignation today, an abrupt departure that added to the long list of personnel problems that have plagued the Clinton Administration.
At a news conference, both Attorney General Janet Reno and Mr.
Heymann, the Deputy Attorney General, blamed a lack of chemistry between them for his resignation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a new campaign, Gap Inc. sheds its usual attire for a look at its charitable giving.
A CAMPAIGN coming from Gap Inc. is devoid of celebrities clad in customized versions of Gap T-shirts, bereft of archival photographs of famous people in khaki pants and lacking in smiling young models wearing denim.
Yet somehow it is still quintessentially Gap.
How can advertising be Gap-like -- low key, softly selling, casually hip -- without featuring Gap's familiar garb?
It can when Gap joins the growing ranks of consumer product marketers seeking to do well by doing good, focusing some of their ad efforts on helping charitable, social and political causes.


A Festival of Chamber Music From Mexico
"South America as a whole does not exist," Aaron Copland declared after his 1941 tour of nine Latin American countries.
"It is a collection of separate countries, each with different traditions. . . . Only as I traveled from country to country did I realize that you must be willing to split the continent up in your mind."
Over the next several years, the American Composers Orchestra will make this point emphatically with a gigantic project, Sonidos de las Americas (Sounds of the Americas), which starts this weekend with a celebration of Mexican music that includes chamber concerts, symposiums and master classes.
The series will devote its festival each year to a single Latin American country.


Spain Gives Varied Support To Strike Over Labor Reform
A one-day general strike called to protest Government labor reforms brought industry to a standstill in Spain today, while support in other sectors varied.
It was business as usual for office workers and the service industry, but universities were shut down.
Transportation services were minimal but functioned relatively smoothly, and scheduled flights took off without delays.


Critic's Notebook; Opinion vs. Reality In an Age of Pundits
IT'S been 18 years since Tom Wolfe heralded the arrival of the "Me Generation," and 15 years since Christopher Lasch anatomized "the culture of narcissism"; in those intervening years the self has become, in Robert Hughes's words, "the sacred cow of American culture." In literature, in philosophy, even in the writing of history, subjectivity has gained a new ascendency.
Post-modernists now place quotation marks around words like "reality," insisting that the old notion of objective knowledge has become obsolete.
Multiculturalists argue for new curriculums not on the basis of factual accuracy, but on the basis of "self-esteem." And politicians and their spin doctors use pseudo-events and photo-ops to market virtual-reality versions of themselves to the public.


Gerry Adams's Visa
The Clinton Administration has effectively denied a visa to Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army.
By saying Mr.
Adams may enter the U.S. only if he first renounces violence in his campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland, the White House has rejected the wider principles of free speech.
It has also ignored the wishes of 40 members of Congress, including New York's two Senators.
Denying Mr.
Adams a visa also robs Americans of a chance next Tuesday to hear and question him at a conference in New York.
And it denies him a chance to sense American antipathy to the continued violence in Northern Ireland.


Political Memo; Oliver North Looking to Join The Senate He Once Defied
It's always a danger, of course, but Oliver North says he feels confident that he will not be corrupted by Washington.
With the same cock of his head, catch in his voice and altar-boy gaze that made him the top television celebrity of 1987, Mr.
North observed today: "I think, really, the problem is that most of these politicians just stay there too long." If he was elected, he said, he wouldn't stay a moment longer than two terms.


Augat Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BJ Services Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jets Hope They've Struck Gold in 49ers' Sherman
Hoping to lift a sagging offense, the Jets hired Ray Sherman, the 49ers' receivers coach for the last two years, as their offensive coordinator today.
"Ray Sherman brings a great background and a wealth of knowledge of offensive football to our staff," Coach Pete Carroll said in a statement released through the team.
"His addition will both embellish and complement our style of play. The fact that he has worked with quarterback coach Walt Harris in the past is also a big plus." Fills a Void
Sherman and Harris, the Jets' quarterbacks coach, worked together at the University of California at Berkeley.
Sherman is the Jets' first offensive coordinator since Rich Kotite, the Eagles' head coach, left New York in 1989.
Kotite was the Jets' offensive coordinator for five years under Coach Joe Walton.


Los Angeles Bracing For Losses in Tourism
When Alvin Dollar of Atlanta told his wife that he was headed for Los Angeles to attend a convention and asked if she wanted to come along, her reply was an emphatic "no!"
Mrs. Dollar said she feared another earthquake.


Unifi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Review/Film; Chinatown Takes a Role As a Setting For Intrigue
"Golden Gate" is not a quiet failure.
It's a big, bright and flamboyant one, boldly made despite the fact that everything about it is so desperately wrong.
Films misconceived from the ground up could once be counted on to achieve a certain negative stature, but the video age is not kind to grandiose misfires.
When "Golden Gate" turns up on home video -- in the very near future -- it is sure to be glimpsed briefly in many a household.
But it won't often be watched all the way through.
"Golden Gate" was written by David Henry Hwang, the prize-winning playwright ("M. Butterfly").
And his writing here has obvious merits.
Spanning two decades and two generations, Mr.
Hwang tells a story of love and intrigue in San Francisco's Chinatown.
Woven into the romance between an F.B.I. agent (Matt Dillon) and the young Chinese woman (Joan Chen) who has been unwittingly victimized by the agent's actions are the author's ideas about law, justice and bigotry, which should have given the material considerable heft.


Bond Prices Jump in Late Trading
Prices of long- and intermediate-term Government securities rose sharply yesterday afternoon after initially slipping in response to the morning's reports on jobless claims and December durable goods orders.
The economic reports, particularly the one on durable goods, were worrisome because they provided more proof that the economy was picking up steam, which bond traders and investors fear may lead to rising inflation.
But other analysts believe that the stronger growth has already been discounted in bond prices.


Rollins to Aid Black in Race For the Senate
Edward J. Rollins Jr., who boasted last fall that he suppressed the black vote in Christine Todd Witman's victorious drive for the New Jersey governorship, will be an unpaid consultant for a black Philadelphia businessman who is running for the Senate.
After winning acclaim for engineering Mrs.
Whitman's come-from-behind victory over Gov.
James J. Florio, her Democratic opponent, Mr.
Rollins told about -- and then denied -- having spent $500,000 in bribing black ministers and Democratic campaign workers to keep the black voter turnout low.


Washington Gas Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Proposals by S.E.C. Receive a Tepid Response
The Securities and Exchange Commission's proposals to amend the way the nation's stock markets go about their business got a cautious review from market participants yesterday, even though the changes the S.E.C. seeks are, by its own admission, fairly modest.
"It is tough to make incrementalism dramatic," said Brandon Becker, head of the S.E.C.'s Division of Market Regulation, which conducted the study.
"But I hope all investors will be happy that the commission has tried to put their interests first, and that the exchanges will say this is a balanced report."


Hynes to Enter Democratic Race For New York Attorney General
Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, yesterday confirmed long-running speculation that he would run for Attorney General this year, challenging the incumbent and a fellow Democrat, G. Oliver Koppell.
"I intend to announce in March that I'm going to run for the Democratic nomination for Attorney General," Mr.
Hynes said in an interview on the television program "Informed Sources," on WNET.


Joseph K. Davie; Dean of Nursing, 39
Joseph K. Davie, dean of the Long Island College Hospital School of Nursing, died Tuesday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 39.
The exact cause of death has yet to be determined, said his stepmother, Mary Davie.


Art in Review
Group Show
Wooster Gardens  40 Wooster Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 5
New, Conceptual twists are offered in the photographs of the four artists here, all of whom rely on involved procedures worthy of Rube Goldberg to make their images.


Clare C. Baldwin; School Administrator, 90
Dr.
Clare C. Baldwin, a retired New York City school administrator, died on Jan. 11 at his home in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He was 90.
The cause was pneumonia, said his son, Dr.
John Baldwin.
Dr.
Baldwin began his 30-year career with the Board of Education in 1935 after serving as a teacher and superintendent of schools in Republic County, Kan.
In New York he served in a series of managerial posts, retiring as associate superintendent of the Board of Education's Division of Special Services.


'Knight' Enters Italian Politics
After weeks of teasing hints, Silvio Berlusconi, media magnate and soccer club owner, has announced that he is entering politics to save the land from "men tied to past political and economic failure."
Mr.
Berlusconi used his own television network to say that he would lead a new center-right group -- known by the soccer chant Forza Italia (roughly, Go Italy! Go!) -- to watershed elections on March 27 and 28.


Albany Moves to Regulate Long-Term Auto Leasing
Though long-term leasing is rapidly becoming one of the most popular ways to acquire a new car, Alen McWeeney says he will never try it again.
In 1990, the Manhattan photographer was slapped with a $2,400 bill for "excess wear and tear" when he returned a car after his four-year lease ended -- even though he had kept the car in a garage, never had an accident and could recall only two occasions when other drivers had "dinged" his doors.


Interlake Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Sherman Hayden, 85, Diplomacy Historian
Dr.
Sherman Strong Hayden, an expert on American diplomatic history, international law and international relations, died on Monday at his home in Holden, Mass.
He was 85.
Dr.
Hayden joined the faculty of Clark University in Worcester, Mass., in 1946, rising to Professor of International Relations and, in 1962, chairman of the department of history, government and international relations.
He retired in 1973.


QVC Talks Are Seen On New Bid
Representatives of QVC Network Inc. and the BellSouth Corporation met the last two days to discuss the possibility of QVC revising its bid for Paramount Communications Inc., people close to the talks said yesterday.
Final bids in the five-month-old fight between QVC and Viacom Inc. are due by Tuesday.


Inacom Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


McDonald's Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A restaurant review in Weekend on Jan. 14 about Barolo described its wheelchair accessibility incompletely.
While its main restrooms are down a flight of stairs, Barolo has a restroom on the main floor for handicapped customers.


Two Black Lawyers' 'Crazy Idea' That Worked
From the beginning, H. Jesse Arnelle and William Hastie knew it sounded crazy: They would close their lucrative solo law practices and create a minority-owned corporate law firm, one of the first in the nation, committed to cost effectiveness in its management and diversity in its hiring policy.
And they would turn the firm into a multimillion-dollar operation, with six-figure annual billings and corporate clients like the Coca-Cola Company, Levi Strauss and the Chrysler Corporation.
"It was a crazy idea because there weren't any real models," said Mr.
Hastie, noting that most minority-owned law firms specialize in litigation, civil rights, criminal defense, family and personal injury law.


Schering-Plough Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO. (N)
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the consumer-products manufacturer, said yesterday that profits rose more than 13 percent in its second quarter ending Dec. 31, as a cost-cutting drive helped raise earnings.
Sales declined by less than 1 percent at the company, which makes, among other items, Tide detergent and Crest toothpaste.
Without the effect of changes in foreign-exchange rates, revenue would have risen by 3 percent.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the U.S.
Central Credit Union's deposits in a Spanish bank misstated the scope of the organization's membership.
U.S.
Central helps administer a network providing financial and investment services for 90 percent of the nation's 13,000 credit unions, not all of them.


Ford Plans Lease Program for Used Cars
The Ford Motor Company is hammering out the details of a program to lease used Ford vehicles through its dealers.
The auto maker said it might announce the plan within a week.
Tom Rhoades, a spokesman for Ford, said the program, which was first reported in The Wall Street Journal, was in the works.


Belden Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AIDED-SUICIDE LAW INVALIDATED AGAIN
Another Michigan judge ruled the state's assisted-suicide law unconstitutional today, dismissing two of the three remaining cases against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian and freeing him from house arrest.
The judge, Jessica R. Cooper of Oakland County Circuit Court, ruled that the law, which took effect last February, was void because in enacting it lawmakers had violated two state constitutional requirements: that a bill may not be amended to change its original purpose, and that a bill may have only one objective.


The Cowboys' Harper: A Flashing Light In Irvin's Fleet Shadow
Alvin Harper, that other Dallas Cowboys receiver, was about 20 minutes late for today's interview session with the news media.
He walked over to the table where he was supposed to sit -- two reporters were waiting -- then suddenly did an about-face.
When someone followed him he said: "Get out of my face. I'm sick of talking to you guys. I just showed up so I won't get fined."
Good morning to you, too, Mr. Harper.


Review/Theater; A Battlefield Of Words And Wills
THE passage of time has not elucidated the mysteries at the heart of Harold Pinter's "No Man's Land," which remains as much a theatrical Rorschach test as it ever was.
What is abundantly clear at the Criterion Center, where the Roundabout Theater Company revived the 1975 drama last night, is that the right actors can have a field day exploring its opaque depths.
None were righter, of course, than Ralph Richardson and John Gielgud, who created the roles of Hirst and Spooner: the one, a grand but crumbling man of letters; the other, a shabby would-be poet.
Or so they claimed.
Much of the evening's strange appeal lay in figuring out where the truth stopped and the lies began.
Were they old friends?
Longstanding enemies?
Had sex, art or envy come between them?
The only logical assumption, as they faced each other over whisky and distant memories, was that nothing was logical.


House Bill Asks 8.4% Payroll Tax For Canadian-Style Health Plan
Congressional advocates of a single-payer health care system in which the Government, not insurance companies, pays the bills today proposed an 8.4 percent payroll tax on most employers and a 2.1 percent income tax on workers to pay for it.
Representative Jim McDermott, the Washington Democrat who has led the single-payer effort in the House, said that under the taxes proposed today, 75 percent of all Americans would pay "substantially less" for health insurance than they do today.


Review/Art; 'Ideal Home' Opens a Series on American Crafts
The American Craft Museum has an ambitious mission: over the next decade it plans to present a series of eight exhibitions under the general title "The History of 20th-Century American Craft." The museum also has a problem: "The Ideal Home, 1900-1920," the project's first installment, is not a good start.
This show haphazardly tackles the immense and fascinating subject of the American Arts and Crafts movement: the utopian crusade against the Industrial Revolution and Victorian excess, originated by William Morris in the 1870's in England, that reached this country by the 1880's.
Its goal, based on the proto-modern belief that good design would improve society, was to bring affordable, simply designed, handcrafted objects to ordinary households.


Tyco International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bard (C.R.) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Big Jump In Orders of Durables
Boding well for further expansion of the economy, orders placed at the country's factories for durable goods surged 2.2 percent in December to lift the full-year advance to 8.6 percent, the best since 1988, the Commerce Department reported today.
Orders for capital goods, machinery used in production, rose 6.6 percent when aircraft and military products were excluded, a gain nearly double October's and November's.


Critic's Notebook; Sundance: Some Surprises Amid the Frivolity
Just when you think the show-biz mania at the Sundance Film Festival can't get more intense, when it seems that every other person on Main Street is carrying a cellular phone, the atmosphere turns loopier.
Now people are making their cellular power calls from their seats in the movie theaters.
"I will talk to them," a young woman promised her office minutes before a 9:30 screening the other morning.
"I'll deal with it." The problem had to do with underlings who were letting too many rotten scripts move up the chain.
It's easy to roll your eyes at this behavior, and there has been more of it since the Hollywood contingent arrived in a swarm on Wednesday, midway through this 10-day festival.
But it's also easy to sympathize with the poor readers who can't tell a good script from a bad.
One of the most revealing, eloquent and well-received films at the festival, a documentary about two elderly women called "Martha and Ethel," still sounds awful on paper.


Ipalco Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Held in Attempt to Kill Car-Towing Rival
Two brothers, one a Port Authority police officer and the other the owner of a private security business, were charged yesterday with trying to kidnap and murder a business rival.
The two men, Officer Gary Zimmer, 30 years old, and Richard Zimmer, 27, pleaded not guilty in Criminal Court in the Bronx.
Judge Edward Padro set bail at $15,000 each, and both posted bail and were released.


Mayors Past and Present Attend Discussion on South Africa


Abbott and Yanks Have an Easy Inning
The Yankees reached agreement with Jim Abbott on a 1994 contract yesterday, a mild surprise considering their past dealings with the pitcher's agent.
In a relatively brief, relatively easy negotiation, Abbott agreed to $2,775,000, precisely halfway between the figures the two sides had submitted for arbitration.
"Scott Boras has mellowed," Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, said of the agent, with whom he has had royal battles.
"This didn't take too long. It was pretty good. Compared to last year, I was surprised."


Reactor's Status Upgraded
James A. FitzPatrick nuclear reactor has shown "sustained improvement," the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said yesterday, and the agency has removed the plant from its list of the worst-run in the United States.
But the performance of the authority's other reactor, the Indian Point 3 plant in Westchester County, "has not significantly changed" since the last review in June, the commission said.
The report was another indication that the Buchanan plant, which was shut 11 months ago, is nowhere near ready to resume operation.
FitzPatrick, in Scriba, N.Y., near Oswego, went on the commission's list of plants that require close monitoring in February 1992.
Because of management problems it was shut from November of 1991 until January 1993, but has been operating fairly reliably since then.
It was running yesterday.


Software Spectrum Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stocks at Another High in Busy Day
The stock market pushed to record highs yesterday amid very heavy trading as investors were attracted by prospects for sustained economic growth and low interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 18.30 points, to 3,926.30, its 10th record closing so far this year.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Index of 500 stocks rose 3.85 points, to 477.05, also a record.


Acting Editor Quits New York
Peter Herbst, acting editor of New York magazine, has resigned from K-III Magazines effective Feb. 4, after 12 years at the magazine.
The new editor, Kurt Andersen, a former editor at large at Time and a founding editor of Spy, will take over on Feb. 7.
K-III officials have said Mr.
Herbst, 45, was on the short list to succeed Edward Kosner, who left in September to become editor in chief of Esquire.
The K-III executives said the 17 issues put out by Mr.
Herbst all had good newsstand sales, particularly the year-end issue, "The Best of New York."


QVC Talks Are Seen On New Bid
Representatives of QVC Network Inc. and the BellSouth Corporation met the last two days to discuss the possibility of QVC revising its bid for Paramount Communications Inc., people close to the talks said yesterday.
Final bids in the five-month-old fight between QVC and Viacom Inc. are due by Tuesday.


Restaurants
The first time I ate sushi I fell in love.
I could hardly believe that I had spent 20 years on this planet before my introduction to this incredibly delicious food.


Art in Review
'The Outsider Art Fair'
The Puck Building  Lafayette and Houston Streets  SoHo  Through Sunday
Outsider art is a somewhat vague, catchall term for self-taught artists of any kind.
Its exact borders are frequently debated, but generally it includes art made by patients in mental hospitals, by recluses, naives and visionaries, by rural laborers saying they receive instructions from God, by suddenly creative retirees.
In the near future, it may come to include art made by people in prisons.
It has its share of true geniuses, like Adolf Wolfli, Martin Ramirez, Henry Darger and Bill Traylor.
It has its own history, which stretches back to the late 19th century and regularly intersects with the development of modern art.
In addition, as one of the fastest-growing areas of the art world in terms of interest, knowledge and (of course) marketing, outsider art also has its own fledgling art fair.


Salomon Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rutgers Sued for Ban on Health Benefits to Gay Partners
As one college after another extends employee benefits to gay and lesbian faculty members and their dependents, Rutgers University has steadfastly refused to offer health benefits to same-sex domestic partners.
Now five gay and lesbian employees are suing the university and the State of New Jersey, saying they are in violation of their own anti-discrimination policies.


Florio Made Tough Choices for the Benefit of New Jerseyans
To the Editor:
Re "Jim Florio's Good Governance" (editorial, Jan. 15): One item should be added to the accomplishments of Gov.
Jim Florio's four-year term in New Jersey.
That is his conditional veto of the sexual-abstinence bill last Dec. 29.
On Jan. 10, an effort to override the veto failed in the State Senate, thus keeping the legislation, which requires teachers to "stress" abstinence in family-life-education classes, from becoming law.


Home Video
Message Received
Public-service announcements on videos usually aren't cryptic about organizations they support, but on the tape of "Menace II Society," Allen and Albert Hughes's bloody film about teen-agers in the Watts section of Los Angeles, a short message from the actor Charles S. Dutton is making viewers curious.


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


400 Jobs for Lawyers Who Don't Want to Be Lawyers
A lawyer by any other name would still be a lawyer, right?
Even if he took a job as a self-determination specialist, energy efficiency officer or intellectual resources director?
Of course, says Linda P. Sutherland, an organizer of a seminar on "400-plus things you can do with a law degree other than practice law." For $145, Ms.
Sutherland promises not to "waste your time reviewing the reasons lawyers are disgruntled and might want to move away from traditional practice," but to focus on "growth careers."


Japan's Leader Broadens His Battle to Win Reform
Struggling to salvage his proposals for political reform and avert a collapse of his Government, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa took the extraordinary step today of appealing for popular support and international pressure to force Parliament to endorse a broad realignment of the electoral system by Saturday.
Direct pressure from Japan's largely apolitical citizens has never been a major factor in decision-making here.
But Mr.
Hosokawa began a counterattack to reverse his defeat in a key vote last Friday by borrowing a tactic from American politics.
He called for voters to launch a telephone, fax and write-in campaign to force the Parliament to accept his proposals to reshape Parliamentary election districts and curb campaign contributions.


Niagara Mohawk Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Dell Computer Corp.
Canada, Toronto, to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, to handle its account, previously at the Cohen Group, Toronto.
Goldberg Moser already handles the account for the parent, Dell Computer Corp.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Who Can Make Peace in Bosnia?
A war of words over Bosnia is raging between Washington and Paris, revealing a fundamental difference over the plight of the Muslim-led Government and the urgency of ending the 22-month war.
Resisting European pressure, the Administration refuses to use its influence to get the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to accept a peace plan partitioning the country; the Administration fears it would have to enforce the partition with American troops.


Art in Review
David Salle  Gagosian Gallery 136 Wooster Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Feb. 19 Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Feb. 26


Ex-Soldiers Take Over Cathedral in Nicaragua


G.O.P. Leaders Support Whitman's Tax-Cut Bills
The leaders of the Republican majority in the New Jersey Legislature today promised swift passage of the first parts of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's pledge to cut state income taxes this year, saying the cuts could be enacted even before the new Governor says how she will pay for the lost revenue.
The backing of the leadership virtually insures that Mrs.
Whitman will make good on pledges in her inaugural speech to begin cutting taxes right away.
But Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco warned today that cutting taxes is the easy part and that the young administration must still find budget cuts that will be as palatable to lawmakers as the tax reductions.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "TWELFTH NIGHT," Pearl, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
The Shakespeare comedy, directed by John Rando.
Closes tomorrow.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 5 and 9 P.M.
Tickets: $16 and $20.
Information: (212) 645-7708.


Laclede Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Officer Shot, Apparently by Another Officer, During Scuffle in a Drug Case
A New York City police officer was shot in the toe yesterday, apparently by another officer, during a scuffle with suspected drug dealers in a Harlem apartment building, the police said.
John Hill, chief of Manhattan detectives, said the shooting occurred during a "buy and bust" operation by a nine-member Tactical Narcotic Team operating in Harlem.
He said Officer Jose Ramos was shot in the toe during a scuffle with four suspects, of whom two were arrested and two escaped.


Diner's Journal
Serendipity in Yorktown
When you walk into a new restaurant and find a man at the bar eating a sandwich from the deli next door, it is not a good sign.
When the music is so loud you can't talk, your friend's martini has mysterious floating specks and the bread is stale, you know it is time to cut your losses and go looking for another restaurant.
And that is how I happened to find myself trudging around the Upper East Side at 9:30 on a freezing evening, looking for someplace else to eat.
A lot of restaurants on York Avenue were depressingly empty, but then we arrived at 78th Street and found a restaurant that looked bright and cheery and warm and inviting.
It was called Tavola.


Alltel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ewing Proves He Is Knicks' Go-To Guy
The score was tied, the game was almost over, and the Knicks had the ball.
The Knicks went to Patrick Ewing. And he delivered.


LSI Logic Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


N.F.L. Players Live Longer
A Federal agency announced today that its study showed the death rate for former professional football players was 46 percent less than the rate for American men of similar age and race in the general population.
The study also showed, however, that offensive and defensive linemen, who are heavier than other players, had a 52 percent greater risk than nonplayers of dying from heart disease.
And it showed that heart disease killed linemen at a rate 3.7 times higher than the rate for other players.


Clark Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cleveland Cliffs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Stage, and Off
A Name That Calls for a Score
"If any title ever said 'Musical,' that's the one," Garth Drabinsky said.
Mr.
Drabinsky, the chairman of Livent, a Toronto-based production company, was talking literature in general, and in particular "Ragtime," E. L. Doctorow's kaleidoscopic 1975 novel set in turn-of-the-century New York City, and the occasion was the announcement of Livent's acquisition of the rights to turn it into a musical.


Viking and Spender Near Settlement
In the face of a barrage of negative publicity and a troublesome lawsuit pursued in Britain by the poet Stephen Spender, Viking has tentatively agreed to alter passages of David Leavitt's recent novel "While England Sleeps," people involved in the negotiations said yesterday.
Mr.
Spender contends that the novel, the story of a love affair between two men in the late 1930's, is little more than a thinly disguised, and objectionably salacious, retelling of parts of "World Within World," his 1951 memoir.


Levitz Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Papa Wilson: 34 Years and Still Counting
Ralph Wilson has seen his share of football -- plenty of odd bounces and frolicking runs, big games, big plays, you name it.
It is his team, his product -- the Buffalo Bills -- that has lost three straight Super Bowls.
And it is the same resiliency the Bills have exhibited in reaching Super Bowl XXVIII that Wilson, 75, has shown in his 34 years as the Bills' owner.


Sherwin-Williams Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


E-Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Defense Time Bomb
Many Americans still treat the defense budget as a symbol of strength.
Politicians therefore spend more money than necessary to shield themselves from charges of weakness.
President Clinton brandished the budget as a shield in his State of the Union address when, with surprising fervor, he drew the line against further cuts.
But the defense budget is more than a symbol; it is a set of multibillion-dollar programs.
Some of them are essential to American security.
Others are wasteful vestiges of the cold war.
Mr.
Clinton's instinct for self-protection could limit his ability to cut unnecessary programs.
Even worse, it could put him under severe pressure to increase a defense budget that is already unreasonably high.


"COCA-COLA CO. (N)"
The Coca-Cola Company attributed the increases of 20 percent in its fourth-quarter earnings and 33 percent for the full year to growth in the company's bottling operation investments and increases in domestic and international soft-drink sales.
Domestically, case sales to retail customers grew by 5 percent during the fourth quarter, compared with the comparable period a year earlier, while sales of syrups and gallon shipments decreased by 6 percent because there were five fewer shipping days in the latest quarter.


The New Pinball: Music, Lights, Voices
TWO rolls of quarters into the Addams Family pinball machine at the Broadway Arcade, I knew something was horribly wrong.
The ball was traveling too fast for me to keep up.
I was spazzing out with the flippers.
The constant backtalk from the machine, the flashing lights, the loud sound effects and the complicated "play field" were throwing me off.
My scores were so low I began worrying that some nearby teen-agers might notice and begin snickering.
There was no getting around it.
I was a middle-aged man playing a young man's game, and very poorly at that.
I began to wonder if my driver's license should be revoked.


Giuliani Begins Talks to Keep N.F.L. Offices in New York
The Giuliani administration said yesterday that it had begun talks with officials of the National Football League about offering financial incentives to keep the league's office in New York City.
Officials of the N.F.L. -- whose lease on their executive offices, at Park Avenue and East 54th Street, expires in February 1995 -- said yesterday that they had looked at possible sites in Westchester County where they could move their headquarters and 250 employees.


Nittany Lions Surprise Seventh-Ranked Purdue
Penn State 71, Purdue 68
John Amaechi's dunk with 1 minute 35 seconds to play put Penn State ahead and the Nittany Lions held No. 7 Purdue scoreless for the final 3:35 last night to take a 71-68 victory in State College, Pa.
It was Penn State's second straight victory at home over a ranked team.


Servicemaster L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Singer Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stanley Adams, 86, Ex-Ascap President
Stanley Adams, a lyricist who was president of Ascap for 24 years, died yesterday at North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He lived in Great Neck, L.I., and was 86.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Berenice Adams.


Will the Last to Leave Please Turn Out the Lights?; Fleeing the Ice and Snow, Seeking the Sun; New Yorkers Know When They're Beat.
For awhile people fought back.
They shoveled the snow, scraped the ice, made sincere efforts to bolster one another's spirits.
Then, the temperature would fall again.
More snow would come.
When the temperature rose, it turned out to be the cruelest of teases.
Winter has won, unconditionally and hands down.
It is time to surrender.
Just call your travel agent, hold for an eternity or two and beg to spend some exorbitant sum to go somewhere -- anywhere! -- warm.


A Dozen Companies Chosen for 'Lemons'
Advertisers including Amoco and American Honda Motor were among a dozen to achieve the dubious distinction of being named "honorees" at the ninth annual Harlan Page Hubbard Lemon Awards ceremony yesterday in Washington, sponsored by the Center for Science in the Public Interest.
The so-called awards are designated by a group of national consumer, environmental and health advocate organizations.
It selects ads it considers "the most misleading, unfair or irresponsible" for the year.


Florio Made Tough Choices for the Benefit of New Jerseyans; Didn't Do the Job
To the Editor:
Gov.
Jim Florio's farewell address (news article, Jan. 12), in which he highlighted regressive property taxes and the evils that home rule has engendered, shows that he is aware of New Jersey's real problems.


First Lady Visits Quake Area


Art in Review
'Milton Avery and International Masters'
Grace Borgenicht Gallery  724 Fifth Avenue (at 57th Street)  Through tomorrow
So what if the star of this show shines less brightly than members of his supporting cast?
No matter.
The exhibition is surprisingly entertaining and full of juxtapositions of paintings just weird and unexpected enough for a viewer who enjoys the simple pleasure of looking at art to overlook the fact that they don't make much art-historical sense.
Avery's works are presented alongside works by a slew of European and American predecessors and successors: Avery and Braque, Avery and Mondrian, Avery and Bonnard, Avery and Richard Diebenkorn, Avery and Rufino Tamayo, Avery and Louis Michel Eilshemius.


QVC Talks Are Seen On New Bid
Representatives of QVC Network Inc. and the BellSouth Corporation met the last two days to discuss the possibility of QVC revising its bid for Paramount Communications Inc., people close to the talks said yesterday.
Final bids in the five-month-old fight between QVC and Viacom Inc. are due by Tuesday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
G.M. hopes a 1997 deadline for zero emission vehicles will be scrapped because the auto maker's electric car project has come up short of expectations.  [ Page A1. ]


Dreyfus Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kelly Defends Record as Head Of Police Dept.
Former Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday defended himself and his leadership of the New York City Police Department against a week of attacks from the Giuliani administration, which has labeled the department as lethargic and one of its cornerstones, community policing, as grossly mismanaged.
Mr.
Kelly, who was praised even by the Giuliani campaign when he ran the 31,000-member department, charged that the Mayor was playing politics and jeopardizing the force's effectiveness.


What the Plumber Told the Doctor's Wife
To the Editor:
We all know the old plumber joke: Woman calls the plumber.
Plumber charges $200.
Woman says, "My husband is a doctor and doesn't charge that much for a house call."


Sarajevo Reports Raise Fears of Serbian Offensive
The Sarajevo radio tonight reported new concentrations of Serbian forces near Brcko and Gorazde, raising fears that the Serbs are preparing major offensives to widen a critical supply corridor and crush the last Bosnian Army forces in the Drina River valley.
The radio reported a heavy Serbian artillery barrage before dawn near Brcko, a Sava River town at the narrowest point of the Serbs' supply corridor to Serb-held sections of northern Bosnia and of Croatia.
For more than 18 months, the Serbs have mounted dozens of tank and infantry assaults on the Government defenses near Brcko without success.


Franklin Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


O'Sullivan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Service Merchandise Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Ruth Pruyn Field, 86; Promoted Civic Causes
Ruth Pruyn Field, a director of the Field Foundation who was active in civic causes in New York, died on Tuesday at her home in Beaufort, S.C.
Mrs.
Field, who was 86, also kept a home in Southport, Conn.
The cause was an aneurysm, her family said.


Intertan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scripps (E.W.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sun Sets on Team, Too
The ice dancers JAYNE TORVILL and CHRISTOPHER DEAN, winners of the gold medal in 1984, will head the 36-member British team for next month's Winter Games, the nation's smallest contingent in 34 years.


No Headline
"So far as we know, no one in the history of the United States Senate, since 1789, has ever sat in this chamber that was convicted of a felony." SENATOR JOHN WARNER, Republican of Virginia.  [ A20:2. ] "Most people don't give a rat's patootie." OLIVER NORTH.  [ A20:2. ]


Recent Spill Forces Government to Seize Control of New Jersey Oil Company


For Children
Jazz Concert
The Mike Ledonne Trio  The Museum of the City of New York  Fifth Avenue at 103d Street  (212) 534-1672, extension 215  Recommended ages: 8 and up  Sunday
In this jazz threesome, Mike Ledonne plays the piano, Peter Washington plays the bass and Kenny Washington (unrelated to Peter) minds the drums.
This is a concert that should lure everyone out of the house, especially parents who "don't get around much anymore" to nightclubs, because baby sitters make an evening out expensive.


Bay State Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article in the special Outlook '94 issue of Business Day on Jan. 3, about the development of electric cars, misstated the headquarters location of U.S.
Electricar/Solar Electric Engineering Inc.
The company is based in Sebastopol, Calif., not Athol, Mass.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; Police and Prisons
More and more billions for prisons to lock up more and more Americans who never had a decent chance at life.
Are we mad?
Why not use those billions to build more schools to give more young people living in poverty the education to climb out of it?
It costs as much to keep a convict in prison as to send him to Yale, for Heaven's sake.
And despite all the other billions the U.S. spends on the drug war, narcotics still flood the country, users are still being put into prison, crowding out violent criminals.
Why not legalize drugs and use the anti-drug money on therapy for addicts and to improve the neighborhoods that create them?


Who Owns Savings Bank Riches?
Almost like a state lottery, mutual savings banks have created instant millionaires among their managers and directors in recent years when the banks have been sold to other institutions or taken public through stock offerings.
But the bounty paid to bank insiders has begun to outrage some depositors, members of Congress and banking regulators.
It is becoming increasingly clear that the management payments are merely a symptom of a difficult legal -- and perhaps moral -- issue: Who should gain the benefit from a cash-laden company that nobody really owns?


Cummins Engine reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yes, Fox Sports Lives, And Offers Answers
The Fox Network came fully equipped yesterday to its coming-out football press conference.
First there was the new logo, quite green, for the color of Fox's $1.58 billion investment in football, and yellow.
Next came a fast-cutting video interspersing gridiron imagery with Homer Simpson, the Bundys and the cross-dressing "Men on Football" from "In Living Color," and eardrum-quaking audio of the Beatles' "Revolution" that broke glass in Ella Fitzgerald's china closet.


People
*
Brian Johnson, executive vice president and director of business development at J. Walter Thompson North America, New York, was named to the additional new position of worldwide new business director. *
Penny Baldwin-Spear was named to the new position of senior vice president and director of communications planning at McCann-Erickson San Francisco.
She was previously a senior vice president and director of client services at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, San Francisco.


AMC Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


'Annie' Sequel Closing
"Annie Warbucks," the long-beleaguered, undeniably plucky Off Broadway musical sequel to "Annie," is to close after its second show on Sunday.
The producers, who were seriously considering moving the show from the Variety Arts Theater to Broadway until two weeks ago, said the persistent cold weather had cut into the show's dwindling ticket sales, prompting the decision to shut down.
The show, by Thomas Meehan, Charles Strouse and Martin Charnin, will have had 200 performances and 38 previews.


Multimedia Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Long-Running Role as the Bills' Heart and Soul
When the Bills drafted Darryl Talley in the second round of the 1983 draft, they had just come off a strike-shortened 4-5 season.
In the next five seasons, they would finish 8-8, 2-14, 2-14, 4-12 and 7-8.
Since then, they have always had winning records, including four straight Super Bowl seasons.
Part of that success can be attributed to Talley's play at outside linebacker, part to his ability to inspire, part to his role, as one Bills official said, of being "the heart and soul of this team."


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; Incremental Changes in a Peaceful World, Saigon 1951
"The Scent of Green Papaya" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 11.
The film, in Vietnamese with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway at 63d Street.
"The Scent of Green Papaya" is Tran Anh Hung's tranquilly beautiful film about a lost Vietnam, a peaceful, orderly place not yet touched by wartime.
The film begins in Saigon in 1951, in a household safely insulated from the first rumblings of trouble.
The family in question has more personal problems, since these people are still mourning the death of a young daughter several years earlier, and since the husband (Tran Ngoc Trung) has a history of disappearing for long periods with his family's money.
The wife (Truong Thi Loc) endures these desertions with the stoicism the film generally ascribes to Vietnamese women.


Salahaddin Journal; A Son's Promise: That Kurds' Dream Doesn't Die
Massoud Barzani, the Kurdish leader, was seated on a couch in his mountain headquarters, a collection of villas originally intended to allow the relatives of President Saddam Hussein to escape Baghdad's summer heat and his deputies to enforce his will in the mutinous north.
On the wall above Mr.
Barzani, a small, stocky man of 47, a tapestry depicted his late father, Mullah Mustafa Barzani, whose name is practically synonymous with Kurdish nationalism.


Smith's Food &amp; Drug Centers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Cilcorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Port Authority Chairman Is Resigning in April
The chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, Richard C. Leone, announced yesterday that he would leave the unsalaried job in April after four years as overseer of one of the most powerful governmental authorities in the nation.
His tenure included guiding the agency through the aftermath of the World Trade Center bombing.
Mr.
Leone's departure, which had been expected, opens the way for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey to make one of the most important appointments of her two-week-old administration.
There are also three vacant positions on the 12-member board of commissioners that Mrs.
Whitman must fill.


Abroad at Home; Whistling Past Weimar
President Clinton was impressive when he talked about domestic issues in his State of the Union address because he connected.
When he told of Americans who were sick or needed family leave, he related to their pain.
More than that, he seemed to be drawing from his own life, his own hopes and hurts.
How different it was when he turned to foreign affairs.
One felt that his heart was not in it, that he was going through a mechanical recitation of claimed achievements.
It was as if he dealt with those things because he had to as President, not because they engaged his deepest moral or political concerns.


Adolph Baller; Pianist
Adolph Baller, a pianist who accompanied the violinist Yehudi Menuhin and other soloists, died on Saturday at his home in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 84.
The cause was kidney failure, said his daughter, Nina Lobban.


Cameo From Quayle


Critic's Choice/Dance; Unscientific Research
Movement Research, the Little Engine That Could of New York dance, has been enlarging the horizons of audiences and performers for 16 years with innovative seminars and workshops conducted by artists including Bill Irwin, Meredith Monk, and Eiko and Koma, as well as with a provocative journal and performances.
Since the organization began its free Monday-night shows at Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village in 1990, they have become a staple of the New York dance scene, events where artists try out new works in affordable, bare-bones presentations that are often memorable adventures for their audiences.
Tomorrow night, three modern-dance institutions and one avant-garde duo will help Movement Research raise money by participating in a gala performance at Pace Downtown Theater at 3 Spruce Street in lower Manhattan, just south of City Hall.


Harding to Get Olympic Spot but Inquiry Continues
Tonya Harding will be named to the United States Olympic team, figure skating and Olympic officials said yesterday.
But skating officials have begun their own investigatory process, and it remains uncertain whether she will actually skate next month in the Winter Games in Norway.
The ultimate decision will rest with the United States Olympic Committee, which assumes jurisdiction when the Olympic team is formally named on Monday.


BCE Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


But They're All So, So, You Know, Common
Iron Mike's still in the slammer.
Will Tonya skate in Lillehammer?
And if da Bills should don't win the game
They'll go right in the hall of shame.
Lunch-pail heroes rarely make it in American sports anymore because the Athletic-Industrial Complex requires middle-class values and behavior along with winning.
Marketing megabucks can't be risked on someone who might wake up in the wrong bed or forget which brand he plays for.
Nike's victory over Reebok at Barcelona was a modern middle-class triumph, enlightened self-interest over blind patriotism.





India Says 22 Die in Kashmir As Rebels Clash With Police
At least 22 people were killed today in clashes between separatists and Indian security troops in the Kashmir region, Indian Government officials said.
A Defense Ministry spokesman in Srinagar said most of the casualties occurred when the rebels fired into the market at Kupwara, a separatist stronghold about 55 miles north of Srinagar.


'This Is My Last Chance'
The statement made by Tonya Harding yesterday in Portland, Ore., as recorded by The Associated Press:
I would like to begin by saying how sorry I am about what happened to Nancy Kerrigan.
I am embarrassed and ashamed to think that anyone close to me could be involved.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  SENATE VOTES ON HANOI EMBARGO  In a strong bipartisan vote, the Senate urged the Administration to end its trade embargo against Vietnam soon.
The vote is intended to make it easier for President Clinton to take that step and end decades of rancor with a former enemy.
A1  EXICO ADOPTS ELECTION REFORM  Bowing to pressure for political change after a peasant uprising in the south, Mexico's governing party agreed to lower campaign spending limits by almost 80 percent and allow a more impartial choice of election authorities.
A1


Belarus Says Aide's Ouster Won't Stop Reform
The Belarus Foreign Ministry called in foreign diplomats in Minsk today to reassure them that the country's commitments to denuclearization and a market economy were unchanged by the ouster on Wednesday of Stanislav S. Shushkevich, a non-Communist reformer, as chairman of Parliament and ceremonial head of state.
The removal of Mr.
Shushkevich by Parliament, on dubious charges of corruption after two years of battling for early elections and economic reforms, leaves Belarus in the hands of the same Communist Party officials who ran it before the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991.


At the Bar; Madness as an excuse: Two similar arguments in the same court, with starkly different results.
A few days ago a seemingly sympathetic defendant charged with a heinous crime appeared in a Manassas, Va., courtroom, pleading for understanding and mercy.
Asked to explain the bloody deed, the defendant, a person of limited intellect and eloquence, had previously testified about losing control, about blanking out, about only realizing afterwards, and with horror, precisely what had happened.
"It was just like something had just took over me that I couldn't understand," the defendant had told the jury at an earlier stage of the case.
"It was like something . . . well, to me it felt like it was evil . . . evil spirit, or something."


METRO DIGEST
F.C.C. RETREATS ON INFINITY PURCHASE
Penned in by a recent court decision that struck down Federal restrictions on "indecent" broadcasting, the Federal Communications Commission is on the verge of letting the company that employs Howard Stern buy a big Los Angeles radio station.
D2.
NEW YORK CITY


Ameritech Sets $4.4 Billion More for Video
In one of the largest applications of advanced communications services to consumers, the Ameritech Corporation said yesterday that it planned to spend an additional $4.4 billion to take video conferencing and other video services to the home, for a total expenditure of $29 billion in the next 15 years.
The company said the system would provide the capacity for 1,000 television channels, with better picture quality than today's television.


Lintas Creates A Spinoff Shop
Lintas Worldwide said yesterday that it had created a spinoff shop, the Gotham Group, from its New York office.
The new shop will initially be devoted to handling the important Maybelline cosmetics account with billings estimated at more than $50 million.
The shop, to be owned by Lintas's parent, the Interpublic Group of Companies, is scheduled to open in February, with 30 employees, at 79 Fifth Avenue, between 15th and 16th Streets, in Manhattan.
That was the site of a previous Lintas New York spinoff, L2 , part of an unsuccessful effort to retain the IBM PC Company account.


Sonat Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Agent Explains Why Cult Raid Was Moved Up
A Federal undercover agent testified today that he had warned his supervisors that the leader of a cult near Waco Tex., knew his compound was about to be raided.
But, the agent said, officials of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms went ahead with the raid anyway.
The agent, Robert Rodriguez, recalled telling the operation's tactical commander, Chuck Sarabyn, that the cult's leader, David Koresh, knew the raid was coming.
He said that Mr.
Sarabyn had asked if he had seen any weapons inside and what Mr.
Koresh was wearing but that the commander did not stop the raid.


Cortines to Cut Board Staff With Layoffs
New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he would cut up to a thousand jobs from Board of Education headquarters staff through attrition and layoffs, reduce the use of consultants and temporary workers, and give community districts responsibility for hundreds of curriculum and staff development experts.
"We have a hiring freeze in place, but I probably will recommend layoffs," he said, which could eliminate up to one in four jobs at the legendary bureaucracy at the board's headquarters at 110 Livingston Street.
"I don't want to be in the business of making jobs for people."


Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guns Gaining on Cars as a Leading U.S. Killer
If current trends continue, gunshot wounds will take more lives nationwide than automobile accidents by 2003 -- a point already reached in the District of Columbia and six states, including New York, according to a report released today by the Department of Health and Human Services.
"It is appalling that in the world's strongest and wealthiest country, death by firearms is increasing at the alarming rate these studies find," Health Secretary Donna E. Shalala said in introducing the report.


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shirking Charges Against Custodian Are Dropped
A New York City school custodian whose arrested two years ago on a misconduct charge was accompanied by photographs said to show him puttering on his boat during work hours, had all charges against him dismissed yesterday.
A state court ruled that the office of the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, last May put the wrong address on an envelope that contained the official notice that a grand jury had returned an indictment against Mr.
Ryan.
And that error, the court ruled, meant that neither Mr.
Ryan nor his lawyer had been notified within six months of the date of arrest, denying him of his right to a speedy trial.


Political Memo; Selling Chips? Or Is it Quayle? It's All a Blur
On the surface it seems a bit perplexing that a man who wants to be President would go on television before a huge audience to sell potato chips.
But the four-decade marriage of Madison Avenue and politics probably made something like Dan Quayle's hawking Frito-Lay's new Wavy Lay's potato chips during the Super Bowl inevitable.
Once politicians got used to being sold like boxes of Tide, they were sure to take the next step and go from being products to pushing them.


New Offerings: Small Companies and Bonds
The Berger Small Company Growth Fund aims to take advantage of the edge that small stocks have had historically over their larger brethren.
The fund owns companies with market capitalizations up to $1 billion and looks primarily for rapid earnings growth when picking stocks.
The fund's risk is partly mitigated by its diverse portfolio.
Even so, share prices of small, rapidly growing companies can be very volatile.
The Scudder Emerging Markets Income Fund invests in debt securities of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, and can buy debt in Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Eastern Europe.
Although emerging markets have greater growth potential than those of more developed nations, they carry more risk as well.
Most of the issues in emerging markets are junk bonds and trade at big discounts to their face value, adding price volatility and default risk to the risk of political instability.
So make sure you have a long time horizon.


Convertible Securities: Aids for the Ambivalent
OF two minds about the ever-up stock market?
Want to stay in, but fear a drop?
Consider convertible securities.
Like the car of the same name, they are designed for rain or shine.
These defensive investments, offered by nearly 600 enterprises in a market that reached $108 billion last year, have a higher yield than a company's stock, but can be exchanged into a fixed number of shares.
These features mean convertibles rise with the company's equity -- but not as far -- and fall with it -- though not as much.


Macy Gets Extension on Right to Sue Federated
In what could become part of a defense against the unwanted overtures of Federated Department Stores, R. H. Macy &amp; Company has filed a motion to preserve its right to sue Federated over its sale of the Bullock's and I. Magnin stores to Macy in 1988.
Separately, Macy said yesterday that it was eliminating about 700 jobs in its West Coast division as part of efforts to cut costs and streamline its organization.


Learning From Russia's Reverse
Economic reform in Russia is on the ropes, and the Clinton Administration is groping for a response.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Ambassador at Large Strobe Talbott say the West must hold up aid until Russia puts market reforms in place; a spokesman for the Secretary of State denies that is U.S. policy.
Which is it?
The U.S. cannot undo Russia's recent election, which produced a Parliament split down the middle over reform and drove President Boris Yeltsin to appoint an anti-reform Government.
But Washington can prepare for the possibility that Russia may again reverse course and resume the tortured path toward markets.
To do that, President Clinton needs to learn from his mistakes.


Abstinence Courses Aren't Equally Enlightened; Tie It to Values
To the Editor:
Re "Sex Educators for Young See New Virtue in Chastity" (front page, Jan. 16): You are to be commended for reporting the honest effort being made in many parts of the country to encourage young people to remain chaste, despite myriad temptations and incessant peer pressure to capitulate and simply go with the flow.


2 Banks Set $1.9 Billion Merger
In a move to expand its corporate banking business, the BankAmerica Corporation said yesterday that it would buy the Continental Bank Corporation for $1.9 billion in cash and stock.
The merger is unusual because Continental, which is based in Chicago, specializes in dealing with medium and large businesses and does not serve consumers.
BankAmerica, based in San Francisco, has a vast consumer-banking business in Western states and in Texas.
But it also has a major corporate-banking business throughout the country and overseas, especially in Asia.


St. Petersburg Journal; City That Defeated Hitler Remembers Its Fallen
Aleksandr I. Yakovlev can still clearly hear the explosions his father set off to blast the ice-bound earth, and the dull ring of the frozen bodies as they were thrown into the rough graves.
"They brought them daily from the whole city, the dead," he recalled.
"They were piled up there by the road, mountains of them, higher than that memorial. Bodies lay all along the road. People simply ran out of strength trying to reach the cemetery and left them."


New York's Crumbling Schools
As New York City schools continue to fall into disrepair, pressure to fix them up is mounting.
The teachers' union and a group of parents jointly filed a lawsuit to make the city keep schools in good repair.
And Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines is trying to respond to maintenance problems faster and more efficiently.
Fixing the deteriorating schools is as vital to the city's health as the transit system or the bridges.
City and state officials need to commit themselves -- and some extra funds -- to do the job.


Abstinence Courses Aren't Equally Enlightened
To the Editor:
Abstinence education is neither new nor unusual.
Sexuality education programs have always included lessons to encourage young people to delay the onset of intercourse.
A study we conducted last year found that all but one state covers abstinence in their sexuality education programs.
In "Sex Educators for Young See New Virtue in Chastity" (front page, Jan. 16), you highlight a program called Postponing Sexual Involvement, which is a rarity among so-called abstinence programs.


At St. Patrick's Cathedral, a Restoration to Benefit the Ears


Asserting Croatia Invaded, Bosnia Appeals to U.N.
Bosnia's Government appealed to the United Nations Security Council today to take action against neighboring Croatia, accusing it of mounting an invasion.
A confidential United Nations report appeared to support the Bosnian contention.
"Open military intervention by the armed forces of the republic of Croatia is being carried out against the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina," the mostly Muslim Government said in its appeal to the Council.
It called for an immediate emergency session of the Council and appealed to it to take measures under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter.


Review/Pop; Cowboy Hat, Jacket and Tie
Junior Brown is a country throwback, an old-fashioned honky-tonker, with a twist.
The 41-year-old songwriter has been a local phenomenon in Austin for some time, but his first nationally distributed album, "Guit With It" (Curb), was released last year.
Mr.
Brown sings about a "hillbilly hula girl" and about long nights at roadhouses; in one song, he's a singing janitor, while in another he runs into an old flame and reminds her, "You're wanted by the police and my wife thinks you're dead." His voice is a droll, unflappable baritone steeped in Ernest Tubb, Ray Price and Lefty Frizzell.
He can yodel, too.
He plays an instrument never seen in country music (or elsewhere) before: the guit-steel, a doublenecked contraption that grafts together a six-stringed guitar and a steel guitar.
With it, Mr.
Brown answers his own vocal lines or sets forth wryly virtuosic solos.
Most country bands have full-time lead guitarists and steel players; Mr.
Brown does three jobs at once, four counting the songwriting.


METRO DIGEST
REPRIEVE FOR A DEATH-ROW DOG  Taro, New Jersey's death-row dog, a 5-year-old Akita, was saved from execution by order of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman but condemned in the same breath to live the rest of its life outside the Garden State.
Page 1.
WINTER OF '94 SPRINGS ANOTHER SURPRISE After weeks of blizzards and brutal cold, the fickle Winter of '94 played another diabolically nasty trick on the New York region, delivering springlike temperatures and a pounding rain that melted snow, flooded roads and homes, delayed travelers and made life a muddy, miserable mess.
Page 1.


Dog's Death Sentence Is Reduced to Exile
It was not quite the drama of the familiar Hollywood death-row scene in which the executioners and the condemned anxiously awaited the last-minute call from the Governor with a reprieve.
But there is melodrama today, nonetheless, in the saga of Taro, the death-row dog.
The 5-year-old Akita was saved from execution by order of the Governor today but condemned in the same breath to live the rest of its life outside the Garden State.


Winter Winks as Cruel Cold Quickly Turns Wet and Wild
After weeks of blizzards and brutal cold, the fickle Winter of '94 played another diabolically nasty trick on the New York region yesterday, delivering springlike temperatures and a pounding rain that melted snow, flooded roads and homes, delayed travelers and made life a muddy, miserable mess.
As roller-coaster temperatures that had plunged below zero soared into the 50's, the rains came down in steady drizzles and driving torrents that, with an efficient silken lash, reduced piles of snow and ice, and formed running rivers.
The flooding closed highways and schools, disrupted subways, caused hydroplaning and car accidents and had pedestrians hopping through puddles on every corner.
Requests for Pumping
Fire departments and plumbers across the region were swamped with calls from homeowners begging to have basements pumped out.
In White Plains, so many fire trucks were running about on water-pumping duty that the wail of sirens sounded like an air raid.
In Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., the front wheels of a Metro-North train derailed in a mudslide, injuring two trainmen and inconveniencing 300 passengers, who had to change trains.


Classical Music in Review
'Jerusalem' The New York Grand Opera Carnegie Hall


Black American Labor Is Honored


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 AGREEMENT ON JAPAN REFORM
Japan's political parties reached an agreement on a somewhat watered-down version of a plan for broad alignment of its electoral system, saving the Prime Minister's job and his reform movement.  1


Abstinence Courses Aren't Equally Enlightened; Two-Part Message
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 16 front-page article on abstinence-based sex education presented one approach.
Abstinence is the most effective protection against sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy.
I strongly agree that girls need opportunities to learn and practice saying "no." But many young women and men need more options to manage their sexuality effectively.


One Is Freed In Sex Attack In Glen Ridge
All charges against the last defendant awaiting trial in the 1989 Glen Ridge sexual assault case were dropped yesterday after the victim's parents opposed further prosecution, officials said.
Based on the parents' wishes, the Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, filed a motion for dismissal of a nine-count indictment against Richard J. Corcoran Jr., the 24-year-old son of the chief of detectives in Glen Ridge.


U.S. Set to Limit Role of Military In Peacekeeping
The Clinton Administration has completed work on a policy that sets narrow conditions on United States military involvement in international peacekeeping, senior Administration officials said today.
The policy, which prompted a major foreign-policy debate, sets minimum conditions for financing peacekeeping and for sending troops to join international missions that are far tougher than those that President Clinton and his aides had discussed earlier.


Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Rise to Record
As the stock market surges to new highs, so do bets that shares will fall.
Short interest in Nasdaq stocks hit a record in the month that ended on Jan. 4, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
Last week, the New York Stock Exchange reported that its short-interest level was at a record.


Europe Exhibition Likely for Giants
It is looking more and more as if the Giants will be playing a preseason game in Europe this year, either in London or Barcelona, several National Football League league officials said today.
Although nothing has been officially set, the league has been talking with the Giants for several months about the possibility, and league officials say the Giants are open to the idea.
In the past, former Coach Bill Parcells resisted the notion, saying it would be too much of a distraction.


Sports of The Times; A Cookie That Never Crumbled
SOMETHING about the Buffalo Bills has bothered me for the last three years, but I couldn't put my finger on it until now.
The feeling went beyond compassion or contempt for their three straight Super Bowl losses.
It had more to do with what gods Buffalo crossed to earn the cruel fate of Sisyphus.
Three times the Bills have rolled this heavy rock to the top of a steep hill; three times it's rolled back.


Classical Music in Review
Christopher Parkening Guitarist Metropolitan Museum of Art Pepe Romero Guitarist Kaye Playhouse


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a new currency in Yugoslavia misstated the inflation rate for December.
It was 283,000 percent, not 283 percent.


The Rangers Wind Up In Duck Soup
The Rangers three-game West Coast road trip and their five-game winning streak came to an end tonight when they lost by 3-2 to the Mighty Ducks at the Pond.
Mark Messier scored twice for the Rangers, who seemed out of sync while playing for the third time in four nights.


Columbia U. May Be Sued In Sex Case
Setting a precedent for sexual-harassment cases, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has ruled that a woman can sue her employer, Columbia University, under Federal civil rights laws for sexual harassment, even though she could not show that she suffered economic harm.
The ruling reversed a lower court decision.
The woman, Sharon Karibian, who started as a secretary in the university's fund-raising office, said her supervisor, Mark Urban, forced her into a violent sexual relationship, in exchange for which, she said, she received promotions and pay increases.
Mr.
Urban conceded that the relationship had existed, but said that it had been consensual.
Rights Are the Same
Typically, Federal courts have considered cases in which the worker has refused to comply with advances and was subsequently punished.
This case, Karibian v.
Columbia University, is unusual, a three-judge panel said, because the worker submitted and was rewarded accordingly.
But the court emphasized that the legal rights of employees are the same, whether or not they accede to sexual advances.


Becker Clarifies View on Drugs
A month after infuriating his fellow tennis professionals and the game's administrators with his published comments regarding the proliferation of drug use and the ineptitude of drug testing on the men's tour, Boris Becker clarified his position yesterday.
"I did not say that doping was widespread on the ATP Tour or that the tour was concealing positive tests, and I did not accuse any tennis player of drug wrongdoing," Becker said in a statement furnished by his attorney and manager, Axel Meyer-Wolden.


Rozelle to Skip Sunday's Game
Pete Rozelle, the former National Football League commissioner, will miss a Super Bowl game for the first time Sunday after having had a benign brain tumor removed at New York Hospital in mid-December.
"They got all of the tumor," he said today from his home in Rancho Santa Fe, Calif.
"They thought it was benign even before the operation and it was. I'm not even on radiation."


William J. Levitt, 86, Pioneer of Suburbs, Dies
William J. Levitt, the Long Island developer who built the prototype for the suburbs that would lure middle-class Americans out of cities by the millions after World War II, died yesterday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 86.
He died of a progressive kidney disease, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Review/Music; The English Horn Steps Forward
In a concert spotlighting New York Philharmonic soloists at Avery Fisher Hall Thursday night, Kurt Masur led the orchestra in the world premiere of Ned Rorem's Concerto for English Horn and Orchestra.
Thomas Stacy, the Philharmonic's longtime English horn player, to whom the Rorem work was dedicated, was the soloist.
The new concerto brought the unsurprising news that Mr.
Rorem had stayed true to the Romantic American style he inherited from Barber and Copland.
His spacious, ambling, tonally centered musical vocabulary sometimes comes perilously close to American kitsch -- what I think of as apple-orchard music -- until an impressionistic twist of harmony averts disaster.
Melodies unspool at an even quarter-note pace, and not much happens to them once they are complete.
Developmental logic is discreetly absent.


Economy Grows 5.9% In Quarter
Surpassing most expectations, the economy surged at a 5.9 percent annual pace in the final quarter of 1993, the best performance in six years, the Government estimated today.
The impressively broad advance was driven mainly by sectors of the economy responsive to low interest rates, including housing and cars.
And it was accompanied by low inflation, making it unlikely, analysts said, that the Federal Reserve will soon yield to any urge to nudge rates up.


INSIDE
Economy Grew Strongly In Final Quarter of '93
The economy surged at a 5.9 percent annual pace in the final quarter of 1993, the best performance in six years.
The broad advance was driven mainly by gains in sectors of the economy that are responsive to low interest rates.
Page 35.
Studying Dying Patients
When patients join experimental research protocols, the potential for cure may be outweighed by the possibility of exploitation.
Page 7.
Leading Law Firm to Close
One of New York's most prestigious law firms, Shea &amp; Gould, will close because of irreconcilable differences among its 80 partners.
Page 35.
Earthquake Largesse
Some poor people whose lives were upended by the earthquake last week received windfalls when the Government cut red tape.
Page 8.


Observer; Soother Of the Beast
At this time last year feminists had the nation alerted for an onset of wife-beating.
Statistics, they said, showed an alarming rise in this crime at Super Bowl time.
Afterward other people produced statistics that showed the feminists' statistics were nonsense.
All this showed once again why, when statistics are being passed around, smart people say, "I'll just have coffee, thanks."


Aetna Life to Cut 4,000 Jobs And Take $1.3 Billion Charge
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company, one of the country's 10 largest diversified insurance concerns, yesterday announced $1.28 billion in charges against its earnings.
The company said it planned to cut 4,000 jobs, abandon a loss-plagued part of its investment business and pay for higher-than-expected losses on claims in its workers' compensation insurance business.


U.N. Secretary General Warns Serbs of Air Strikes
Under pressure from NATO to threaten the Serbs with force if they block the reopening of a Bosnian airfield to relief flights or the rotation of a United Nations garrison guarding Muslim refugees, the United Nations Secretary General told the Security Council today that he was ready to call for NATO air attacks if necessary.
But the Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, also warned that if the Serbs put up a determined resistance to these two operations despite such air attacks, the United Nations could not carry them out by force unless the Security Council sent additional troops equipped to fight a land war, something it has so far refused to do.


Mayor Moves To Combine Three Forces
In a first step toward merging the city's three police departments, the Giuliani administration is seeking to consolidate the administrative offices, emergency services and detective bureaus of the New York Police Department, the housing police and the transit police by July 1, senior city officials said yesterday.
The officials, who spoke on the condition that they would not be identified, said the move would essentially result in three separate patrol forces controlled by the New York City police headquarters.


After Trickery, Stories of Woe Don't Win Aid
Concerned about fraudulent claims for relief, disaster officials decided today to shut down a program that provided Federal food stamps, on the spot, to any poor person professing to be an earthquake victim.
The officials said that starting Saturday they would take three days to check all requests for the stamps, which are in such demand that there have been numerous scuffles and arguments among the huge crowds that have gathered at the 30 relief centers offering them.


The Senate's Green Light on Vietnam
This week the Senate staged a pre-emptive strike -- a 62-to-38 non-binding vote urging an early end to America's long economic embargo against Hanoi.
The senators deserve praise for taking another step back from the bitterness of that war.
Vietnam is now giving all the cooperation Washington has asked for in the search for information about Americans lost in the Indochina wars.
That deserves official recognition.
And flooding Vietnam with U.S. businessmen may be the best way to flush out further information on the few remaining cases.


Justice in Disarray
Who is to blame for the disarray at the Justice Department?
Each slip-up seems to have its own rationale, and delay in completing background checks on nominees is an all-purpose excuse.
But the signs point to Attorney General Janet Reno and to the White House, where the buck is supposed to stop.
Indeed, the Justice Department seems to be the most disorganized agency in an Administration not exactly known for precision management.
The abrupt resignation of Deputy Attorney General Philip Heymann after only nine months is another setback.
Mr.
Heymann, a respected legal educator and seasoned criminal law administrator, was challenged to end the department's headless drift.
Now faulty "chemistry" requires his departure and reopens holes in top management.
Coherent leadership still seems far in the future.
Ms.
Reno's supporters say she found him too dilatory.
That means, presumably, that she will now get on with wresting control of her department from the White House and with filling year-old vacancies.


Review/Dance; Vienna Along the Hudson, As Waltzed by City Ballet
George Balanchine's "Vienna Waltzes," presented by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater, is a treatise as lighthearted and sumptuous as the waltz itself.
Dancers wander, caper and swirl on and off the stage, through a pretty forest and a pair of ballrooms whose differences mirror great changes in the waltz and in its time.
And Balanchine's delight in the music -- five waltzes by Johann Strauss 2d, Franz Lehar and Richard Strauss -- is infectious, especially in the hands of a conductor like Hugo Fiorato, who led the orchestra on Wednesday.
The performance was somewhat listless, however, despite two role debuts.
Darci Kistler, new as the ballerina in the dance's closing "Rosenkavalier" section, was a charming girl-next-door rather than the mysterious, slightly sad lone waltzer suggested by the choreography and the music's haunting, fleeting emotional dissonances.


Euro Disney Reserve Fund
The Walt Disney Company's troubled European theme park has apparently run short of cash and is making use of a $175 million in financial aid set aside by its American parent, an industry analyst said today.
Disney, based in Burbank, Calif., took a $350 million charge against earnings in its fourth quarter, which ended on Sept. 30.
Half of that was to cover the operating needs of Euro Disneyland, the theme park outside Paris, through March 31, Disney's deadline for a financial restructuring.


Q &amp; A
WITHDRAWALS FROM 401(k)'s  Q. I am past retirement age and I have a 401(k) plan that my company started two years ago.
Contributions are approximately $15 a week.
Does this mean I must withdraw this small amount when I become 70 1/2?
William J. Grant, Mount Vernon, N.Y.
A.
You must begin receiving distributions, even for small account balances, by April 1 of the year following the year you turn 70 1/2.
These distributions generally must start even though you have not retired and are still working for the plan sponsor.


4 Former Secretaries of State Grade Clinton's Policies
None of them attacked their host, of course.
After all they used to make a living practicing the inscrutable art of diplomacy.
Besides, they were having lunch with him afterward.
But when four former Secretaries of State -- three Republicans and one Democrat -- gathered this morning at the State Department at the invitation of Warren Christopher, each played to type and each made clear what he would do about the world if he were still sitting in the suite of offices six floors above.


Annuities vs. I.R.A.'s: The Winner Is . . .
Variable annuities are all the rage in personal investing.
Combining aspects of insurance and mutual funds, they are sold as a stellar choice for retirement saving.
Before succumbing to sales pitches, though, investors would do well to take a second look at the individual retirement account.
This ho-hum product doesn't get as much attention as the annuity, but carries all the tax sizzle -- at a lower cost.


Japanese Public's Ardor Over Vote Reform Fades
After a five-year struggle to enact election and campaign finance reform laws, the Japanese people seem to regard the prospect of the passage of a package of bills with skepticism, a bit of cynicism and some modest hopefulness.
A compromise package of bills that was agreed on early today would create new election districts and make them single-seat constituencies, as opposed to the current multiple-seat districts.
The bills would also modestly tighten campaign finance laws and stiffen penalties for violations.


Rozelle to Skip Sunday's Game
Pete Rozelle, the former National Football League commissioner, will miss a Super Bowl game for the first time Sunday after having had a benign brain tumor removed at New York Hospital in mid-December.
"They got all of the tumor," he said today from his home in Rancho Santa Fe, Calif.
"They thought it was benign even before the operation and it was. I'm not even on radiation."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy surged at a 5.9 percent annual pace in the final quarter of 1993, the best performance in six years.
The broad advance was mainly driven by sectors of the economy that are responsive to low interest rates, including housing and cars, and was accompanied by low inflation.  [ Page 35. ]


When the Dying Enroll in Studies: A Debate Over False Hopes
Ruth Good of Westport, Conn., was willing to go almost anywhere and put up with almost any inconvenience to get help for the breast cancer spreading throughout her body.
Conventional therapy had failed.
Mrs.
Good's only hope was to take an experimental drug or undergo an experimental procedure.
But she and her husband, Paul, had no idea how scant that hope would be.


Fogbound Islanders Grounded by Bruins
The Islanders pledged to make a fresh start in the second half of the season, but so far they seem to be regressing instead of regrouping.
"We said it was going to be a new year for us, and instead we go out and lose two games," said Derek King.
"We've got a huge cloud over our heads, and we put it there."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Hawks Stop Hornets  Dominique Wilkins scored 17 of his 27 points in the second half as the Central Division-leading Atlanta Hawks continued their mastery over the Charlotte Hornets with a 117-105 victory last night in Charlotte, N.C.
Kevin Willis had 24 points and 12 rebounds and Mookie Blaylock scored 25 points on 7-for-11 3-point shooting as the Hawks won their fourth straight game.
For the Hornets, it was their third straight loss.
The victory also clinched the Eastern Conference All-Star coaching berth for Atlanta Coach Lenny Wilkens.
The Hornets had to play without center Alonzo Mourning, who injured his calf against Orlando on Wednesday night, and forward Larry Johnson, who is out with a bad back.
"We need L. J. and Zo back," said Hornets forward Eddie Johnson, who finished with 21 points.
"If you take those two guys off any team, then it's tough to win." (AP)


'Replacement' Policies Have Lots of Fine Print
INSURANCE agents sell many homeowner policies as "replacement" policies, with the promise that they will pay for the replacement of a severely damaged home.
But a close read shows that many of these policies are more limited than the term implies.
To the insurer, replacement cost excludes any expenses for complying with building standards that did not exist when a home was built.
This exclusion, embedded deep in the fine print of policies that are often 30 pages long, is called the "ordinance or law" clause.


Knicks Prepare for a Test in the Northwest
The Seattle SuperSonics have the best record (31-8) in the National Basketball Association.
The Knicks are favored to win the Eastern Conference.
So their game here Saturday night could be a preview of the N.B.A.
Finals.
At the very least, it will be as intriguing as any regular-season game in January can be.


Classical Music in Review
'Elektra' Metropolitan Opera


Aides Say Giuliani Plans to Cut 14,000 to 18,000 Jobs by 1995
Faced with a $2.3 billion gap in the next fiscal year's budget, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to eliminate 14,000 to 18,000 city jobs over the next year and a half by offering payments to certain workers to quit, administration officials said yesterday.
The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that the administration had already identified 5,500 positions to be cut.
It intends to identify for elimination another 5,000 to 6,000 jobs by late April, when Mr.
Giuliani presents his executive budget for the 1995 fiscal year, which begins in July.


Central Park Parrots: What Price Freedom?
IN this, the coldest of many winters, a drama of survival involving the least fit and most marginal is being played out by the parrots of Central Park.
There were three of them when the days turned chill, pets that had presumably escaped together at summer's end when the canopy of leaves provided cover and there was much to eat.
Now after one of the tropical birds was seized and eaten by a red tailed hawk, there are just two left to buck harsh and rising odds.


The Coach They Want Most: Norv Turner
Norv Turner hasn't looked like himself lately.
Maybe it's the pressure cooker of the Super Bowl, but probably it is a combination of that and something else.
After Dallas plays Buffalo in the Super Bowl on Sunday, Turner's life will take a drastic turn.
He will most likely be transformed from the talented Cowboys assistant everyone craves into the head coach of the Washington Redskins.
No wonder the normally lively offensive coordinator has been so subdued.
He has a lot on his mind.


No Headline
We have an ethical, professional, moral responsibility to go forward with this case as a first-degree murder case.
This may cost $1 million.
We are seeking justice and that is what we are going to do, and be damned with how much money it is going to cost. -- GIL GARCETTI, the district attorney in the Menendez case.  [ 1:2. ]


Abstinence Courses Aren't Equally Enlightened; Not by Ads Alone
To the Editor:
"Sex Educators See New Virtue in Chastity" (front page, Jan. 16) credits a $5 million ad campaign promoting abstinence with reducing teen-age pregnancy in California by more than 10 percent in two years.
You also state, "There is no comparable campaign in New York, and the school systems have largely adopted a standard sex education approach."


Blast Levels New Jersey Mall


Rozelle to Skip Sunday's Game
Pete Rozelle, the former National Football League commissioner, will miss a Super Bowl game for the first time Sunday after having had a benign brain tumor removed at New York Hospital in mid-December.
"They got all of the tumor," he said today from his home in Rancho Santa Fe, Calif.
"They thought it was benign even before the operation and it was. I'm not even on radiation."


Classical Music in Review
Cavani String Quartet Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


For Some Teachers, an Unwanted Lesson
After teaching for 14 years in New York City public schools, Laurie Scher thought she had learned all there was to know about bureaucracy.
But then last fall a new computer-payroll system at the Board of Education mysteriously cut her salary by $20,000 a year.
Five months later, she has gone into debt and has been unable to get a mortgage, while still struggling to straighten out the problem.


Religion Notes
Pontiff vs. the Tube
Attorney General Janet Reno did it.
President Clinton did it.
Now Pope John Paul II has taken on television, calling it a major threat to family life and criticizing parents who use the tube as "an electronic baby sitter." The Pope's advice to parents was blunt: "Simply turn the set off."


SPECTRUM INFORMATION STOCK CONTINUES SLIDE
Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., the company headed by John Sculley whose stock price has swung wildly this week, closed yesterday on the Nasdaq at $6.3125, down 6.25 cents for the day and $1 since Monday.
The company's stock price has plunged since reports of a management rift, which was denied, and an inquiry by Federal regulators, which was confirmed.
On Tuesday, nearly 20 million shares changed hands, subsiding to fewer than 4 million shares Wednesday and ending the week at fewer than 2 million shares of trading volume yesterday.
It also became known yesterday that Spectrum on Thursday had quietly hired a well-known outside public relations firm, Howard J. Rubenstein Associates.
It is the fifth public relations firm that the company has hired, but many of those were retained for specific projects, the company said.


After Ruling, Green Point Goes Public
After surviving a hostile takeover attempt, a half-dozen lawsuits and a government rebuke, the Green Point Savings Bank went public yesterday, issuing $804 million in stock just hours before a critical deadline.
It was the largest initial public offering by a bank or savings institution in the last 20 years.


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's visit to an after-school math and science program for girls misidentified the girl at the left.
She was Kelly Stewart.
The caption also included one name erroneously.
Zuleyka Gonzalez was not pictured.


Small Polish Company Wins Major TV License
A small Polish television broadcaster, in which Rupert Murdoch had expressed an interest, has won a license to operate the country's first private, nationwide television network, according to Government regulators.
In the surprise ruling on Thursday, the company, PolSat, won the license against big, well-known rivals that included Time Warner, Capital Cities/ABC, Reuters and Bertelsmann A.G., the German publishing conglomerate.


Corrections
A chart with the Eating Well column in The Living Section on Wednesday about the fat content of prepared vegetarian foods misspelled the brand name of a cheese pizza and misstated the brand's fat and calorie content.
The brand is Totino's, not Tontino's; its 13-ounce pizza contains 900 calories and has 3.2 grams of fat per ounce.


UConn's Coach Is Hospitalized
As the University of Connecticut prepared yesterday for tonight's Big East game at Pitt, the Huskies did so without their coach, Jim Calhoun.
He was being treated for pneumonia at John Dempsey Hospital at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington, Conn.


XXV Bowls Later, No Namath Guarantee
Before anyone could ask a question, Joe Namath looked out at his audience and grinned.
"I've got the Bills winning, 38-30," he said.
"Being an underdog, I know an underdog can win. The key is Buffalo's offensive line. If they give Thurman Thomas a little bit of room and Jim Kelly hits his passes, the Bills can win. But if they give Dallas a lot of plays, it'll be a tough day for Buffalo."


Transactions
Hockey  National Hockey League ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Signed Mike Maneluk, left wing, to a multiyear contract effective at the start of the 1994-95 season.
DALLAS STARS -- Assigned Tommy Sjodin, defenseman, to Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Todd Harkins, center, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
Reassigned Igor Chibirev, forward, to Springfield.
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Agreed to terms with Garth Butcher, defenseman, on a three-year contract.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Recalled Yanic Perreault, center, from St.
John's of the American Hockey League.


The Other Menendez Trial, Too, Ends With the Jury Deadlocked
The six-month trial of Lyle and Erik Menendez for the murder of their wealthy parents ended today in a mistrial with fragmented juries, leaving a tangle of legal, emotional and moral questions.
The jury in the case of the older brother, Lyle, 26, deadlocked today, two weeks after a separate jury deadlocked in the case of 23-year-old Erik.
Both juries agreed that a crime had been committed when the brothers shotgunned their parents to death as they watched television.
But both juries remained divided over whether that crime was murder.


State Justice Ivan Warner, 74; Served 25 Years on Bronx Bench
Justice Ivan Warner of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 74 and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
It was almost more than any one celebrity watcher could absorb when 6,200 members of the Hollywood film industry assembled on Thursday to watch "Commitment to Life," a benefit extravaganza that raised almost $5 million for AIDS Project Los Angeles.
The show was held in the Universal Amphitheater in Universal City, amid monitors flashing the names of people who had died of AIDS.
On stage and in the audience, it was a "Who's Who" of the entertainment business.
There was BARBRA STREISAND, who introduced HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON.
Mrs.
Clinton talked about the President's health-care plan as it relates to AIDS, and told those in the audience who have the virus that causes AIDS: "There is hope. You are not alone."


Finding Windfalls in Quake's Rubble
The earthquake last week virtually destroyed Carlos Lara's apartment, and at first, living with his family in the back of his 1979 Oldsmobile, he lamented his misfortune.
But now he concedes the disaster has allowed him to reap a windfall in Government housing aid.
The filthy $400-a-month Hollywood tenement where the Laras lived before the earthquake was a hangout for crack dealers and the scene of a fatal stabbing.
But because Mr.
Lara is broke and unemployed, he qualified for a Federal program that moves poor disaster victims into apartments that would normally be beyond their means and pays most of their rent for 18 months.


Federated Hires Ex-Macy Official for A.&amp;S.
Federated Department Stores Inc., said yesterday that it had hired Harold D. Kahn, a former executive at R. H. Macy &amp; Company, to head its Abraham &amp; Straus chain.
The announcement confirmed earlier news reports from the retail community, which regarded the selection of Mr.
Kahn as somewhat unusual considering that Federated is seeking a merger with Macy.


New York Republicans Offer Two-Fisted Gun-Violence Answer; Death Penalty Needed
To the Editor:
I read with dismay Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's recommendation of mandating life sentences for third-time violent felons (news article, Jan. 15).


Funeral for Police Officer Killed Chasing Stolen Car


Public &amp; Private; A Woman Scorned
It's a sad but familiar story, the story of the discarded executive wife and the small family business of which she was once a part.
The division of labor was this: He would have an important job, leading to ever more important ones.
And to make sure that this would be so, she would give dinner parties, care for their children and their home, participate in the right charities, construct a life of shared privilege and success.


Oregon Governor Won't Seek Re-election to Second Term
Gov.
Barbara Roberts announced today that she would not seek re-election for a second term.
She cited personal challenges that have impeded her ability to run both the state and a political campaign.
The Governor said she would remain in office until she completed her term next January.
By a slim margin four years ago, Ms.
Roberts, 57, a Democrat, became the state's first woman to be elected Governor.


Professor Advanced Science Education
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 17 obituary article on Bernard D. Davis, Harvard professor and author, was largely devoted to an insignificant 1976 controversy over medical school admissions standards for minorities.
It is tantamount to devoting most of an obituary on Ronald Reagan to his presidency of the Screen Actors Guild.


Images and Action Weighed at Democrats' Retreat
More than 100 House Democrats ended their annual retreat here today after two days of pondering how to pass and sell an ambitious domestic agenda topped by health care, and how to get the credit for it from a public that holds Congress in low regard.
Democratic leaders said they were convinced that the American people wanted and expected an overhaul of the health care system, despite the second-guessing of the interest groups and assertions from some Republicans that there is no health care crisis.


Review/Rock; Dream Pop, Shimmering With Meshed Guitars
Melody buried in noise.
As the 1990's began, that was the recipe for a whole wave of bands, most of them from England, who had seemingly found a way to have their pop tunes and destroy them, too.
It was called dream pop, for its haze of sound, or shoe-gazer rock, because its performers were determinedly self-effacing on stage.
A few years later, the fad has crested, but some bands still think the style has possibilities.
Two of them, Swervedriver (from Oxford, England) and Medicine (from the San Fernando Valley in California) performed on Thursday night at Irving Plaza.


President Appeals to Mayors To Lobby for Anti-Crime Bill
President Clinton today asked more than 100 mayors who met with him at the White House to help him lobby for crime legislation.
Different crime bills are now pending in the House and Senate, and Mr.
Clinton has not endorsed every provision in either version.
But today he reiterated his belief, supported by many city leaders, that adding 100,000 more officers to the nation's police departments would reduce the rate of violent crime.


The Giulianis' Front Burner
Memo: To the Giulianis. Subject: Gracie Mansion's kitchen and dining room.
As Ed Koch's first executive chef -- I created the post in Gracie Mansion in 1977 -- and the person who cleaned Abe Beame's leftover flanken out of the freezer, I have some tips about entertaining.


Football Coach's Tale, Lit-Crit and Hard Hits
Football coaches are supposed to talk about flying wedges, post patterns and safety blitzes.
They're supposed to quote Vince Lombardi and yell and scream a lot.
Aren't they?
They're not supposed to have white hair, eyes that dance and benign smiles, or talk about Dickens and Chaucer and quote Abraham Lincoln.
Are they?


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.00
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.90
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.11
3.03
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.63
5.67
6.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.21
6.26
7.19
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.13
7.18
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.44
5.48
6.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bridge
The Chinese finesse is neither Chinese nor a finesse: It is the lead of an unsupported honor that can gain only if the defense slips and fails to cover the honor.
A related position is the heart layout shown in the diagram.
If South leads the heart queen, he can gain legitimately if West has a singleton jack.
He can also gain Chinese-style if East has a doubleton king and fails to cover the queen.
The deal was played Wednesday night in a social game in Hobe Sound, Fla.
The hostess, sitting South, was Helen Walsh, who has an international reputation as an advocate for people with physical disabilities.
Now a youthful 95, she likes to sit up half the night playing bridge.
She likes to compare her style of play to that of the old-style riverboat gambler, and proved it here with her bidding.
When her overcall was raised, her leap to game was distinctly exuberant, but a modest invitation would have led to the same result.


Boy Hit by Bullet in Home
A 9-year-old Queens boy was hit by a bullet fired through a window yesterday evening while watching television with his father and sister in the family's living room, the police said.
At 9:55 P.M., a bullet shattered the living room window of the home on 96th Street in Elmhurst, and lodged in the boy's neck, a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey, said.
The child, whose name was not released, was taken to St.
John's Episcopal Hospital, where he was in stable condition.


Peres and Arafat to Meet, With 'Lot of Work' to Do
Cautioning that "a lot of work" was still needed to break Israel's negotiation impasse with the Palestinians, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres journeyed to Switzerland today for a potentially critical meeting with Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The Peres-Arafat meeting, planned for Saturday night in Davos, had been billed as a possible breakthrough moment.
Officials at one point had hoped that the two sides were set to clear away the last major differences that have pushed them well beyond their Dec. 13 target date for introducing Palestinian self-rule and starting an Israeli troop withdrawal from the occupied Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


Jurors in Medgar Evers Case Handle Rifle From the Past
For almost a dozen years the high-powered rifle sat ignominiously in the dusty garage of a home here.
But today the high-powered .30-06 Enfield that is believed to have been used to kill the civil rights leader Medgar Evers emerged as one of the few remaining pieces of physical evidence to give a hard edge of reality to the often fuzzy memories and recollections of 31 years ago.
As jurors awkwardly passed the long weapon from one to another in the jury box, Byron De La Beckwith, the man who prosecutors say owned the rifle and who is facing his third trial in the 1963 murder of Mr.
Evers, sat staring and occasionally adjusting the earpiece of his hearing aid.


JAPANESE PREMIER AGREES WITH FOES ON VOTING REFORM
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa saved his job and the reform movement he has come to symbolize early today, announcing that he and his political opponents had reached an eleventh-hour compromise on a broad realignment of Japan's electoral system.
The agreement, reached after a frantic day and night of negotiations, culminated a six-year effort in Japan to pass a framework of anti-corruption measures.
It will also force a redrawing of Japan's electoral map, giving greater representation to urban residents and creating, for the first time, a system in which only one representative is elected from each of 300 districts in the country.


Reuben Mattus, 81, the Founder of Haagen-Dazs
Reuben Mattus, the Polish immigrant who stuck an umlaut on a nonsensical name and parlayed the exotic result into the multimillion-dollar company that sold Haagen-Dazs ice cream, died on Thursday in the North Broward Medical Center in Deerfield Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Mattus, who lived in Cresskill, N.J., was 81.
Mr. Mattus suffered a heart attack while on vacation, said a daughter, Doris Hurley.


Let's Normalize Relations With Vietnam
To the Editor:
In "Tie Vietnam Status to Rights Reform" (letter, Jan. 15), Viet D. Dinh is right to cite Hanoi's abuse of the human rights of its citizens in answer to your Jan. 6 editorial call for lifting the United States economic embargo against Vietnam.
But to say that Buddhism is persecuted goes, I believe, beyond the evidence.
The state's attack is against those Buddhists who want a church independent of state control.


Details Of Gillooly Plea Offer Emerge
Prosecutors will seek a maximum two-year sentence in charging Tonya Harding's former husband, Jeff Gillooly, in the assault against Harding's skating rival Nancy Kerrigan, two lawyers with different interests in the case and a law enforcement official said today.
Under this proposal to charge him with a single count of racketeering, Gillooly would face a jail term of one year less than he faced under the original charge, conspiracy to commit assault, and would not be prosecuted in any other jurisdiction.


Crossroads for China; With Democratic Stirrings Among Chinese, U.S. Is Pressing Beijing on Crucial Choices
Under enormous pressure from the Clinton Administration, China faces a series of decisions that could result in greater freedom of expression and guarantees of basic human rights that Chinese leaders have long considered a potential threat to the survival of Communist Party rule.
Already there seems to be a new surge of democratic activity.


Oil Companies Capitalize On Disruptions in Supplies
Fuel shortages brought on by clean-air regulations, some panic buying and oil companies' reluctance to try to wrest more market share through price wars helped to keep gasoline and diesel fuel prices higher in the last quarter, enabling many oil companies to make money from their refineries.
While the higher prices eventually fell in small increments on the retail and wholesale ends, the prices of crude oil from which the oil companies make their products plunged much faster.


CHRONICLE
BRIGITTE BARDOT became the target of death threats this week after urging television viewers in France to boycott horse meat.
But instead of backing off in the face of the threats, Miss Bardot appealed in a letter yesterday to the French Agriculture Minister, Jean Puech, to ban the sale of the meat.


Yankees Sign Ojeda As Pitching Insurance
Seeking pitching insurance in case they cannot acquire another quality starter and their young prospects turn out not to be ready for prime time, the Yankees yesterday signed the veteran left-hander Bob Ojeda to a minor league contract.
Although the signing seemed to indicate that the Yankees might no longer be pursuing an ace like Andy Benes or Terry Mulholland or Pete Harnisch to bolster their rotation before spring training, General Manager Gene Michael contended that he was still in quest of a solid starter.


Goalie Skates Into Spotlight
This is the goalie's time.
It was the time of Jack McCartan in 1960 and Jim Craig in 1980.
And now, the United States Olympic hockey team goalie is Mike Dunham, a silent worrier who exudes strength on the ice but who calls his mom when he is riddled with doubt.


No Time to Savor a Special Game
Through the extended winter, a season's worth of hockey games rush by in a blizzard blur, 84 in the regular schedule and then the playoffs, in places like Manhattan and Halifax and San Jose, in all sorts of time zones, in all kinds of climates, at all times of the day and night.
How can any one of them stand out in memory?


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 20 and another article yesterday, both about the takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc., misstated the value for the cash portion of Viacom Inc.'s current bid for Paramount.
Viacom is now offering $107 a share in cash for 50.1 percent of Paramount's stock, not $105 a share.


With Winds of Change, a Quick Thaw
There was spring in the air yesterday but it was still clearly winter on the ground, a combination that meant floods.
The air temperature in Central Park was zero at the low point on Thursday and only 31 degrees when Friday began, but with a strong southerly wind, it soared to 55 degrees later in the day.
The 55-degree gain in a day made a big difference to the people, but as Joseph C. Venuti, a meteorologist at the Penn State Weather Communcations Group, pointed out, "the ground itself is still frozen like a rock."  Melting Snow and Ice
With the warm, moisture-laden air converging here from the Gulf of Mexico and from over the Atlantic, the result was heavy rains falling on soil that would absorb nothing.
Rain melting some of the ice and snow on the ground did not help much either.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP INC., Fairmount, W.  Va., agreed to acquire First Inter-Bancorp Inc., Fishkill, N.Y., the parent of Mid-Hudson Savings Bank, for $56 million in cash.
CHRYSLER CORP., Highland Park, Mich., is investing $80 million at its stamping plant in Twinsburg, Ohio, to make parts for its mini-vans to be introduced in 1995.
NATIONAL MEDIA CORP., Philadelphia, a marketing concern, rejected Valuevision International Inc.'s unsolicited proposal to buy the company.


Bright Economy Report Puts Dow Ahead 19.13
Stocks surged to record highs in a second day of heavy trading yesterday, after the Commerce Department reported that the economy grew at a 5.9 percent pace in the last three months of 1993 -- the best quarterly performance in six years.
But even better was the news, included in the report on the gross domestic product, that inflation remained low, with the increase for the year, by one measure, the lowest since the 1960's.


Hillary Clinton Tells Doctors Crisis in Health Care Is Real
After meeting a woman here who said she could not afford an anesthetic for childbirth next month, Hillary Rodham Clinton told a meeting of doctors today, "No one can come to Nevada without seeing that there is a health care crisis in this country."
She told the doctors that this was one of several painful stories she had heard that "would refute the unfair and in many ways cruel claim that there is no health care crisis."


Drift and Turmoil in Justice Dept.
Attorney General Janet Reno's decision to jettison her deputy on Thursday seemed to be at least partly an attempt to answer rising criticism of her own performance.
But whether the replacement of Philip B. Heymann, the No. 2 official at the Justice Department, will bring substantial improvement at an agency that has drifted indecisively through the first year of the Clinton Administration is uncertain.
Ms.
Reno's aides said today that she had lost patience with Mr.
Heymann's approach and was concentrating on finding a decisive, seasoned professional to succeed him.
But other officials at the Justice Department, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said some of the managerial problems at the department were not entirely Mr.
Heymann's fault.


Shea &amp; Gould Partners Vote to Close Law Firm
One of New York's best-known law firms, Shea &amp; Gould, announced yesterday that it would break up.
The 80 partners voted Thursday night to dissolve the 200-lawyer practice, said a management consultant hired by the firm, Bradford W. Hildebrandt of Somerville, N.J.
Mr.
Hildebrandt said he had recommended the decision, which came on a show-of-hands vote, because of serious discord among the partners.


Avoiding Unnecessary Costs in Switching Among Mutual Funds
A prime attraction of investing with a large family of mutual funds is the ability to shift easily among its offerings -- from a conservative stock fund to an international fund to a short-term bond fund.
Even a moderate amount of switching, however, can rack up costs -- sometimes unnecessarily.


Philadelphia Firefighters Find a Shoulder to Lean On


Sprint in Polish Venture
The Sprint Corporation, the third-largest long-distance telephone operator in the United States, has joined a joint venture with R. P. Telekom S.A., a private company based in Warsaw, to construct the first independent telephone network in Poland.
Sprint is to invest $15 million for a 25 percent stake in the joint venture.
The company plans to install 125,000 telephones in two regions of Poland in the next year.
It said it would use fiber-optic cable that would double as a cable television carrier.


Field Goals Are Up . . . Up But N.F.L. Says: No Good
If you thought that National Football League teams were kicking more field goals than ever this season, you were right.
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue wants to change that, to get more touchdowns and fewer field goals, and he said the addition of a 2-point conversion option might help.
In his annual state-of-the-league address today, Tagliabue acknowledged that the endless string of field goals had become a concern.
His idea is that the option of a 2-point conversion would make the field goal less important.


DIALOGUE: 'Three Strikes' -- Two Views; Harsh, Sure, But Fair
Violence has shattered the order of our civilized life like a bullet through the living room window.
In response, political leaders across the country have offered a spectrum of tough new laws.
One in particular has gained attention everywhere.
In New York, we call it "three strikes and you're in." It would put those convicted of three violent felonies behind bars for life, with no possibility of parole.
Nearly 30 states are considering some version of this law, and President Clinton in his State of the Union address proposed such a measure for violent Federal offenses.
In all its many variations, the idea has received widespread support, and on both sides of the political aisle.


New York Republicans Offer Two-Fisted Gun-Violence Answer
To the Editor:
"Bipartisan Pistol Denial" (editorial, Jan. 23), on growing handgun violence, is right on the mark.


Behind the Tinted Windows; Life Styles of the Middle Class and Obscure Now Include the Occasional Limousine
On a Wednesday evening, a stretch limousine glided through the crowded streets of Manhattan, stopping at some of the usual destinations of the rich and famous in New York: Bergdorf Goodman, the Plaza and Tavern on the Green.
But behind the tinted windows of this particular 24-foot-2-inch vehicle, snuggled in the leather seats and sipping highballs from the limousine's bar, were not stars of screen or stage, scions of oil fortunes or up-and-coming Wall Street traders.


In a Venerable French City, the Comic Book Seeks a Future
This proud city, a landmark in Roman and medieval Aquitaine, has in recent years become the comics capital of Europe.
Its annual International Comics Festival, now in its 21st year, was visited regularly by Jack Lang, when he was the Socialist Minister of Culture, and once, in 1985, by President Francois Mitterrand himself.
The Socialists even managed to build an imposing museum, the National Comics Center, with post-modern architecture embracing the ruins of a 19th-century paper mill.
But a visit to this year's festival, which started on Thursday and continues through Sunday, revealed a curious blend of vitality, charm and anachronism.
Though by now a recognized literary tradition in France -- and worldwide, too, to judge by rampant sales in Japan and the Pulitzer Prize for Art Spiegelman's "Maus" -- the comic book shows signs of age.
Or maybe its apparent senescence is merely the way it is celebrated in Angouleme.


Shared Police Units
In a first step toward merging New York City's three police forces, the Giuliani administration is seeking to consolidate the administrative offices, emergency services and detective bureaus of the New York Police Department, the housing police and the transit police by July 1, senior city officials said.
They said the change would free some officers from administrative posts to be added to street patrol.
Article, page 21.


O'Rourke Attacks Proposal to Reroute Air Traffic From Newark
The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, today attacked a plan by a New Jersey citizens' group to reroute flights from Newark International Airport over Staten Island, Long Island and Westchester.
Reacting to a map showing a proposed flight path going directly across central Westchester, Mr.
O'Rourke called the plan, which is under study by the Federal Aviation Administration, "outrageous, unfair and probably unsafe."


Review/Dance; A Site-Specific Work With Apparel Optional
In "Stucco Moon," a visually striking dance piece, Douglas Dunn remains openly wedded to the experimental devices that were commonplace in the 1960's and 70's.
The work, which varies from site to site, was given its New York premiere on Thursday night and is to be repeated through Sunday at La Mama Annex Theater (74A East Fourth Street).
Mr.
Dunn has presented "Stucco Moon" in a gymnasium in Minneapolis and in a proscenium setting in Portland, Ore.


After the Earthquake, Insurance Pays (a Little)
When Lisa Fremer, a business manager for the music industry, and her son, Ross, regained their composure after the Los Angeles earthquake, they discovered that they were rather lucky.
They were both unhurt.
Their 1,500-square-foot Sherman Oaks home, in the San Fernando Valley, was still standing, while other houses within blocks had collapsed.
But the house and its contents were damaged, and the financial impact was serious.
Even though Ms.
Fremer has carried earthquake insurance since 1984, at a cost of $775 a year, the policy's high deductible means many repairs to her house and the replacement of many household items will have to be made out of pocket.
Rejected for a loan from the Federal Emergency Management Agency because of her income level, Ms.
Fremer will probably borrow from other sources to make up the differences.


The New Colossus: American Culture As Power Export
Spielbergian Dinosaurs devouring entire national film industries at a single gulp!
Silver-haired villains and sloe-eyed ingenues setting new soap-opera standards for political incorrectness as half the world watches!
Teen-agers from Bangkok to Beirut wearing Chicago Bulls caps backwards and lamenting Michael Jordan's retirement!
Smoke bombs and lasers and thrusting pelvises and outraged clerics and intellectuals from Paris to Teheran to Beijing denouncing Michael Jackson and Madonna!
As the millennium approaches -- "Angels in America" is also big worldwide, but rather higher of brow -- American popular culture has never been more dominant internationally, nor more controversial.
American cultural exports swell at least some of us with pride and help reduce the trade deficit.
Serious money is involved; this is America's second-biggest export after aircraft.
But just as some Americans have doubts about our pop culture -- its propensity to celebrate violence, sexual stereotyping and sheer lowest-common-denominator crassness -- those doubts multiply abroad, especially when the imports are seen as a threat to local cultural identity.


The Big Bouquet
THE CULTURE OF FLOWERS  By Jack Goody.
Illustrated. 462 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cloth, $59.95.
Paper, $18.95.


Money and Metaphysics: New-Age Wall Street
WALL STREET has traditionally been home to bulls and bears.
But lately, more extraordinary beings are finding their way to the trading rooms and executive suites of the city's financial community.
These are the psychics, hypnotists and astrologers who bring an extra dimension to the already arcane science of investing money.
Call it a foolish fad, but believers claim that billions of dollars are managed by people who consult planetary movements in advance; and some 27.5 million Americans review the stars to make decisions, according to a 1990 Gallup poll.
No one has calculated how many do so for investments, but a mini-industry has emerged around New-Age Wall Street.
Consider: A hotel near the stock exchanges is offering a new guest service, a tarot card reader.
At the Wall Street Hypnosis Center, 165 William Street, a dozen or so traders visit monthly to keep their unconscious minds honed for split-second decisions.
And at the New York Astrology Center, Eighth Avenue at 37th Street, computers and stars are used for investment advice.


For Many in Oregon, Harding Is Still Hero
From her position along the rail of the ice rink in the Clackamas Town Center mall, Marien Gammon spotted a pair of little girls in tutus and shook her head.
"Starts out cute, doesn't it?" she said.
No doubt Tonya Harding looked much the same way 20 years ago when her figure-skating career began.
And in some ways, she appears not so much different now, training for the Olympics next month in Norway despite an ongoing investigation into the assault on her rival, Nancy Kerrigan, and the possibility she might be removed from the United States Olympic team.
Already, four men, including her former husband, have been charged in the case, and she has admitted waiting several days to contact authorities after she learned people close to her were involved.


Katherine Bishop, Thomas Wyckoff
Katherine Ann Bishop, a daughter of Henry and Barbara Bishop of Fairfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Thomas Clinton Wyckoff, the son of James S. Wyckoff of Fort Myers, Fla., and Judith W. Wyckoff of Elmira, N.Y.
The Rev.
Alida W. Schuchert officiated at the Greenfield Hill Congregational Church.
The bride, 26, graduated from Bucknell University.
She is a manager in the cosmetics department at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.


Nurturing a Passion For the Designs Of a Modernist
THE SCOTTISH DESIGNER Charles Rennie Mackintosh may have been one of the pioneers of Modernism.
But when Thomas Howarth, a British architect, arrived in Glasgow in 1939, he knew virtually nothing about him.
A year later, while teach ing there, Mr.
Howarth was invited to deliver a lecture on the then-all-but-forgotten architect and designer, whose austere buildings and eccentrically furnished tearooms had transformed parts of Glasgow at the turn of the century.
Immersing himself in the subject, Mr.
Howarth gave a spirited talk based on his interviews with friends and colleagues of Mackintosh, who had died nearly penniless at age 60 in 1928.
Encouraged to expand his research into a doctoral dissertation, Mr.
Howarth did so and went further: His biography, "Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Modern Movement," was published in 1952.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Paula Williams; When Bed-and-Breakfast Inns Team Up
NINE years ago, after the divestiture of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Paula Williams left the company and started a modest bed-and-breakfast in a Victorian mansion that she and her husband, Joe Mulay, restored and named the Whistling Swan Inn.
Six years later, with her business booming, Ms.
Williams added more bedrooms.
Mr.
Mulay took early retirement from his own job at A.T.&amp; T. to help his wife full time.


Now, Dallas Feels at Home
Mavericks 108, Kings 101
The Dallas Mavericks found out what it felt like to be in a winning home locker room last night.
They halted their N.B.A.-record streak for homecourt futility at 19 games, following Jim Jackson's 24 points to a 108-101 victory over Sacramento.


The Hatman Closeth
For the last six years, the old commercial strip of brownstones approaching the piers on Atlantic Avenue has been the home of Vesture, a millinery store whose big front window is filled with white styrofoam heads wearing brightly colored hats, ranging from the outlandish to the simple beret, their tones dulled by the grime on the glass.
But recently, hot pink and lime-green posters shouting "Lost Our Lease" and "Everything Must Go" joined the hats.


Post-Quake California Will Recreate a Transportation System; The Big Shake-Up
To the Editor:
The many pronouncements that the Northridge, Calif., earthquake was only "moderate" stem from a pervasive misunderstanding of the Richter scale's limitations.
It gauges the total force released, not how violent the shaking is on the surface.


Denali Waivers
To the Editor: My husband and I had an experience similar to the Larsens' and the Hooples' in Denali Park in Alaska (Practical Traveler, Aug. 22, and Letters to the Editor, Oct. 31) -- but with a very different outcome.
We, too, signed up for a rafting trip and were asked to sign a waiver.
My husband, who is an attorney, agreed with the attorney on Mr.
Hoople's trip that this kind of waiver would not stand up in court.
We went on the trip and had an exciting and wonderful time.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ESSAYS  THE DAY OF THE DEAD  And Other Mortal Reflections.
By F. Gonzalez-Crussi.
Harcourt Brace, $19.95.


On Sunday; Gently Pressing For Women In Priesthood
CRITICS and friends may think combining feminism and the Catholic Church is a non-starter, a fruitless pursuit, for Nancy Small.
But the 31-year-old church organizer, armed with a master of divinity degree, thinks she and a score of like-minded scholarly women, busy in some shadowy church activities, are on the cusp of the priesthood.
That's right, the Catholic priesthood -- one of the longest-lived male bastions, two millennia old, and enduring in its power, whatever modern challenges and scandals arise.
Feminism would not seem to get much more radical than that: intimations of the priestess for a church ever dedicated to male hierarchy.
Ms.
Small, however, recognizes the "radical feminist" accusation from offended Catholics as too easy a label of dismissal of women intent on the sacramental ministries.
They are no more radical, she argues and increasingly preaches, than Lydia, an overlooked Christian who aided the great apostle Paul.
In asserting her role as a pioneer church organizer, Lydia "would not take no for an answer," to quote a scrap of scripture dear to Ms.
Small.


Keeping a Vista in the View
The view.
Along with the brownstone, it is the defining quality of Brooklyn Heights, an improbable sweep of urban beauty fiercely loved and protected through years of development talk.
Now, state and local officials have taken a significant step toward preserving the neighborhood's treasured visual link to lower Manhattan.
They have reached an understanding that would discourage high-rise development of five piers along 64 acres of prime waterfront.


Guides Worth Carrying To Tokyo and Kyoto
ANYONE who is about to make a first trip to Tokyo, Kyoto, or both faces a potential quandary when it comes to choosing good guidebooks from the dozens available.
Trial and error has taught me that the sensibility of the author, or authors, is far more important in a guidebook than the publisher's brand name.
The best guides to Tokyo and Kyoto, I have found, are written by people who have spent considerable time in Japan or who are Japanese.
Their books evoke the rich atmosphere of Japanese culture rather than merely describe it and the points of interest they choose to discuss are more than stops on an itinerary.
If you want a single practical guide that will get you around Tokyo and Kyoto, the best volume is the revised edition of June Kinoshita and Nicholas Palevsky's "Gateway to Japan," published in 1992.
It covers the entire country, but includes detailed sections on Tokyo and Kyoto.
In fact, the Tokyo portion was issued separately in 1993 under the title "Gateway to Tokyo."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Frigid Patrol
ROLAND STERN is a member of the Suffolk County Police Polar Bear Club.
Not of his choosing.
"The club's for any officer who falls in the water between November and April," said Deputy Inspector Douglas S. Matulewich, head of the marine bureau.


A Warm Snap


France Tells U.S., 'I Oppose, Therefore I Am'
WHEN Charles de Gaulle wrote to Lyndon B. Johnson to announce France's withdrawal from the military command of NATO and to request the removal of American soldiers in France, Secretary of State Dean Rusk pointedly asked the French President, "Does that include the dead Americans in military cemeteries as well?"
Almost three decades later, the tetchiness between the United States and France has not disappeared.
The exasperation that once led Eisenhower to inveigh against "those damn French" has recently erupted over issues as various as agricultural trade and suggestions that the "Jurassic Park" dinosaurs may be agents of marauding American cultural imperialism.


Ellen H. Marcus, Eric D. Marcus
Ellen Hynda Marcus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred H. Marcus of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Eric David Marcus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rubin H. Marcus of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Richard Thaler will officiate at the Pavillion at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The Marcus families are not related.
The bride, 30, is the acting assistant commissioner for policy, planning and quality assurance at the New York City Department of Health.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Nancy E. Marcus, is the office manager of the Gardner L. Grant Company, a real estate investment service in White Plains.


No Headline
"The impression has been created that the easiest way to disrupt a peacekeeping operation is to kill Americans." KOFI ANNAN, an Under Secretary General of the United Nations.  [ 10:4. ]


Real-Life Runway
There were two distinctly different fashion showings during the men's wear presentations in New York last week.
The first was the designers' projections of fall fashions.
The second was the informal parade of fashion professionals who attended the shows.
What they wore was a blend of function and flair.
The older men in the audience were bound to the traditional business look of suits, shirts and ties.
But the new generation disposed of the 20th-century noose -- the necktie -- as they moved toward the millennium with a style of dress based on layers of active sportswear color-coordinated to highlight fabric textures.
Some young men required by business dress codes to wear suits diffused tradition by wearing sportswear over them.
The new wave was articulated by Kevin Stewart, center, a fashion editor for Details magazine.
He wore a T-shirt with gray flannel trousers and a dashingly tied paisley silk scarf with a pewter-gray shearling coat.
The effect was a refined, nonchalant casualness.


Cold Spell After Half Dooms Seton Hall
He was not the leading scorer, or even the leading performer.
But Danya Abrams was definitely a presence today in the Boston College-Seton Hall game, won by the Eagles, 70-58, before a crowd of 8,606.
Abrams is the 19-year-old freshman from Westchester, a not-so-svelte 6-foot-7-inch, 266-pound forward who can throw his weight around and who represented a recruiting coup for Coach Jim O'Brien.


Coming to Grips With an Original In Fort Worth
ART HISTORY HAS ITS professional secrets as well as its public icons, and the best kept secret of 17th-century scholarship is unquestionably Ludovico Carracci.
Together with his younger and better known cousin, Annibale Carracci, and with Caravaggio, he was one of the founders of Baroque painting.
With an exhibition of 34 works at the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth (through April 10), the secret is out, and Ludovico moves -- at last -- into the public limelight.
Until now only the most assiduous visitors to American museums have even had the opportunity of becoming acquainted with Ludovico's work.
There is, it is true, a picture of haunting beauty at the National Gallery in Washington, but after that it is necessary to go to Raleigh, N.C., or to the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., to see a major painting by the artist.
There is nothing in Boston or Philadelphia, and nothing even at the Metropolitan Museum.


Jan. 23-29: Prepping for Surgery; A La-La-Pop for Kids Leaves a Sour Taste
"What an incredibly dumb idea," said Dr.
Sidney Wolfe, head of the Public Citizen Health Research Group.
His target: a narcotic-laced lollipop intended to calm children before surgery and given conditional approval by the Government in October.
Dr.
Wolfe is leading a group of doctors who petitioned the Food and Drug Administration last week to keep the raspberry lollipop, called Oralet and made by Abbott Laboratories, out of hospitals.
Backers said the lollipop -- loaded with fentanyl, a potent opiate -- would offer doctors a safer, less painful way to sedate kids.
Now they're often calmed by injection or drug mixtures.
But opponents say fentanyl is too dangerous for children, and the lolly could easily be abused by addicted doctors.
PHILIP J. HILTS


Indian Objects, Full of Spirit
ALL the American Indian baskets, ceramics, clothing, jewelry and toys in a current show at the Montclair Art Museum were made by women.
Their exquisite work is largely anonymous, studded with symbolic motifs and well made to endure repeated use.
From childhood, the women were taught how to create utilitarian objects for the home and decorate them with quills, bone, shells, glass beads and feathers.
Design motifs often belonged to a specific family and were handed down from mother to daughter.
Men made the implements used for hunting and fighting.


Why Pop-Up Books Pop and Soda Fizzes
THE New York Hall of Science is beginning its spring session of workshops this week for children from pre-kindergarten through eighth grade.
Participants will explore such questions as how pop-up books work, how simple chemical reactions in food contribute to the fizz in soda water and how structures hold their shapes.
The series for preschool children, which has a limited enrollment and includes a snack, starts on Saturday with an examination of the mechanics of three-dimensional books.
"Then they're going to make their own pop-up greeting cards for Valentine's Day," said Rise Tucker, the coordinator of the Discovery Activities Related to Science series.


Cousteau, at 83, Emphasizes the Most Important Species: Mankind
When a wave of explosives, bags of pesticide and drums of acetone washed ashore after recent storms, France turned to the man who has long acted as the conscience of the sea.
And Jacques-Yves Cousteau responded with predictable passion.
"We're faced with vandalism," said the French explorer, who has spent much of his life alerting the world to major changes in the oceans.
"I'm sick of seeing an oil spill every week, of diving down and finding rotten cans and old shoes, sick of detonators and toxic barrels on the beaches."


The World; Russian Reform Lingers Near Life
MOURNING the death of "shock therapy" in Russia overlooks one fact: It never really came alive.
Yes, there were big shocks at the outset, when President Boris N. Yeltsin's chief architect of market reforms, Yegor T. Gaidar, freed prices in January 1992 and tried to starve state-owned industries into submission by simply withholding money.
But by the spring of 1992 the Government was already in tactical retreat, and the subsequent history of reform has been one of spurts and setbacks, compromises and waffling.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Bonnie Raphael works in cages, barns and fields treating patients who complain in grunts, growls and roars.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Heard on New-Age Wall Street: "Take two meditations and call me in the morning."


In America; An Embargo in the Dark
The lights come on, sort of, around 2 o'clock each morning in the Port-au-Prince office of the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees.
It's a dim and feeble effort and it doesn't last long.
By 4 A.M. the electrical power to the coalition's office is exhausted and the lights go out for the remainder of the day.
Because of an international oil embargo, Haitians get only about two hours of electricity a day.
It's almost as if an entire country of seven million people were living in a permanent blackout.
When the sun goes down, the increasingly demoralized population is consigned to a dreary and fearful darkness.


SUNDAY, January 30, 1994; Most Human Guinea Pig?
The capybara, the world's largest rodent, is a relative of the guinea pig and more closely related to people than other rodents and real pigs.
So?
So a letter in the Jan. 8 issue of The Lancet suggests that although pigs have been the source of choice for organ transplants to people (after primates of one sort or other), the big rodent might be better.
"Why not the capybara?" asks the Lancet headline.
Ask the capybara.


Journal; The Road to Neverland
During the brief vogue for the movie "Indecent Proposal" last year, couples nationwide argued about whether it was right for a woman to sleep with Robert Redford in exchange for a million bucks.
My wife and I never resolved this issue -- we wouldn't mind a house in the country, actually -- but since the offer wasn't on our table, we pressed on.
Yet until the nasty whispers started spreading, few debated the wisdom of real-life parents who turned over their children to Michael Jackson in exchange for shopping sprees at Toys "R" Us, special Disneyland tours and overnights at Neverland Ranch, a sort of Playboy Mansion for tots.
Mr.
Jackson, by far a bigger star than Robert Redford, couldn't possibly be up to no good.


Finally, There's Lots of Snow, But the Cold Deters Skiers
FROM the very beginning, Connecticut ski operators have thrived on cold weather, mainly because it enabled them to produce artificial snow, which has become the staple of their existence.
So it was somewhat unusualwhen skiers called Mohawk Mountain in Cornwall in mid-January and were greeted with a recording that promised higher temperatures were on the way.
That was because many skiers, particularly beginners, have been kept away from the slopes much of this month by extremely low temperatures and even lower wind-chill factors.
In addition, ski operators were unable to capitalize on what they refer to as "the snow-in-the-backyard" syndrome during the cold wave -- meaning that most people do not think about skiing until they see snow on the ground where they live.


SUNDAY, January 30, 1994; List: Internet Hot Spots
For Internet newcomers, or the nondigital curious, here are some personal recommendations from Peter Wayner, a consulting editor at Byte magazine, teacher of computer science at Georgetown University and "soldier in Gore's army." These are the names of news groups and mailing lists, which are collections of messages on particular topics.
Computer users with Internet access can send in (by modem) their own material and collect thoughts and discussions from others.  comp.risks: Deep talk about what happens when things go bad between computers and the people who love them -- space probe glitches, aviation problems, crashes both physical and digital.


Both Sides Battered Over Strike
In a struggle that has taken on symbolic significance, the lockout at Chinatown's only unionized restaurant is dragging into its sixth month, with both sides battered but resolute.
Every lunch and dinner hour, pickets march at the Silver Palace at 50 Bowery, as they have since management shut them out on Aug. 19.
The restaurant, which opened in 1976 as Chinatown's first giant dim sum parlor and banquet hall, continues to discount prices 30 percent to draw customers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a column on Jan. 16, "If You're Thinking of Living in Harrison," misstated the town's relationship with the sculpture garden at Pepsico headquarters.
The town does not contribute to maintaining the sculpture garden.


Rain Causes Flooding in Lower Great Lakes


USAir Is Latest to Offer More Flights for Less
USAir has become the latest carrier to pledge that it will offer travelers more of what they want on short flights: greater frequency and lower fares.
The airline is hoping this combination will draw passengers and make more productive use of crews and planes.
USAir is following Southwest Airlines and Continental Airlines in offering this few-frills, low-fare service.
More airlines are expected to follow suit.


Could One Victory Ever Mean More?
The Super Bowl and the Buffalo Bills.
We have this pair once again this afternoon here in the Georgia Dome in Super Bowl XXVIII.


Copeland's Cooks On 125th Street
Copeland's, one of Harlem's best-known restaurants, is planning to open a branch on 125th Street, a thoroughfare that is long on bustle and short on dining opportunities.
The owner, Calvin Copeland, started his small dynasty with a fried-chicken outlet on West 145th Street in 1970, eventually turning it into a cafeteria.
In 1981, he expanded next door with a sleek restaurant that is still serving everything from chitterlings and pigs' feet to champagne.


Woman Favored as Finland President
When Elisabeth Rehn joined a televised debate among Finland's 11 presidential candidates last month, a questioner demanded to know what she was doing there.
As the nominee of a tiny party composed mostly of Swedish-speaking Finns, Mrs.
Rehn surely did not believe that she had a serious chance of winning, she was told.
But this month she confounded political experts here by finishing a strong second in the first round of balloting.
She is now the odds-on choice to win the runoff on Feb. 6 and become Finland's first woman to serve as president, after serving as the country's first female Defense Minister.


Giuliani to Use Layoff Threat to Demand Union Concessions
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani intends to use its plans to cut New York City's municipal work force by 14,000 to 18,000 jobs as a bargaining tool for union concessions on productivity and work rules, an administration official said yesterday.
The official said that if the unions agreed to some of the changes, which could save the city millions of dollars each year, the administration would not have to resort to as many reductions through the severance packages or other layoffs.


The Warring of the Green
For almost two decades, Park Slope's annual St.
Patrick's Day parade has escaped the bitter clashes that have become associated with Manhattan's Fifth Avenue march.
But this year, a sudden breath of discord is sweeping from Park Slope to Bay Ridge, as plans for an insurgent parade take shape.


Taiwan to Drop Visas For Americans' Visits
Starting this month, citizens of the United States and 11 other countries were allowed to enter Taiwan without a visa for visits of up to five days.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Bonnie Raphael works in cages, barns and fields treating patients who complain in grunts, growls and roars.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Heard on New-Age Wall Street: "Take two meditations and call me in the morning."


The Nation; When Is Protest Not Protest? When You Call It Extortion
PROF.
G.
ROBERT BLAKEY of the University of Notre Dame law school was naturally discouraged when the Supreme Court held that anti-abortion protesters could be sued under the Federal racketeering law.
He had argued their case before the Court.
But there was more to it.
As a Senate staff counsel 25 years ago, Mr.
Blakey was a principal drafter of the law known as RICO, and last week he said it wasn't supposed to work out this way.
Two liberals on the Senate Judiciary Committee, Philip A. Hart of Michigan and Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, approached Chairman John L. McClellan, Mr.
Blakey recalled.
They supported the bill, with one reservation: "They said, 'Richard Nixon is going to use and abuse this law against antiwar demonstrators.' McClellan turned to me and said, 'Bob, change it.' "


Why Pop-Up Books Pop and Soda Fizzes
THE New York Hall of Science is beginning its spring session of workshops this week for children from pre-kindergarten through eighth grade.
Participants will explore such questions as how pop-up books work, how simple chemical reactions in food contribute to the fizz in soda water and how structures hold their shapes.
The series for preschool children, which has a limited enrollment and includes a snack, starts on Saturday with an examination of the mechanics of three-dimensional books.
"Then they're going to make their own pop-up greeting cards for Valentine's Day," said Rise Tucker, the coordinator of the Discovery Activities Related to Science series.


Say What You Will
To the Editor:
Calvin Woodard rightly questions the arguments of Stanley Fish, Catharine MacKinnon and Cass Sunstein.
He refers to us as "becoming a nation of lawyers." That point combines with technology to raise more problems than could possibly be solved by the authors' proposals to abridge the First Amendment.


Mutual Funds; Putting Money Behind Your Beliefs
MORE and more religions are getting mutual funds.
Besides funds long available to Lutherans and Muslims, there are three new offerings from the Catholic Foundation, the Mennonite Mutual Aid Society and B'nai B'rith.
Some of them take their cues from sacred texts, others use guidelines on socially responsible investing.
The two groups with track records have been mostly competitive so far.


Holy Bull Goes Front and Center at Hutcheson
They may be the best bunch of Triple Crown candidates in nearly 40 years, and there will be no primping or posturing when five of them take their first steps on the road to the Kentucky Derby on Sunday in the Hutcheson Stakes at Gulfstream Park.
They will do it, though, without the champion of the class, Dehere, who came down with a stomachache this morning and was scratched from the race.
His owner, Robert Brennan, reported that Dehere had suffered an attack of colic but said the colt would rejoin the other stars of the 3-year-old class in three weeks when they gather at Gulfstream for the Fountain of Youth Stakes, the second major test on the long road to the classics.


Mayor Fills Two Top Land-Use Positions
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani turned yesterday to two veterans of New York City land-use battles -- and Democrats at that -- to head the Environmental Protection Department and the City Planning Commission and Planning Department.
He named Marilyn G. Gelber, 48, Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
She has been executive assistant to Borough President Howard Golden of Brooklyn since 1987.
Ms.
Gelber inherits an agency that will be struggling to safeguard the city's upstate water supply and to deliver the water through an aging and fragile network of mains.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; India: Only Pirates Are Even in the Game
India has the world's largest film industry; American movies come here sporadically and play in very few theaters.
"Jurassic Park" was released in Hindi this month, only the third American movie to be dubbed for release -- the others were "King Kong" and "Gandhi." Virtually all American movies are watched on pirated videos, and stores in Delhi were offering "Carlito's Way" and "The Fugitive" last year.
India got its first bite of Western television by satellite in 1991; young entrepreneurs with eight-foot dishes wire up fly-by-night cable systems.


IN SHORT: FICTION
NEW ORLEANS INTRIGUE VOODOO DREAMS A Novel of Marie Laveau.
By Jewell Parker Rhodes.
St.
Martin's, $22.95.


In Favor of Golfing At Liberty State Park
Regarding the Jan. 9 letters to the New Jersey editor on a proposed golf course at Liberty State Park: Thousands of people feel the golf course is the only way to raise revenues to develop the entire Liberty Park for all the people.
At the last public hearing before Commissioner Scott Weiner, it was established without contradiction that Hudson County has some 18,000 golfers, who spend their money elsewhere because Hudson County has no golf course of any kind.


Shhhh! From White Noise to Entirely Soundproofed Walls
REDUCING noise in a house is fairly easy and inexpensive.
But complete soundproofing is difficult and usually expensive, because it usually involves major remodeling.
A simple strategy for combating noise to sleep or concentrate is to use a "white noise" generator.
The device, which sells for about $60 and can fit under a bed, produces a gentle rushing sound that helps block noises like traffic and voices by masking them.


North Korea Warns U.S. on Patriot Missiles
North Korea has denounced the Clinton Administration's plan to deploy Patriot antimissile batteries as an "unpardonable, grave military challenge" and said that such a move could disrupt the negotiations over North Korea's nuclear program.
North Korea included a warning that the deployment would "increase the danger of war." But the statement, made on Friday, was no more scathing than others aimed at American strategy issued in the past, and officials here doubted that North Korea would use the deployment of the Patriot missiles as an excuse to break off talks.


Hall of Fame Taps 5 Players and Coach for Class of '94
Tony Dorsett, Randy White, Jackie Smith, Jimmy Johnson and Leroy Kelly, all former players, were elected today to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
So was Bud Grant, the retired coach.
Johnson is not the Dallas Cowboys' head coach, but a former San Francisco 49ers cornerback (1961-76).
He is the younger brother of Rafer Johnson, the 1960 Olympic decathlon champion and boyhood hero.


An Alternative to Sludge Plants: Move It Out
Although nobody in Maspeth wants it, city officials are busily designing a $300 million sewage sludge composting plant to be built there under a Federally imposed deadline.
But because of the opposition, the city has also started drafting a substitute proposal to not build the plant and instead to transport the sludge residue out of town.
"We would be firing off fireworks of joy if that happens," said Francis J. Principe, a leading critic and president of the West Maspeth Local Development Corporation.
Despite the city's denials, he said the plant would create offensive odors and pose health hazards: "It's still human excrement and highly contaminated. I'm hopeful we can stop the plant, but we're far from out of the woods."


After Florio, Localities Fear Impact Of Aid Cuts
For New Jersey's patchwork of boroughs, townships, school districts and county governments, Jim Florio's term as Governor was a time when state aid to local governments flowed freely.
That legacy will make it harder, local officials say, for Christine Todd Whitman to put the state on a fiscal diet.
As Mrs.
Whitman sits down to draw up a budget to cut state spending and state income taxes, she will be faced with a local budgeting system that was vastly changed by her predecessor.
During his term, Mr.
Florio shifted billions in state aid to localities and school districts, allowing local property taxes to stabilize and, in many cases, to fall even as local spending continued to rise.


Data Bank/January 30, 1994
Data Bank/January 30, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
2.2
2.3
2.6
Consumer Confidence
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
1985=100
83.2
79.8
71.9
Gross Domestic Product
IV Q'93
III Q'93
II Q'93
Change in percent
5.9
2.9
1.9
3-Month Treasury Bills
Jan. 28
Jan. 21
Jan. 14
Rate in percent
2.92
2.94
2.96
Steel Production
Jan. 21
Jan. 14
Jan. 7
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,670
1,892
1,894
Weekly Jobless Claims
In thousands
309
365
357
Coal Production
Jan. 14
Jan. 7
Dec. 31
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
19,694
18,311
14,660
Paperboard Production
Dec. 24
Dec. 17
Dec. 10
Thousands of tons
836.3
835.7
834.0


The Eyes of Texas Are on the Bills' Thomas
Buffalo center Kent Hull has a theory about the Bills' offense and the team's chances for winning.
Let's call it the Thomas Principle.
"If the threat of 34 carrying the football is there, we're a much better football team," he said, referring to running back Thurman Thomas.
"Take away the threat of 34 running the football, make us one-dimensional and I don't know if we're that good a football team. We have to find a way to let him carry the ball."


IN SHORT: FICTION
HISTORICAL NOVEL  CHILD OF ALL NATIONS  By Pramoedya Ananta Toer. Morrow, $22.


No News. Just Another Day in the Soup Line.
AT 11:20 last Monday morning there were 70 people ahead of me in the line for a free lunch at the Church of the Holy Apostles on Ninth Avenue.
I had passed that line more than a dozen times over the past decade, and seen only a dark and distant blur, call it the disadvantaged, the underclass, the homeless, and in these meaner days, the bums.
I was on the line because two days earlier, last Saturday, at a forum about human services, I had heard words like "client" and "provider" and "the community" but not much about who these "recipients" might be.
A "well-run facility," one panelist said, would be "well-nigh invisible."


In U.S. Study, Ethicist Gets A Dream Job
For a professor of ethics, it is the chance of a lifetime, a chance to, as Dr.
Ruth R. Faden puts it, "rewrite the history of ethics and research on human subjects in this country."
Dr.
Faden was named by the White House this week as chairwoman of the Federal advisory committee of experts that has been assigned to assess the history and ethics of the Government's radiation experiments on humans that have been recently receiving so much attention.
It is an a opportunity to review in one stroke the ethical practices of doctors and scientists in the United States over the past half-century and to change the standards for such experiments in the future.


A New Menu With a New Focus in Canaan
NO hype, no hoopla, no press releases.
All the Cannery in Canaan has to offer is delicious, expertly prepared food at moderate prices (no entree more than $18, most between $11 and $15), excellent service that pays attention to details without being intrusive and a low-key atmosphere that is congenial but not splashy.
All this adds up to a real sleeper in the northwest corner of the state.
In a former life as the Cannery Cafe, the emphasis was on Cajun food.
With a new name (goodbye to the word "cafe"), a new subtitle ("An American Bistro"), refreshed decor (lighter, more elegant) and new ownership (chef William O'Meara from Apricots in Farmington and Lisa Sullivan, dessert chef at the previous Cannery and this one as well), the new Cannery also offers a new menu.


Getting on Line Before You Go
PEOPLE with computers, modems and memberships in one or more of the on-line services can act as their own travel agents.
It isn't always easy, and it isn't free, but it can be rewarding.
One can gather information on flight schedules, hotels and automobile rentals; examine a restaurant guide; see if the State Department has issued an advisory about a foreign destination; find visa requirements, and exchange messages with other members.


A Gig at Lincoln Center
Celebrating the 3d season of the center's jazz series. Jan. 26.


Say What You Will
To the Editor:
Calvin Woodard's review of Stanley Fish's "There's No Such Thing as Free Speech," Catharine A. MacKinnon's "Only Words" and Cass R. Sunstein's "Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech" (Jan. 2) is a signal instance of how not to defend our freedoms, abridged though they might be today.
All three authors deserved the severest remonstrance: Mr.
Fish for applying the fallacy of collectivist "rights" to "victims of historic injustices"; Ms.
MacKinnon for advocating the same thing, except in terms of sex; and Mr.
Sunstein for proposing further Government controls on the First Amendment, which is what his "New Deal for speech" would mean.


In Zambia, a Legacy of Graft and a Drug Scandal Taint Democratic Reforms
Supporters describe Vernon Johnston Mwaanga as a charismatic protector.
But to diplomats and opposition leaders, he is one of Zambia's most powerful drug traffickers and a symbol of the corruption that threatens to thwart the country's transformation to a stable democracy.
Last month Mr.
Mwaanga resigned as Foreign Minister, saying he wanted to give the Government time to investigate his allegations of drug dealing and corruption by other Cabinet members.


Katherine Hewitt, Bruce R. Goin
Katherine Whitney Hewitt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Hewitt of Orlando, Fla., was married there yesterday to Bruce Robert Goin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Goin of Tallahassee, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Howard Edington performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Goin, 24, was until recently a speech teacher at Lake Highland Preparatory School in Orlando.
She and her husband graduated from Florida State University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the United American Bank in Orlando.
He was a founding partner in the Orlando Magic basketball team.


No News. Just Another Day in the Soup Line.
AT 11:20 last Monday morning there were 70 people ahead of me in the line for a free lunch at the Church of the Holy Apostles on Ninth Avenue.
I had passed that line more than a dozen times over the past decade, and seen only a dark and distant blur, call it the disadvantaged, the underclass, the homeless, and in these meaner days, the bums.
I was on the line because two days earlier, last Saturday, at a forum about human services, I had heard words like "client" and "provider" and "the community" but not much about who these "recipients" might be.
A "well-run facility," one panelist said, would be "well-nigh invisible."


An Alternative Super Bowl Halftime Activity; The Second-Place, Runner-Up, Not-Quite-There Quiz
LThe Buffalo Bills should be a symbol of tenacity: Tonight they are playing in their fourth straight Super Bowl.
Instead, "Buffalo" has become shorthand for loser because they failed to win in their first three tries at football's championship.
But second place isn't the end of the world.
As the quiz below notes, sometimes the stand-in becomes the star.
Sometimes the also-ran is better known than the front-runner.
Sometimes Nos. 1 and 2 are equally obscure.


Sally Cooke, Ike Lawrence
Sara Mullin Graff Cooke, a preschool teacher in Chestnut Hill, Pa., was married there yesterday to Alexander K. Lawrence, the former president of Marcoa Associates, mortgage brokers in Chestnut Hill.
The Rev.
Charles A. Carter 3d performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Lawrence, who is known as Sally, works at Special Care Inc., a private day care service.
She is a graduate of Bennett College.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Graff of Harrisburg, Pa.


2 Front-Runners Emerge for No. 2 Justice Job
A Pentagon lawyer and a former Federal prosecutor have emerged as front-runners for the No. 2 job at the Justice Department, Clinton Administration officials said today.
Jamie S. Gorelick, who as general counsel is the Pentagon's top lawyer, and Charles F. C. Ruff, a former United States Attorney here, head a list of contenders for the job of Deputy Attorney General, the officials said, after the abrupt resignation on Thursday of Philip B. Heymann, who was Attorney General Janet Reno's chief aide.


Shhhh! From White Noise to Entirely Soundproofed Walls
REDUCING noise in a house is fairly easy and inexpensive.
But complete soundproofing is difficult and usually expensive, because it usually involves major remodeling.
A simple strategy for combating noise to sleep or concentrate is to use a "white noise" generator.
The device, which sells for about $60 and can fit under a bed, produces a gentle rushing sound that helps block noises like traffic and voices by masking them.


Habitats; Kansas, With Boats
THE roads have names like Flying Cloud and Top Gallant.
The directory of owners lists the house number, the children's names and the name of the family boat, with separate symbols for types of boat -- a silhouette of a sailboat next to one family, a silhouette of a power boat next to another.
Kelly and Bob Ramsden say they picked the Dolphin Cove development -- a 22-year-old enclave of 107 houses in Stamford, Conn. -- because it reminded them of Florida, where they lived before Hurricane Andrew wiped them out a year ago last August.


Welcome to -icity City
Nouns, irritated at being turned into verbs at the slightest hat-dropping, have sought vengeance by lashing out at innocent adjectives, forcing them into service as awkward nouns.
At the White House, the Kopfverdrehers (a German word for "mind benders," a variant of spinmeisters) called in the usual suspects before President Clinton's recent trip to Europe and Russia.
Over lunch in what is now called the old Family Dining Room (where Ulysses S. Grant first heard the news of the Credit Mobilier scandal), the bigfeet of the Opinion Mafia were permitted to ask very heavy questions about global conceptual frameworks.


Speaking of the Breakup: What of Bell Labs?
To the Editor:
I found the paired-up articles under the headlines "10 Years After Bell's Breakup -- The Split-Up Worked. No, It Didn't" (Viewpoints, Jan. 23) interesting.


Turning Trash Into Treasure for the Soil
GARDENERS are learning to be good recyclers.
Each year more of them learn that composting is an excellent way to recycle wastes like weeds, leaves, vegetable peelings and grass clippings.
They add the decomposed organic material to soil, even potting mixes, and learn that the compost does wonders.
In fact, the compost has earned such a marvelous reputation, it has gained a new appellation: black gold.
Technology is catching up, ever so slowly though, on this recycling effort.
The problem has always been that too much waste is accumulated with no market to absorb it.
About 40 percent of the solid waste that goes into landfills is paper.
Industry figures indicate that an average person disposes of 1.6 pounds of paper a day.


Major Aftershocks Felt
Buildings and nerves were rocked in Los Angeles as three aftershocks, one registering 5.0 on the Richter scale, struck in the night.
Page 24.


School Copes After Ceiling Collapses
THE effects of recent winter storms linger as more than merely a chilling memory as residents contend with broken pipes, slippery driveways and walkways and disrupted schedules as well as bumpier commuting resulting from potholes creating a lunar surface.
For students and staff at the Rye Neck Middle and High School in Mamaroneck, though, the aftermath of the mid-January storm is likely to affect their activities well into the spring thaw, if not beyond.
More than 60 percent of the school was damaged when part of its ceiling collapsed early in the morning on Jan. 17, which was Martin Luther King Day and the school was closed.


News From Museums
To the Editor:
"Where the Sun Never Sets" (editorial, Jan. 22), describing the exhibitions in New York City's museums, is a breath of much-needed fresh air.
When out-of-town acquaintances dump on New York, I tell them we have more museums, concert halls and cultural opportunities than any other city in the nation.
I wish television and radio news would reduce their coverage of crime and other sordid events, and report more on the city's cultural gifts.
ELI MASON  New York, Jan. 26, 1994


Raw Country, Via Miami
THE FIRST THING ONE IS likely to notice about Raul Malo, lead singer and chief songwriter for the country group the Mavericks, is the beautiful ache in his voice.
When he sings the song that opens his band's new album, "What a Crying Shame," "There goes my heart/Breaking in two," Mr.
Malo breaks the word "two" in half.
His throaty tenor cracks in a quick sob that conveys all the yearning and regret the lyric holds.
From the start, he has established the Mavericks' mastery of melancholy country ballads, and "What a Crying Shame"(MCA MA3p-2907; CD and cassette) only gets better from there.
At a time when the burgeoning country-music industry is chockablock with grinning, good-looking guys and gals eager to please, the Mavericks, who will appear appear on Tuesday at Tramps in Manhattan, aren't afraid to pull long faces and brood at length on the loss of love.
"What a Crying Shame" is a fine paradox: an exhilarating downer.


'Macho' No More: Camacho Looks More Like a Has-Been in His Loss to Trinidad
Boxing's oldest plots are its truest.
Remember this one?
Famous old former champion returns to fight rising young current champion, hoping years of savvy will prevail over eagerness and inexperience.
It rarely works out that way and it sure didn't tonight, when Felix Trinidad embarrassed Hector Camacho and retained his International Boxing Federation welterweight championship with a unanimous 12-round decision.


Keeping a Vista in the View
The view.
Along with the brownstone, it is the defining quality of Brooklyn Heights, an improbable sweep of urban beauty fiercely loved and protected through years of development talk.
Now, state and local officials have taken a significant step toward preserving the neighborhood's treasured visual link to lower Manhattan.
They have reached an understanding that would discourage high-rise development of five piers along 64 acres of prime waterfront.


A Fresh View of Art From the Neuberger's Curator
HER knowing eye appraising the stark white walls, the curator, Cornelia H. Butler, stood in an empty gallery at the Neuberger Museum of Art here and nodded her approval at the arrangement of partitions.
The museum, on the campus of Purchase College, was being readied for the show "Translucent Writings," and the lucid Ms.
Butler would soon be knee deep in 25 years of contemporary art.
Startlingly young for her thick resume of exhibitions and published essays, the 30-year-old Ms.
Butler -- she will be 31 on Tuesday -- has been spicing up the Neuberger for more than a year now, joining her views on the art of today with the expertise of Dr.
Lucinda H. Gedeon, the museum's director, who specializes in 20th-century American and African art.


Is There a Ballet In Rachmaninoff's Symphonic Dances?
FOR ALL THE PERENNIAL popularity of his music, Rachmaninoff doesn't get much respect.
In better musical circles he is treated with condescension.
In the dance world he is largely ignored.
His music, despite its conservative idiom and old Russian flavor, is evidently considered too richly contrapuntal and rhythmically complex to accommodate clean lines of dance, and liable to overpower rather than support a ballet.
"Ten years ago, I listened to the Symphonic Dances," said Peter Martins, the artistic director of the New York City Ballet, referring to the composer's sumptuously orchestrated 35-minute score from 1940.
"At the time I thought it was a big, lush, beautiful piece. But I never thought it could be danced to. It was too symphonic in scope. I didn't really pay much attention to it. I just remember that it was all over the place."


Challenge to Trump Plan Loses
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan has ruled against a coalition of community groups that were suing to stop Donald J. Trump's Riverside South project on an abandoned railyard.
The suit, brought by the owners of several buildings and residents neighboring the site as well as community groups, challenged the enormous mixed-use development on the ground that it violated the terms that Abraham Hirschfeld and his partnership negotiated for the site in 1982.


The Hair Stratosphere
The world of haute coiffure, where a haircut can cost from $100 to $275, is populated with shooting stars who soar for a while and then fade.
A few, like Vidal Sassoon and Jacques Dessange, go on to become businessmen with a string of franchised salons and a profitable line of hair products.
But most are eventually forgotten as new stylists make their reputations.
Kenneth Battelle is, of course, the notable exception.
Famous for giving Jacqueline Kennedy her signature do, he's been going strong since 1947.


INSIDE
City Hall Is Bargaining
The Giuliani administration will use its plans to cut New York City's work force as a bargaining tool for union concessions, an official said.
Page 29.
New Look at Homelessness
Mayor Giuliani appealed for new approaches to homelessness in New York City, warning against oversimplifying the problem.
Page 31.
Drug Scandal in Zambia
Members of Zambia's Cabinet have been accused in a drug-trafficking scandal, threatening the country's transition to democracy.
Page 10.
Pied Piper of Prozac
A professional board has accused a Wenatchee, Wash., psychologist of being too eager to put his depressed patients on Prozac.
Page 16.


Winter Hills, Sledding Sites
BY now you're cranky.
There are holes in your gloves from overuse.
Your car has stalled twice, you've run out of salt, you're so sore from shoveling snow and cracking ice you're missing valuable Stairmaster time at the health club.
Think about sledding.


In Other Words, Just Make It Perfect
From 13 Guiding Principles to Govern Redevelopment on the Downtown Brooklyn Waterfront, compiled by the Brooklyn Bridge Park Coalition. 1a.
The Plan shall celebrate the unparalleled vistas and historic nature of the site with a world-class design affording a spectacular entry into Brooklyn.


Richard Falk, 81, Noted Publicist Known for His Outlandish Stunts
Richard R. Falk, a legendary Broadway publicist who ballyhooed anything and everything in show business putting quotes in the mouths of 10,000 clients, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 81.
He had suffered recently from lymphoma, said his son-in-law, Edward C. Wallace.


That Mess on Hudson Street; Infrastructure Blues: When Neighborhood Improvement Becomes Neighborhood Plague
ASK people in Greenwich Village to name the best thing to happen along Hudson Street since the heavy machinery moved in two years ago, and they're likely to tell you about the chilly Sunday morning last April when Jacqueline Slivko decided she had had enough.
A backhoe was backing and bobbing on her corner -- Hudson as it trundles across Horatio -- its plaintive mechanical beeps jerking her from a deep sleep.
It was 7 A.M., too early for the crew to be working, and on a weekend, no less.
She called the police, who refused to respond, she said.
Then she ran downstairs -- in her nightgown, according to local legend, though Ms.
Slivko insists she was wearing street clothes -- and planted herself near the backhoe.
Evoking, albeit in a far more parochial vein, the Chinese protester who held off a column of tanks near Tiananmen Square, Ms.
Slivko remained there for more than an hour while the backhoe operator yelled at her, a construction supervisor tried to intervene and a neighbor brought her some warm gloves.


In the Region/Westchester; Outpaced by Neighbors, Office Market Struggles
WHILE the Manhattan office market strengthened last year and Connecticut saw lower vacancy rates, Westchester County continues to be particularly hard hit by corporate consolidations, particularly by I.B.M.'s downsizing.
Yet real estate brokers believe that the worst may be behind them.


Listening To Unheard Voices
To the Editor:
James Gardner's critique of political art  [ "Is This Art for People Who Are Not In On the Joke?" Jan. 9 ]  charges that it fails to change the conditions it represents because it does not communicate effectively with those "who would seem to need it most, bigots and chauvinists" -- who, we are left to presume, do not exist in the art world.
On one hand, Mr.
Gardner suggests that "political artists" should not do their art in an art setting.
On the other, when they do their art in public, they should not do it as art.


Bookshelf
THE GIRL WHO CHANGED THE WORLD.
By Delia Ephron.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $13.95. (Ages 8 to 11) Sibling warfare erupts in a contemporary California suburb, as Violet Sparks leads the "youngers" against the obnoxious "olders," especially her brother Simon.
A fast and funny novel that rings with familiar truth, from the humiliating piano recital to the threat of death by tickling.
I AM LAVINA CUMMING.
By Susan Lowell.
Illustrated by Paul Mirocha.
Milkweed Editions.
Cloth, $14.95.
Paper, $6.95. (Ages 8 to 12) Lavina spent her first decade on the family's ranch in the Arizona Territory, but after her mother's death in 1905, she is sent to live with an aunt in Santa Cruz, Calif.
That's where she is on the morning of the great 1906 earthquake.
Well done.


Tower on Tower Records Site?
Consolidating its hold on a corridor of Broadway just north of Lincoln Center, a developer has bought the five-story building between 66th and 67th Streets that houses Tower Records and Tower Video.
The development company, Millennium Partners, has nearly completed Lincoln Square, an austere high-rise across Broadway from Tower whose height, bulk and two-tone brick facade has led to prolonged but futile community opposition.
And the company is tearing down several walk-up buildings, the former Cinema Studio and the Bank Leumi building on the triangular block between 66th and 67th, to build another tower.


Tapping Home Equity to Cushion Old Age
BERNICE STUART, a Minneapolis suburbanite, worked hard most of her life and still didn't know how she was going to make ends meet when she retired in 1988 at the age of 73.
Widowed when her only child was just a year old, Mrs.
Stuart "didn't owe anybody a dime" and had managed to put aside savings in an I.R.A.
But the retirement money all went to nurse her mother through a final illness, leaving her with little apart from Social Security.
"The handwriting was on the wall," Mrs.
Stuart recalls: She would have to sell her three-bedroom house and move into an apartment that lacked space to put up her beloved nieces and nephews.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Brazil: Killer Judges, Just Like America's
In Latin America's largest country, even the toys are American: stores carry tiny Cheyenne tepees, not the forest shelters of the Yanomami.
On screen, violent American action movies dominate, and many Brazilians take them literally.
When Rio de Janiero's military policemen -- who have been known to form death squads that round up homeless children -- were asked who their heroes were, they answered: Charles Bronson and Judge Nicholas Marshall.


One Man's Follies
Though it was written by a cousin and his wife, THE ZIEGFELD TOUCH: The Life and Times of Florenz Ziegfeld Jr. (Abrams, $49.50) reads as though it might have been produced by Flo Ziegfeld himself.
As if it were a show that had been put together by the man considered to be the greatest producer in Broadway's history, what appears at first blush to be just another coffeetable extravaganza proves far more substantial than its opulent illustrations and lavish packaging might suggest.
Richard and Paulette Ziegfeld persuasively argue that Ziegfeld was more than just an extravagant showman; he was also an artist who "raised the revue form progressively from burlesque to vaudeville to art." Ziegfeld began his legendary career in 1893 by promoting Sandow, a circus strongman, in his native Chicago.
Within a few years Ziegfeld had settled in New York, where he produced more than 80 shows before his death in 1932 at the age of 65.
From the start, the authors write, his shows flirted with "the bounds of propriety" and "prompted talk about vulgarity," but in the end "his ability to meld the best of both high and low cultures" had permanently shaped the course of the American theater.
In addition to "The Ziegfeld Follies," his annual signature offering, Ziegfeld produced a wide variety of plays and musical diversions, often showcasing his many mistresses or his long-suffering second wife, Billie Burke.
In the same way that Ziegfeld provided more than simply the titillation his works were famous for, the authors' early peekaboo treatment of Ziegfeld's notorious womanizing and gambling gives way to a deeperanalysis of what such behavior entailed.
The book has many revealing anecdotes, and a veritable who's who of the American theater parades through these pages just as it paraded through Ziegfeld's life.
DAVID KAUFMAN


Ms. Rosenstock, Mr. Kessler
Robyn Faith Rosenstock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Rosenstock of Canton, Ohio, was married there last evening to Jonathan Stuart Kessler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Kessler of Houston.
Rabbi John Spitzer officiated at Temple Israel.
Mrs.
Kessler, 32, is a production planning manager for Aris Isotoner, a clothing accessories manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Ohio State University.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.


The Chunnel Is Ready, But Are the English?
"THE Island Race is No More," proclaim advertisements that have been running in London newspapers for the past few months, and technically it is true.
Britain's splendid isolation from the European continent has come to an end with the completion last month of the 31-mile Channel Tunnel between Folkestone, England, and Calais, France.
Eurotunnel, the English-French company that will operate the tunnel, has unveiled its fares, which, depending on the season, range at an exchange rate of $1.50 to a pound from $195 to $465 round-trip for a car and its passengers, levels that generally make the tunnel more expensive than competing ferries and hovercraft.
Rail freight services will begin rolling through the tunnel on March 7, with car-passenger service scheduled to start May 7.
There will also be passenger rail services between London and Paris beginning in the fall.


Have Shareholder Activists Lost Their Edge?
THE shareholder rights movement, which once caused top heads to roll at several leading corporations, is undergoing radical change.
Shareholder activists have won so many victories -- including gaining a bigger voice in how companies are run -- that they are now fully entrenched on the business scene.
And that, some say, is causing them to lose their edge and become too cozy with former foes.


Midwinter Night's Dream: Fragrant Sweet Peas
I'VE been reading about sweet peas.
How the English have been known to prepare beds full of manure and compost and wood ashes and roast beef (O.K., so it's just bone meal and blood meal) six feet deep to get these greedy, gorgeous vines to grow over their heads.
So don't try to grow them on a fire escape in a pot with 12 inches of soil.
If you have a patch of earth, though, and some memories of sweet peas, you could start some seeds indoors under lights and hope for the kind of balmy spring that will let you plant them outside in early April.


Animal House Calls
HAULING a medical kit about the size of a truck mechanic's toolbox, Dr.
Bonnie L. Raphael recently trudged out to a waiting van, which then carried her over winding, snow-packed roads on a house call in a semirural expanse of the Bronx.
At the end of the slippery trek through frozen downsized range lands and past a few Africanesque huts, the doctor finally stood toe to toe with her patient: a gray-feathered crane with a wounded wing.
Replacing her winter gloves with rubber ones, she carefully went to work, as she has for much of her adult life, attending to the medical needs of an animal.


The World: Let's Play Geo-Monopoly; Diplomacy Is Minding Other Nations' Business
THE Clinton Administration came to office stressing that henceforth foreign policy would be economic policy and economic policy would be foreign policy.
Early on, the mantra had an almost soothing, new-age feel to it -- implying that NATO summits would now give way to job summits and warheads to work stations.
But as trips abroad this month by President Clinton and other Administration officials have shown, the credo has translated more and more into action in the diplomatic marketplace.
As it has, the Administration and the American public are discovering just how difficult this new diplomacy can be.
It may be the future, it may be necessary, but geo-Monopoly is not for the faint-hearted.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
TIMES SQUARE Two Curtain Raisers On the Grammy Awards
As part of the city's welcome for the Grammy Awards on March 1, an exhibition of sound, painting and sculpture has been organized to celebrate New York's contributions to musical styles, from classical to jazz to pop.


Say What You Will
To the Editor:
As the director of the American Civil Liberties Union Arts Censorship Project, I would like to respond to Calvin Woodard's review of three books that are in various degrees antagonistic to freedom of speech.
The review contains dismissive references to the First Amendment as an "abstraction" that surely should not be elevated in importance over gritty realities like discrimination or domestic violence.
Nowhere does Mr.
Woodard even suggest that free expression may have a gritty reality of its own, and a practical, real-world importance for individuals and social justice movements.


Sports of The Times; The Backup QB's Stand And Wait
WHEN the Super Bowl XXVIII collisions begin tonight, these two players will be standing on the sideline but each knows he is only a knockout or a knee away from trotting into the next huddle.
They are the backup quarterbacks, Bernie Kosar of the Cowboys and Frank Reich of the Bills.
And in an era of concussions and X-rays, the outcome could be decided by one or both rather than by their more celebrated teammates, Troy Aikman and Jim Kelly.


Awaited for a Decade, Project Gets Started Too Suddenly
The day before New Year's Eve, Thomas Lucania, the district manager of Community Board 11, received word that, finally, the refurbishing of the dilapidated Pelham Parkway station on the No. 2 line -- a project that community officials requested more than a decade ago -- was about to begin.
In four days.


COLLEGE OFFICIALS AGREE TO CHANGE
The six regional accrediting associations responsible for certifying the nation's colleges and universities have agreed to develop a new set of common criteria for evaluating institutions.
The accrediting associations have also agreed to make public their reports on individual universities, and eventually to stop cooperating with the Federal Government in certifying the eligibility of colleges for Federal financial aid, saying the job should not be their responsibility.


Troubled Students Dropping Back In
Benjamin Guererro, a ninth-grader at Junior High School 45 in East Harlem, kept finding himself in trouble this school year.
He was talking back to teachers and fighting with other students.
Eventually, he was suspended, then suspended again, and then again, in a pattern school counselors say often leads to longer suspensions, expulsion or dropping out.
But now Benjamin's dark eyes flash as he talks about how much he wants to go to college, about how he has dreamed of becoming a doctor since he was a little boy.


Here's Looking at You
Interview magazine gives a party for M.N.W. Wardrobe at the Puck Building, Jan. 24.


An Alternative Super Bowl Halftime Activity; The Second-Place, Runner-Up, Not-Quite-There Quiz
LThe Buffalo Bills should be a symbol of tenacity: Tonight they are playing in their fourth straight Super Bowl.
Instead, "Buffalo" has become shorthand for loser because they failed to win in their first three tries at football's championship.
But second place isn't the end of the world.
As the quiz below notes, sometimes the stand-in becomes the star.
Sometimes the also-ran is better known than the front-runner.
Sometimes Nos. 1 and 2 are equally obscure.


India's Election Commissioner Gains a Following
To the wail of police sirens, India's latest and most unlikely public hero speeds through the streets of the capital in a convoy of vehicles carrying heavily armed paramilitary commandos.
Tirunellayi Narayana Iyer Seshan, India's irrepressible Chief Election Commissioner, whose responsibility is to insure free and fair elections, is much in demand on the speaking circuit for his withering attacks on electoral and political corruption.


Both Sides Battered Over Strike
In a struggle that has taken on symbolic significance, the lockout at Chinatown's only unionized restaurant is dragging into its sixth month, with both sides battered but resolute.
Every lunch and dinner hour, pickets march at the Silver Palace at 50 Bowery, as they have since management shut them out on Aug. 19.
The restaurant, which opened in 1976 as Chinatown's first giant dim sum parlor and banquet hall, continues to discount prices 30 percent to draw customers.


Ferry Terminal With Heliport Open on Macao
A new ferry terminal has opened on Macao, the Portuguese territory 40 miles from Hong Kong.
The three-story terminal is equipped with piers for high-speed ferries, jetfoils and catamarans and has a heliport on its roof for scheduled service by East Asia Airlines, which has flights between Macao and Hong Kong in addition to Canton and Shenzen in China.


Yes, There Is a Health Crisis
No crisis; no big fix needed.
That is the emerging Republican mantra on health care.
And it is wrong.
By any reasonable definition, there is a crisis in insurance coverage when tens of millions of Americans remain uninsured and live in constant fear of bankruptcy should they become ill.
There is a cost crisis when virtually every family and most employers face ever-rising insurance premiums and ever-higher medical bills.
And there is a governmental crisis when skyrocketing Medicare and Medicaid costs crowd out public spending on education, training, scientific research and infrastructure.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
REMEMBERING JOYCE
At 984 Sullivan Avenue in South Windsor, where a bookshop called Paperback Alley occupies a space in a small shopping plaza, the birthday of James Joyce has been celebrated faithfully since 1982.
So it will be again on Wednesday from 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M., open to the public.
Admirers of the controversial Irish author gather religously to participate in the annual ritual.
They will read from copies of "Ulysses," listen to music composed by Joyce, hear his voice on recordings, join impromptu discussions of the man and his work, watch screenings of three Joycean films and consume copious amounts of Irish soda bread and tea.
The films are: "The Dead," based on Joyce's short story, directed by John Huston and starring Anjelica Huston, to be shown at 11 A.M.; "Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man," screened at 2 P.M. with John Gielgud in a fiery bit as Joyce's priest, and "James Joyce's Women," with Fionnula Flanagan portraying the key women in Joyce's life at 7 P.M.
Following the last film, the shop's owners, Lila and Marshall Cohen, will serve their traditional Joyce birthday cake, on which the first page of "Ulysses" has been reproduced in chocolate and white icing.
Everything is free. The number for more information is 644-9979. A TOUCH OF GAELIC
The Wild Geese, a Connecticut-based organization that preserves and promotes the culture of the Ould Sod, now offers classes in the language of the Irish.
"You won't wind up speaking fluent Gaelic, but you will understand and be able to say common phrases," a Wild Geese member and organizer of the language program, Gene Cronin, said.
And if you should travel afterward to the west of Ireland you may surprise and please the residents with your smattering of their own tongue.
"There are many people who still speak Gaelic among themselves, but they switch to English with strangers because nobody else understands it," Mr.
Cronin said.
Classes begin this Wednesday from 7:30 to 9 P.M. and continue weekly through the end of May at Trinity Catholic High School on Newfield Avenue in Stamford.
Attendance at 12 classes costs $35, and the textbook, "Irish for Everyone" by Brother Charles Quinn of Iona College, New Rochelle, is an additional $10.
To enroll or obtain more information the numbers are 853-9318 or 656-2365.
HISTORY COMES TO LIFE
Yale's Divinity School will host a symposium about the 12th-century German Benedictine nun Hildegard of Bingen on Friday.
It is open to the public free of charge.
Hildegard's talents and output were remarkable for a woman in medieval society.
She was an abbess, preacher, counselor, scientist, prophet, mystic, musician and creator of colorful, beguiling manuscript illuminations.
The program begins at 9:30 A.M. and ends following a 5:30 P.M. dinner, a music and drama presentation at 7 P.M. and an 8 P.M. reception.
The event is sponsored by the Religion and The Arts Program at Yale's Institute of Sacred Music, and the Divinity School's Historical Studies and Feminist Studies Programs.
Speakers include Penelope D. Johnson, professor of history at New York University; Elizabeth A. Dreyer, associate professor of ecclesiastical history at Washington Theological Union in Maryland; Madeline H. Gaviness, professor of art history at Tufts University; Jeffrey Schnapp, chairman of comparative literature at Stanford University, and Janet M. Martin, associate professor of classics at Princeton University.
For more information, 432-5325.
THE SPIRIT OF UGANDA
Black History Month is to be celebrated by City Spirit Artists of New Haven with an exhibition of batik paintings by Nelson Lwanga, a Ugandan artist.
The show opens tomorrow and remains through Feb. 25 at the Community Foundation of Greater New Haven, 70 Audubon Street, 5th floor.
The batiks, sales of which support Mr.
Lwanga and his family, depict Ugandan wildlife and genre scenes.
During a reception on Friday from 5 to 7 P.M. there will be a slide program on Uganda at 6:15.
Gallery hours are Monday through Friday from 9 to 5.
The number is 773-1777 for more information.
A HOME'S SECRET PAST
Robert R. Gradie 3d, a doctoral candidate in anthropology at the University of Connecticut and principal investigator of the recent 1761 Hatheway House archeological excavations in Suffield, will present a program on his findings today at 3 P.M. at Keeney Memorial Center, 200 Main Street in Wethersfield.
The dig was made during a restoration of the house, one of 12 historic homes owned and maintained by the Antiquarian and Landmark Society in Hartford.
Most of the objects recovered were related to cooking and dining.
Among the ceramics are delftware, English white saltglaze, creamware, pearlware, redware and North American saltglazed stoneware.
Remains of the early householders' meals were also discovered.
Mr.
Gradie will relate his findings to the life styles of the occupants and he will touch on changes that have occurred in the house over the years.
Admission and refreshments are free.
The number is 247-8996 for more information.
LEGENDS OF BASEBALL
The Fifth Annual Living Legends Celebrity Dinner and Auction, to be held at the new Foxwoods Resort Hotel next Sunday in Ledyard, will benefit cancer victims in Connecticut.
The event will begin at noon and end around 10 P.M.
Among the living legends of baseball who will mix with guests during the evening are Yogi Berra, Whitey Ford, Stan Musial, Sparky Lyle, Buck Showalter and John McNamara.
A preview of auction items, valued at $250,000 and including authentic team uniforms, equipment, photographs, cards and other professional memorabilia, will take place at noon, with the live auction scheduled from 2 to 3:30 P.M.
Tickets are $5 for adults, $2 for children.
A V.I.P. cocktail party will fill the hour from 5:30 to 6:30 P.M. with a ticket price of $500, which includes dinner and the auction.
Dinner from 7 to 10 P.M. will be accompanied by videos of the celebrities' careers and anecdotal talks by each of them.
Auction and dinner tickets are $150.
The event is sponsored by the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation's Foxwoods Resort Casino and the Connecticut Sports Foundation, a nonprofit group established in 1987 by John Ellis, a major league catcher, who experienced personal and family bouts with cancer.
The number is 885-3352 for reservations or more information.
ELEANOR CHARLES


SUNDAY, January 30, 1994; Sexually Incorrect Sand
Dade County is about to confront the gender issue. Well, the gender/ sand/turtle issue.
The story begins with sand loss, which is to beaches what hair loss is to middle-aged men.
Dade County has been losing, and replacing, storm-tossed sand for years.
No problem.
Sand replacement techniques are much further advanced than hair replacement techniques.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Junior's Makes a Pitch For a Corner on Cheesecake As Junior's Restaurant lays plans to set up cheesecake kiosks in malls around the country, its owners are seeking to elevate the company's image back home in Brooklyn.
They have asked Community Board 2 to support a campaign to add the words "Cheesecake Corner" to the street signs at the corner of Flatbush Avenue Extension and DeKalb Avenue, where Junior's offices are located.
The board is scheduled to vote on the matter on Feb. 9.


Governors Ask for Power Over Self-Insurance Plans
Uncertain whether Congress will adopt a national health insurance program this year, leaders of the National Governors' Association are seeking new power to tax and regulate the health plans of large corporations so the states can forge ahead on their own if the Federal Government fails to act.
At a four-day meeting that began today, the governors are expected to adopt a new policy seeking such power, over strenuous objections from many business executives who say that such a move could subject their health plans to 50 different sets of regulations.


Corrections
A column last Sunday about living in Jericho misidentified a school official, Ben Ciuffo.
He is director of educational operations of the Jericho School District, not Superintendent.


Amusement Parks Put Visitors in 'Movies'
Amusement parks in Florida and Virginia are making it possible for visitors to feel what it is like to be part of the action of a movie, not just a passive viewer.
Jaws, the ride, at Universal Studios Florida in Orlando, features a 32-foot, three-ton mechanical shark pursuing tour boats across a seven-acre lagoon designed to resemble Amity Harbor, site of the attacks in "Jaws," the 1975 film by Steven Spielberg.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
TIMES SQUARE Two Curtain Raisers On the Grammy Awards
As part of the city's welcome for the Grammy Awards on March 1, an exhibition of sound, painting and sculpture has been organized to celebrate New York's contributions to musical styles, from classical to jazz to pop.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Big Disaster? Maybe It Is, But It's OUR Big Disaster.
AFTER the hurricane passes, the floodwaters recede, the ice melts or the earth stops quaking, an amazing thing seems to happen to people.
Survivors who have lost everything and maybe even seen the face of death say they could not imagine living anyplace else.
Floridians say they would rather brave a hurricane than a winter in New York.
Kansans say they'll take their chances on a tornado rather than see the ground open beneath them in an earthquake.
Californians still edgy from aftershocks following the Jan. 17 earthquake say they would rather put up with the fires and mudslides and drought and quakes than shovel snow in Chicago.


U.S. to Base Balkans Spy Plane in Albania
The cold war really is over: the Central Intelligence Agency will use Albania, once the most isolated and xenophobic Iron Curtain country, as a base for a new American spy plane to monitor the war in the former Yugoslavia, defense officials said Friday.
The C.I.A. approached Albania for permission to use its territory after Italy, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization partner of the United States, refused to allow the agency to operate from Italian airfields.


Animal House Calls
HAULING a medical kit about the size of a truck mechanic's toolbox, Dr.
Bonnie L. Raphael recently trudged out to a waiting van, which then carried her over winding, snow-packed roads on a house call in a semirural expanse of the Bronx.
At the end of the slippery trek through frozen downsized range lands and past a few Africanesque huts, the doctor finally stood toe to toe with her patient: a gray-feathered crane with a wounded wing.
Replacing her winter gloves with rubber ones, she carefully went to work, as she has for much of her adult life, attending to the medical needs of an animal.


Some Good Out of Chiapas
Mexico's peasant rebellion has brought death, reports of grave human rights abuse and serious embarrassment to President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
It has also created some awkwardness for Washington, which identified itself with the Salinas Government on the North American Free Trade Agreement, and which lent Mexico helicopters for drug interdiction only to see the aircraft used in early operations against the rebels.
But the Chiapas revolt has also yielded some positive results.
It woke up a political system whose backward and authoritarian ways clashed with Mexico's efforts to build a modernized economy.
It brought long-overdue dialogue between Mexico City and the peasants of Chiapas.
And now it has brought agreement between all of Mexico's main parties on ground rules for fairer, less money-tainted presidential elections this August.


SUNDAY, January 30, 1994; Are We Missing Something Here?
Fernando Mateo thought he had a nice idea -- $100 gift certificates for guns.
It even seemed that the exchange programs he initiated were imaginative and somewhat effective.
That was until the Federation of New York State Rifle and Pistol Clubs Inc. came up with a truly imaginative program: bullets for guns -- 1,000 free rounds of ammunition in the caliber of your choice for each unregistered weapon turned in.
At first, this kind of exchange might not seem to make sense.
But Gerald Preiser, federation president, says the problem is that drug dealers are not exchanging their semiautomatics for teddy bears.
So they'll come in for the bullets?
No, he doesn't want that either.
In fact, Preiser wouldn't give criminals bullets.
Not real criminals.
You have to be a law-abiding criminal.
His plan is to give free bullets to good people whose only unlawful act has been to own an unregistered gun.
You do have to get a license and register the gun before you get the ammunition, a process the federation will help you with.
Preiser's goal is not to get guns off the streets but to put them in the right hands and thus "raise the body count of criminals." Preiser seems confident that more guns will mean more dead bad guys.


Jan. 23-29; Betcha Can't Watch More Than 1
Should the line now be: Dan Quayle, you're no Bill Cosby?
Mr.
Quayle tonight becomes the first former Vice President to perform in a product ad, with a cameo appearance in a 60-second TV commercial to run one time only, during the Super Bowl halftime show on NBC.


3/4 Time: Will Music Minus One Be Fab?
"HEY, what do you think about the Beatles reunion?"
The question, heard frequently since Paul McCartney announced a few weeks ago that he had scheduled recording sessions with George Harrison and Ringo Starr, is flawed, of course.
Mr.
Harrison put it best in November 1989, when Mr.
McCartney first raised the prospect of a collaboration:


Contract Extension for Dean Smith
The University of North Carolina reaffirmed its love affair with its basketball coach, DEAN SMITH.
The school's board of trustees amended Smith's contract Friday to allow Smith to remain as head coach through June 30, 2001.
Smith, who was named head coach at the start of the 1961-1962 season, will be 70 in 2001.
Smith said he considered the revised contract as a clarification, rather than an extension.
The contract does not change Smith's annual salary of $137,000. (AP)


Hall of Fame or Shrine to Nostalgia?
THIS IS REALLY NO TIME TO BE cynical about the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame.
The building in Cleveland, so long in the planning stages, has been under construction since last June; a chief curator who has strong credentials in documenting popular music, James Henke (a longtime Rolling Stone editor), has been hired.
But the ninth annual induction ceremonies, which took place on Jan. 19 at the Waldorf-Astoria, only made it clearer that the Hall of Fame will have difficulties rising above the tensions that are at the heart of rock music: between art and commerce, between rebellion and accommodation, between impetuous youth and established institutions.
At best, the Hall will finally tell the story of late-20th-century music from a rockers' perspective.
But younger fans may see it as one last attempt by baby boomers to impose their now outmoded esthetics on rock.


Someone Spying? So Are the Teddy Bear and the Potted Plant
SEE the cuddly teddy bear over on the shelf?
Well, it sees you, too.
"Right here is the camera, behind the left eye," said Marvin Bandler, the owner of Spy Mart, a Monmouth County company dedicated to the proposition that what you don't know can hurt you and what you do know protects you from being caught off guard.
"There's a wireless transmitter in here," Mr.
Bandler said, holding the teddy bear in his arm and pointing to its furry little head.
"It can send a signal up to 300 feet away, so you don't even need a wire to attach it to a VCR."


Pippen Comments on Gun Charge
SCOTTIE PIPPEN, in his first public comment about his arrest on a firearms charge, said he regrets it but feels a need to protect himself because of his high visibility as a member of the Chicago Bulls.
He said there is reason to be alarmed, citing attacks on LARRY STEWART of the Washington Bullets, who was recently shot and stabbed in his home; the attack on the skater NANCY KERRIGAN , and the fatal shooting of MICHAEL JORDAN 's father.
"I really want to apologize to my family and friends because of the negative press and reaction I got," Pippen said Friday.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Personal income, Dec., pct. chg.
0.6
0.5
Personal consumption, Dec., pct. chg.
0.4
0.5
Tuesday
Purchasing managers' index, Jan.
57.1
58.0
Wednesday
Leading indicators, Dec., pct. chg.
0.5
0.5
New home sales, Dec., thousands
807
770
Thursday
Factory goods orders, Dec., pct. chg.
1.4
1.6
Auto sales, Jan., millions, annual rate
7.0
6.8
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, Jan., thousands
183
200
Unemployment, Jan., percent
6.4
6.6
This Week's Developments
Monday
Alan Greenspan to face Joint Economic Committee of Congress.
Wednesday
Treasury to detail refunding for notes and bonds.
Thursday
Chain stores reports January sales.


Recalling a World's Fair
A century ago, more than 200 structures were built in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park for the California Midwinter International Exposition, which drew 1.5 million visitors in just over five months.
After the event, one building was allowed to remain, eventually becoming the M. H. de Young Memorial Museum, which is celebrating the fair's centennial with a special exhibition scheduled to open Jan. 27.
In the midst of a severe recession in 1894, the world's fair was orchestrated by the museum's namesake, M. H. de Young, who was inspired by the gargantuan World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago the year before.
The San Francisco and Chicago expositions were among the few world's fairs to turn a profit since the tradition began in London in 1851.


Post-Quake California Will Recreate a Transportation System; Time Doesn't Count
To the Editor:
In "Measuring the Magnitude," a graphic accompanying your Jan. 18 coverage of the California earthquake, you quantify the Richter scale magnitudes of energy released in earthquakes.


Dresses to Fulfill Brides' Dreams


'Does Anybody Here Know What Time It Is?'
TAKE a moment and consider what's ticking away out there: the "National Death clock" records one victim from a shooting every 14 minutes.
The "Les Miserables" ticket clock registers one sale every nine minutes.
The M.C.I. savings clock keeps track of how much that long-distance carrier's customers have supposedly saved by dropping A.T.&amp; T. -- $18,000 every five minutes.
Those are the figures from just one intersection -- where 47th Street, Seventh Avenue and Broadway meet in midtown Manhattan.
A few blocks away, the "national debt clock" adds $13,000 a second to the Federal deficit.


Clare Rooney, David Butler
DAVID BUTLER, a 28-year-old law student at Fordham University, proposed to Clare Rooney, a 28-year-old decorating editor at Colonial Homes magazine, only after passing a test administered by her father.
Last summer, the couple visited her parents, Francis and Frances Rooney, at their summer house on Nantucket Island.
One hot afternoon, Mr.
Butler formally asked Mr.
Rooney for his daughter's hand in marriage.
"You've got to catch a bluefish or you can't marry Clare" was the reply.


Canucks Overpower Devils
Too many factors were working against the Devils in their game against the Vancouver Canucks last night and, in the end, they proved too much to overcome as New Jersey lost, 6-3.
Playing a fifth consecutive game on the road, and their second in as many nights, the Devils (27-16-6) had their road unbeaten streak end at five.
They haven't won at Pacific Coliseum in 10 games.


Profile; An Unusual Climb At Kodak Wins Her A Place at the Top
MOST people probably haven't heard of the W. H. Brady Company, but they will soon.
Katherine M. Hudson has just taken charge.
In 24 years at the Eastman Kodak Company, Ms.
Hudson -- ever the risk-taker, always the visionary -- turned around one operation after another, made a controversial change in Kodak's operations that was widely emulated in American industry and made a rare jump from the computer room to general management.
Computer World magazine recently listed her among the 25 people, including Ross Perot and Bill Gates, who have done the most to change the computer industry.


Post-Quake California Will Recreate a Transportation System
To the Editor:
I suppose it shouldn't surprise anyone that many Southern Californians, contemplating their daily commutes without their broken freeways, are looking at going to work and back with a certain amount of dread.


Smoking Aloft
To the Editor: On July 16, 1993, I took a flight from Athens to New York on Olympic Airways.
One of the passengers, obviously quite ill and receiving oxygen, was being flown home on a stretcher, which was placed in the smoking section.
Apart from any safety issue relating to him, I raised the question of the danger to everyone on board, possibly from an explosion caused by sparks or flames in the presence of oxygen.
I wrote the Federal Aviation Administration and in August received a reply from the aviation safety hot-line program manager, Sally S. Ryberg.
She said that the smoking occurred while the plane was in international airspace.
"The F.A.A. does not have jurisdiction in this instance," she wrote.
She said that letters about the matter had been sent to the Greek authorities and to Olympic Airways.


Eyeshades and Objectivity
MY TIMES Adventures in the News Trade.
By John Corry. 256 pp.
New York:  Grosset/Putnam. $24.95.


Troubled Students Dropping Back In
Benjamin Guererro, a ninth-grader at Junior High School 45 in East Harlem, kept finding himself in trouble this school year.
He was talking back to teachers and fighting with other students.
Eventually, he was suspended, then suspended again, and then again, in a pattern school counselors say often leads to longer suspensions, expulsion or dropping out.
But now Benjamin's dark eyes flash as he talks about how much he wants to go to college, about how he has dreamed of becoming a doctor since he was a little boy.


The New Colossus: American Culture As Power Export
Spielbergian Dinosaurs devouring entire national film industries at a single gulp!
Silver-haired villains and sloe-eyed ingenues setting new soap-opera standards for political incorrectness as half the world watches!
Teen-agers from Bangkok to Beirut wearing Chicago Bulls caps backwards and lamenting Michael Jordan's retirement!
Smoke bombs and lasers and thrusting pelvises and outraged clerics and intellectuals from Paris to Teheran to Beijing denouncing Michael Jackson and Madonna!
As the millennium approaches -- "Angels in America" is also big worldwide, but rather higher of brow -- American popular culture has never been more dominant internationally, nor more controversial.
American cultural exports swell at least some of us with pride and help reduce the trade deficit.
Serious money is involved; this is America's second-biggest export after aircraft.
But just as some Americans have doubts about our pop culture -- its propensity to celebrate violence, sexual stereotyping and sheer lowest-common-denominator crassness -- those doubts multiply abroad, especially when the imports are seen as a threat to local cultural identity.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 30, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
2
2
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in Los Angeles.
3
4
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
4
50
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
5
5
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
6
1
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
7
6
THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her Colorado hometown.
8*
1
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
9*
10
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
10
94
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
11*
1
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
12
1
THE BELOVED SCOUNDREL, by Iris Johansen. (Bantam, $5.99.) Abduction, seduction and romantic surrender in Regency England.
13
21
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
14
9
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
15
11
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
534
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
2
3
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
3
20
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
4
50
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5
7
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
6
120
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
13
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos (by Walter Iooss Jr.) and observations.
8
13
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
9*
9
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
10
35
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
11*
3
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
12*
134
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
13*
24
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
14*
9
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
15*
14
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
16*
1
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
17*
9
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
7
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
2
1
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
150
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
5
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Disabled Truck Near the . . .?
Traffic reporters may have until the end of the decade to decide on a substitute reference point for the Elmhurst tanks, the twin towers that stand conveniently near a frequently jammed section of the Long Island Expressway.
Brooklyn Union Gas, which permanently closed the antiquated tanks last spring, still does not have a timetable for the removal of the tanks and their white and red tower frames.
"It's not a priority item, but we'll slot it into our plan and budget at some point" by the end of the decade, said Robert H. Preusser, vice president and chief engineer.


Ward Quarterbacks Another Late Victory
Florida State 74, Georgia Tech 73
Charlie Ward, the Heisman Trophy winner playing only his fifth basketball game this season, made a layup with two seconds left to give Florida State a 74-73 victory over struggling Georgia Tech yesterday in an Atlantic Coast Conference duel in Atlanta.


Dale Shumate and Norman Leff
Dale Ellen Stark Shumate was married in New York on Wednesday to Norman Mills Leff.
The Rev.
Charles A. Amstein, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Church Center for the United Nations.
Mrs.
Leff was until recently the director of shopping services at Bloomingdale's in New York.
She graduated from Indiana University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Butler University.
She is a daughter of Maribel S. Stark of Indianapolis and the late George W. Stark.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Q and A
Churchill's Home
Q.
My wife and I will be in London this spring and we would like to know if there is any way to get to Chartwell, Winston Churchill's country residence, by public transportation. -- Lawrence N. Byer, New York, N.Y.


Global Exotica Create a Greenhouse Effect
WITH the "Seventh International Exhibition of Botanical Art and Illustration," Wave Hill in Riverdale declares an end to winter and in the same breath draws attention to the Hunt Institute for Botanical Documentation at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
Since its founding in 1960, the institute has recorded, by way of its prestigious annuals, more than 650 botanical artists who follow in their various 20th-century ways the example set by 18th-century masters like Pierre-Joseph Redoute and Georg Dionysius Ehret.
Though an abridged version of the annual, which first appeared at the institute in 1992, the Wave Hill show comes with the original catalogue documenting nearly 90 artists.


Challenge to Trump Plan Loses
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan has ruled against a coalition of community groups that were suing to stop Donald J. Trump's Riverside South project on an abandoned railyard.
The suit, brought by the owners of several buildings and residents neighboring the site as well as community groups, challenged the enormous mixed-use development on the ground that it violated the terms that Abraham Hirschfeld and his partnership negotiated for the site in 1982.


In Hartford, A Revised Production Of 'Women'
THE game the overindulged shallow women play involves one required activity: "tearing your friends apart." Snaring their husbands is optional.
And that is how the frivolous well-to-do pass the time amid mudpacks, manicures and martinis.
In 1936 nobody bothered to ask why.
That's when Clare Boothe Luce's play "The Women" opened on Broadway.
And when the first movie version was released three years later, nobody cared because they were sparkling movie stars who could do anything they wanted.
In cinematic remake and in stage revivals, Ms.
Luce's women have remained unpleasant -- odious, even -- but trivial, dismissable or just plain camp.


Old Home Week


Larkinh Without Apologies
SELECTED LETTERS OF PHILIP LARKIN, 1940-1985  Edited by Anthony Thwaite.
Illustrated. 791 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $40.


Jamie Rosen and Dennis Scurletis
Jamie Rosen, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Rosen of Mountain Lakes, N.J., was married last evening to Dennis Theodore Scurletis, the son of Dr.
Theodore D. Scurletis of Des Moines, and the late Rebecca T. Scurletis.
M.
Michael Grupp, a leader of the Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at the home of Dr.
Lester L. Coleman, the bride's great-uncle, in New York.
The bride, 34, is the president of Classical Cruises, an educational cruise company, in New York.
She graduated from Amherst College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father is a urologist in Mountain Lakes, N.J.
Her mother, Carol J. Rosen, designs exhibits for children at the Morris Museum in Morristown, N.J.


But Not Unknown


The Warring of the Green
For almost two decades, Park Slope's annual St.
Patrick's Day parade has escaped the bitter clashes that have become associated with Manhattan's Fifth Avenue march.
But this year, a sudden breath of discord is sweeping from Park Slope to Bay Ridge, as plans for an insurgent parade take shape.


Coach Sick; UConn Couldn't Be Better
One team's coach wasn't here tonight.
And the other's might not be here much longer, especially after Connecticut, without Coach Jim Calhoun, exploded in the second half for an 88-67 victory over Pitt before a standing-room-only crowd at the Fitzgerald Field House.
The victory solidified the Huskies' (18-1, 8-0) hold on first place in the Big East as they became only the third team in the history of the league to win its first eight league games.
Pitt, on the other hand, which viewed the matchup as a potential breakthrough, dropped to 12-5 and 6-3 for its embattled coach, Paul Evans, who is in the last year of his contract.


The Loss of a Bookstore Turns Pocketbook Issue
To the Editor:
My apprehension over the super-bookstores' predilection for gobbling up the little guy was not assuaged by "A Bibliophile's Baedeker," Richard Bernstein's happy account in the Jan. 16 issue of the survival of so many of New York's smaller bookshops.


Winter Hills, Sledding Sites
BY now you're cranky.
There are holes in your gloves from overuse.
Your car has stalled twice, you've run out of salt, you're so sore from shoveling snow and cracking ice you're missing valuable Stairmaster time at the health club.
Think about sledding.


Hispanic Officials Encourage Citizenship Registration


A Book in Search of a Buzz: The Marketing of a First Novel
This essay is the first of two parts about the marketing of a first novel and the beginning of a writer's career.
Part 2 will appear next week.


Road to Acapulco
To the Editor: Mr.
DePalma detects shortcomings of Acapulco that seasoned vacationers to developing countries seldom find disturbing.
Perhaps the high tolls ($158 round trip, Mexico City-Acapulco) set him in a bad mood even before he arrived in Acapulco.
Too many mudslides?
Pesky vendors?
Coarse yellow sand?
Piles of trash?
Acapulco, a city that is grubby and worn?
Did he find anything he liked about the city?
Then he compares Acapulco to Atlantic City?
Pleeaase!


Native Schubertian


SUNDAY, January 30, 1994; Matryoshka Madness
Every traveler to Russia brings back a nesting matryoshka doll.
A few years ago, the makers started moving beyond the babushka to Soviet leaders, as in the Gorbachev/Brezhnev/Khrushchev/Lenin doll.
American politicians were next, and now come subjects like Saddam Hussein, harem nudes (still egg-shaped) and American rock stars.
The tackiest new doll may be the Bruce Springsteen/ Madonna/Boy George/Dave Stewart/Annie Lennox creation, shown above.
Most puzzling is a Michael Jackson doll.
He seems to darken with each shell, and the innermost dolls are a panther and a chimpanzee.
Even given Jackson's menagerie, the doll is a shocker.
What's unclear is whether the racist imagery is a result of Russian naivete or of cynicism.


New Series of Programs for the Organ
TIMOTHY LEWIS, the organist of Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains, doubles as artistic director of the Downtown Music at Grace series, but today at 4 P.M., he will be helping to introduce a new series at St.
James Episcopal Church in North Salem.
Designed to present the organ in various chamber music configurations, the concerts on the last Sundays of February and March will feature string quartet and harp, respectively, while today's recital pits the heaviest instrument in the world against one of the lightest.


The Hatman Closeth
For the last six years, the old commercial strip of brownstones approaching the piers on Atlantic Avenue has been the home of Vesture, a millinery store whose big front window is filled with white styrofoam heads wearing brightly colored hats, ranging from the outlandish to the simple beret, their tones dulled by the grime on the glass.
But recently, hot pink and lime-green posters shouting "Lost Our Lease" and "Everything Must Go" joined the hats.


Road to Acapulco
To the Editor: We read with great interest "The New Road to Acapulco" (Jan. 9).
The author, Anthony DePalma, noted one danger of the road: rockslides.
We would like to warn travelers of another danger: livestock.
We were traveling on this superhighway at twilight in August, shortly after it opened.
As we crested a hill, we hit a cow standing in the middle of the road.
We were lucky -- my brother suffered a fractured skull and I underwent six hours of plastic and reconstructive surgery on my face back in the United States.
The car behind us hit the carcass, resulting in the death of two of its passengers.


Tower on Tower Records Site?
Consolidating its hold on a corridor of Broadway just north of Lincoln Center, a developer has bought the five-story building between 66th and 67th Streets that houses Tower Records and Tower Video.
The development company, Millennium Partners, has nearly completed Lincoln Square, an austere high-rise across Broadway from Tower whose height, bulk and two-tone brick facade has led to prolonged but futile community opposition.
And the company is tearing down several walk-up buildings, the former Cinema Studio and the Bank Leumi building on the triangular block between 66th and 67th, to build another tower.


Corrections
A report in A la Carte last Sunday about Caffe Angelica in Garden City Park carried its fax number instead of its telephone number.
The phone is (516) 739-0505.


Budding Scientist's Success Breaks the Mold
Jamel Oeser-Sweat walks home at night from the subway, a 17-year-old in big black sneakers and a baseball cap, passing drug dealers asking: "What do you want? What do you want?" and young ladies making eyes at him.
At his housing project on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, he sometimes has to stand on his toes in the elevator to avoid the urine puddles.
Upstairs, the apartment is frayed and spare.
His family only recently acquired a telephone.
A good thing, too.
Opportunity is suddenly on the line.


Turning Trash Into Treasure for the Soil
GARDENERS are learning to be good recyclers.
Each year more of them learn that composting is an excellent way to recycle wastes like weeds, leaves, vegetable peelings and grass clippings.
They add the decomposed organic material to soil, even potting mixes, and learn that the compost does wonders.
In fact, the compost has earned such a marvelous reputation, it has gained a new appellation: black gold.
Technology is catching up, ever so slowly though, on this recycling effort.
The problem has always been that too much waste is accumulated with no market to absorb it.
About 40 percent of the solid waste that goes into landfills is paper.
Industry figures indicate that an average person disposes of 1.6 pounds of paper a day.


States and Health Care
Leaders of the National Governors' Association are seeking new power to tax and regulate health plans of large corporations so that states can forge ahead on their own if the Federal Government fails to act.
Article, page 14


Minorities and Adult Education Give Women's Colleges a Boost; Fueled by Ideals
To the Editor:
"Women's Colleges Find a New Popularity" has a harsh bias, claiming the schools partly draw strength from coed classes and coed living options with other universities.


Two-Day Event Seeks to Encourage Reading
FOR the fifth year in a row, the Black Caucus of the National Council of Teachers of English will sponsor a nationwide "African American Read-In Chain" in honor of Black History Month.
The event, which will take place Feb. 6 and 7, is expected to draw hundreds of local readers, writers and listeners to libraries, churches and other sites in the county.
Jerrie C. Scott, national director of the read-in chain, said the Black Caucus hoped to involve 800,000 people of all ethnic groups in a simultaneous celebration of black writers and at the same time promote literacy and reading programs.


The New Colossus: American Culture As Power Export
Spielbergian Dinosaurs devouring entire national film industries at a single gulp!
Silver-haired villains and sloe-eyed ingenues setting new soap-opera standards for political incorrectness as half the world watches!
Teen-agers from Bangkok to Beirut wearing Chicago Bulls caps backwards and lamenting Michael Jordan's retirement!
Smoke bombs and lasers and thrusting pelvises and outraged clerics and intellectuals from Paris to Teheran to Beijing denouncing Michael Jackson and Madonna!
As the millennium approaches -- "Angels in America" is also big worldwide, but rather higher of brow -- American popular culture has never been more dominant internationally, nor more controversial.
American cultural exports swell at least some of us with pride and help reduce the trade deficit.
Serious money is involved; this is America's second-biggest export after aircraft.
But just as some Americans have doubts about our pop culture -- its propensity to celebrate violence, sexual stereotyping and sheer lowest-common-denominator crassness -- those doubts multiply abroad, especially when the imports are seen as a threat to local cultural identity.


For a Half, Knicks Are Flawless in Seattle
The Knicks made a strong statement in Seattle tonight.
And it was loud enough to make the rest of the National Basketball Association take notice.
Dominating the team with the best record in the league, New York rolled to a stunning 106-92 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics at the Seattle Center Coliseum.


IN SHORT: FICTION
NEW ORLEANS INTRIGUE VOODOO DREAMS A Novel of Marie Laveau.
By Jewell Parker Rhodes.
St.
Martin's, $22.95.


Owner of Store Fatally Stabbed in Bronx
An ice cream store owner who wanted to retire, partly because of crime in the Bronx neighborhood around his store, died yesterday after being stabbed late Friday during what was apparently a robbery minutes before he was to close the store, the police said.
The man, Louis Laudo, 62, was getting into his car, which was parked a block away from his store, The L &amp; L Ice Cream Shoppe, when a man approached him, drew a knife and told him to hand over his money, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.
The shop is at 1590 Westchester Avenue in the Soundview section.


Ms. Berman, Mr. McClimon
Suzanne Berman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Berman of Toronto, is to be married there today to Timothy John McClimon, a son of Leonard J. McClimon of Cape Coral, Fla., and the late Celeste M. McClimon.
The Rev.
Katherine Cook, a Unitarian minister, will perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Art Gallery of Ontario.
The bride, 34, graduated from the University of Toronto.
She is the director of public relations in Toronto for the Canadian operations of the American Telephone and Telegraph company.
Next month, she is to become A. T. &amp; T.'s international media-relations manager, in Basking Ridge, N.J.


Shhhh! From White Noise to Entirely Soundproofed Walls
REDUCING noise in a house is fairly easy and inexpensive.
But complete soundproofing is difficult and usually expensive, because it usually involves major remodeling.
A simple strategy for combating noise to sleep or concentrate is to use a "white noise" generator.
The device, which sells for about $60 and can fit under a bed, produces a gentle rushing sound that helps block noises like traffic and voices by masking them.


Q and A
Responsibility For a Sidewalk Q. Recently the city did my sidewalk on my two-family rental unit.
I was advised that a lien would be put on the property for the work performed and would be clear once the bill was paid.


Getting on Line Before You Go
PEOPLE with computers, modems and memberships in one or more of the on-line services can act as their own travel agents.
It isn't always easy, and it isn't free, but it can be rewarding.
One can gather information on flight schedules, hotels and automobile rentals; examine a restaurant guide; see if the State Department has issued an advisory about a foreign destination; find visa requirements, and exchange messages with other members.


Remembering the 80's (the 1880's)
Lovers of Jack Finney's 'Time and Again' turn back the clock. The Terrace, Jan. 21.


POSTINGS: 199-Bed Bronx Nursing Home; St. Barnabas Expands
A $35 million, 199-bed, seven-story nursing home specializing in the care of patients with AIDS or tuberculosis, as well as of elderly people requiring long-term care, is to open on March 1 in the Bronx.
The St.
Barnabas Nursing Home, on the campus of St.
Barnabas Hospital at East 183d Street and Third Avenue, is connected to the fourth floor of the hospital by an enclosed bridge.


Two 'Angels,' Two Journeys, In London And New York
"Millennium Approaches" and "Perestroika," Parts 1 and 2 of Tony Kushner's giddy, apocalyptic epic, "Angels in America," have now settled comfortably into the repertory at the Cottesloe Theater, the smallest (262 seats) and most inviting of the three performing spaces at the Royal National Theater.
More than anything else I've seen this trip, it qualifies as the theatrical event of the London season.
Declan Donnellan's stunning production, designed by Nick Ormerod, might fit in the pocket of George C. Wolfe's more visually complicated staging of "Angels in America," now at the Walter Kerr Theater on Broadway.
The local version is not really that much smaller than the New York production, and it certainly isn't shorter -- both run approximately seven hours.
In most ways, though, it has a spare, intimate manner that, coupled with the tightly choreographed staging, makes it seem to fly like the wind.


Chinatown Benefit
A 'Golden Gate' screening aids the Chinatown Historical Museum. Jan. 25.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LITERATURE AND POLITICS  THE FIRST ANTHOLOGY  30 Years of The New York Review of Books.
Edited by Robert B. Silvers,  Barbara Epstein and Rea S. Hederman.
New York Review/Consortium, $27.50.


Debra A. Clark, Louis V. Fasulo
Debra Anne Clark, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton D. Clark of Little River, S.C., was married yesterday to Louis Vincent Fasulo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis E. Fasulo of Springfield, N.J.
The Rev.
John A. Kamas performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Jean Baptiste in New York.
The bride, 35, is the director of marketing for Prescriptives, a division of the Estee Lauder Companies, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father, now retired, was a manager in the tax department at the General Electric Corporation in Schenectady, N.Y.


Haiti Businessmen Protest Sanctions by Work Stoppage
A group of influential business leaders has initiated a work stoppage to protest international sanctions against Haiti.
The action, which began on Friday, appeared to have broad support among the 300 to 400 members of the Haitian Chamber of Commerce, but it was uncertain how the protest would affect commerce in the country.


American Style
ETATS-UNIS ** (212) 517-8826; 242 East 81st Street; $$$; all major credit cards


Political Memo; G.O.P.-TV: New Image In Appeal To Voters
"There are a lot of choices on TV," says Ronald Reagan, staring into the camera.
"But my choice is 'G.O.P.-TV.' "
Unlike many ordinary Americans, former President Reagan does not tune in to "The Simpsons" at 8 P.M. on Thursdays.
He says he watches the Republican Party's new show.
George Bush heartily agrees with his Presidential predecessor's viewing habits, saying, "I also make time for 'G.O.P.-TV.' "


Reminder to Trumpy: Madden Has Pizazz
There is challenge, maybe even bravado, in Bob Trumpy's voice.
As there usually is.
NBC's top football analyst isn't trying to defend himself.
He's too confident to feel he must.
He believes himself immensely worthy of his position.
Yet he was disquieted and "shook" by the brief possibility that John Madden would come to NBC, before his eventual signing with Fox Sports.
"The public's perception of the difference in our talent is different from mine and the people I work with," he said the other day during the network's Super Bowl XXVIII announcer conclave.
In his mind, he is Madden's equal.


In I.B.M. Deal, State Offers A Loan to Create 700 Jobs
New York State will provide $40 million in low-interest loans to a computer-chip company from California if it concludes a manufacturing agreement with I.B.M. that could create more than 700 jobs in the economically troubled Mid-Hudson Valley, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced yesterday.
The computer-chip company, Cirrus Logic Corporation, based in Fremont, Calif., produces software and integrated circuits for desktop, portable and hand-held computers, as well as telecommunications and consumer electronics equipment, according to the company's 1993 annual report.


At Work; Crashing, Temping, Coping, Sneering
IN the opening pages of "Career Crash: America's New Crisis and Who Survives" (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21), the book's sociologist-author Barry Glassner takes note of research revealing that a startling, and disproportionate, number of baby boomers are depressed.
Well, of course they are.
Janis Joplin is dead and Crosby, Stills and Nash are alive and playing gigs.
It is not a just world.
Who wouldn't be depressed?
But Mr.
Glassner is no fan of Occam's razor, the philosophical imperative to explain phenomena as simply and elegantly as possible.
He attributes the boomers' lack of joie de vivre primarily to dissatisfaction over work, and a tendency, as he calls it, to "crash out of their careers." Crashing, Mr.
Glassner asserts, is not the same as burning out, being furloughed, fired or early-retired and it is not quite the same as having a midlife crisis, which many baby boomers are of an age to do.
A crash seems to occur when a series of small unhappinesses and unfulfilled expectations become a pile of misery, causing the boomers to want to bolt careers most normal people would kill for.


BEHIND THE HEADLINES IN THE LENO -- LETTERMAN WAR
NOTHING IN HIS OFTEN TURBULENT RELATIONSHIP with his network prepared David Letterman for the agony he would feel beginning June 1991, when two NBC executives flew into New York to give him the official word: Jay Leno, and not David Letterman, would succeed Johnny Carson on "The Tonight Show." It was the end of the dream Letterman had carried with him since childhood.
When he was growing up in Indianapolis, Letterman once got a Tinker Toy set as a birthday gift.
The first thing he built was a microphone, just like the ones he saw Steve Allen and Garry Moore using on television.
When Johnny Carson took over "The Tonight Show," in 1962, Letterman found an idol.
He watched and dreamed: Someday he would be that stylish, witty guy commanding late-night television.


PERES AND ARAFAT BEGIN SWISS TALKS
A potentially crucial meeting between the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, and the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, began here on Saturday with both sides emphasizing that significant issues had to be resolved before they could reach an accord opening the way for a limited Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
Elaborating on remarks made on Friday by an Israeli official, a senior Israeli delegate taking part in the talks said the Palestinians had already agreed that Israel would retain the ultimate authority to prevent unwanted individuals from entering Jericho and Gaza.


Sarajevo Family's Pain Is Soothed By Neediest
With white lace in her auburn hair and a picture book open before her, Almadina Gutic broke into the self-conscious grin of a 3-year-old who has discovered the power of a smile.
But as she smiled, she scribbled furiously on the pictures of rabbits and birds, pressing so hard with her pen that it tore the pages.


Trollope and Mail
To the Editor: The lively article about English mail ("The Empire Is in the Mail," Jan. 2) described many aspects of the Royal Mail.
One fact it omitted was that we owe the invention of the letterbox to the Victorian writer Anthony Trollope.
In addition to over 40 novels and numerous travel books, Trollope was a longtime civil servant working in the postal service.
He is responsible for the introduction of pillar boxes for posting letters.
Prior to mailboxes, letters had to be taken to a post office, not infrequently situated miles apart.
Laurie M. Guilfoyle  New York, N.Y.


Mining the Genome: Big Science as Big Business -- A special report.; PROFITS AND ETHICS CLASH IN RESEARCH ON GENETIC CODING
The Human Genome Project, an international quest to spell out the precise sequence of the three billion letters in the human genetic code, is still more than a decade from completion.
But in a rapid blurring of big science and big business, the effort has already created its first millionaires.
One is J. Craig Venter, who as a Federal employee at the National Institutes of Health developed crucial technology for spelling out -- or "sequencing" -- long strands of genetic code.
Then, a little more than a year ago, he left to join a venture to commercialize the technology.
Now, even before they have a product, Dr.
Venter and his backers have raised millions of dollars by selling public shares of stock in their venture, Human Genome Sciences Inc., of Bethesda, Md.
Differing Perspectives
Depending on one's perspective, Dr.
Venter and his company typify the ideal link between Government-supported basic science and the entrepreneurial verve necessary for seeing that the fruits of the Human Genome Project make their way into the medical marketplace.
But some scientists are uneasy -- ethically and professionally -- with the idea of their colleagues profiting from the research for which the Government has paid.


Correction
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 16 referred incorrectly to the frequent flier program of Midway Airlines.
Midway will buy American or United tickets as rewards for program members who reach certain mileage levels; its own mileage, however, is not convertible to mileage in the programs of American or United.


Zulu and Afrikaner Leaders Rally the Wrathful
Zulu nationalists and white separatists filled the air today with bellicose oratory, darkening if not quite extinguishing hopes that they would take part in South Africa's first free elections.
The leader of the Inkatha Freedom Party, Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, exhorted his followers at a party conference in the Zulu homeland to prepare for an election boycott and "the politics of resistance" unless the country's new constitution is amended to give provincial governments greater autonomy.


But Can They Make Cars?
FOR MANY YEARS, ROBERT WALZER AND Phil Hymer, two bright young electrical engineers, designed flight simulators for Hughes Aircraft.
The products of their endeavors, intricate machines built with the most advanced technology available, enabled Air Force top guns to learn to dogfight without ever leaving the ground.
Lately, though, Hymer and Walzer have been assigned to a new task: designing upscale, strap-yourself-in video games in which ordinary folks can dogfight their way through the solar system.
Their new assignment makes Hymer and Walzer participants in a real-world adventure, something called "defense conversion." For the past half century, they and the other men and women in the United States military industry have applied their considerable talents to defending our free-enterprise system.
But with the arms race now receding into history, the industry has been urged to retool for the peacetime economy.
"If they can build fighter planes, they can build electric cars." So goes the rallying cry heard from the critics who propose conversion as the road to salvation.


In Truth, Age And Beauty Mix
To the Editor:
Lynn Darling's article ("Age, Beauty and Truth," Jan. 23) will strike many a female heart.
Yet, I feel it did not go far enough.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CHELSEA;
For two years, preparations for a $100 million Federal project to repair the Williamsburg Bridge have been complicated by a thorny neighborhood problem: where to move 120 sanitation trucks on the Manhattan side of the bridge.
Now, faced with the hangman's noose -- an ultimatum to find a new site for the first 60 trucks or lose the money -- the city appears to have found a solution in Chelsea.
On Thursday, three days after a Federal deadline, the city said it had probably found a temporary site for the 60 trucks: a warehouse on 30th Street near 12th Avenue.
Community Board 4 in midtown west is not thrilled with the idea of more trucks moving through the neighborhood in order to serve the East Side.
But Ross Graham, chairwoman of the board, said she saw the writing on the wall.


That Mess on Hudson Street; Infrastructure Blues: When Neighborhood Improvement Becomes Neighborhood Plague
ASK people in Greenwich Village to name the best thing to happen along Hudson Street since the heavy machinery moved in two years ago, and they're likely to tell you about the chilly Sunday morning last April when Jacqueline Slivko decided she had had enough.
A backhoe was backing and bobbing on her corner -- Hudson as it trundles across Horatio -- its plaintive mechanical beeps jerking her from a deep sleep.
It was 7 A.M., too early for the crew to be working, and on a weekend, no less.
She called the police, who refused to respond, she said.
Then she ran downstairs -- in her nightgown, according to local legend, though Ms.
Slivko insists she was wearing street clothes -- and planted herself near the backhoe.
Evoking, albeit in a far more parochial vein, the Chinese protester who held off a column of tanks near Tiananmen Square, Ms.
Slivko remained there for more than an hour while the backhoe operator yelled at her, a construction supervisor tried to intervene and a neighbor brought her some warm gloves.


Tenant Rift Roils Calm In Gramercy
Gramercy Park, an oasis of privilege and pride on Manhattan's East Side, has been long cherished for its beauty and serenity.
But behind the stately facade of 15 Gramercy Park South the atmosphere is anything but serene: a long dispute between factions at the National Arts Club has landed in court.
Seven club members who occupy stunning duplex apartments in the club's studio building are facing eviction.


Graft and Gangsterism in Russia Blight the Entrepreneurial Spirit
While most Russians are not surprised to hear that criminal gangs seem to be taking over the country, a top-level Government report has laid out the gangs' reach in stark terms: organized crime has Russia by the throat, squeezing the life out of the fledgling private sector and holding the Government itself hostage.
The report, prepared for President Boris N. Yeltsin, says 70 to 80 percent of private enterprises and commercial banks in major cities are forced to pay a tribute of 10 to 20 percent of their turnover to organized crime.


LIFT FOR DEFENSE IN CULTISTS' TRIAL
Jurors heard tales of heroism and bureaucratic cover-up in the third week of a murder and conspiracy trial for 11 Branch Davidian sect members accused in the deaths of four Federal agents during a bungled raid last Feb. 28.
Robert Rodriguez, an undercover agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, testified that he had warned his superiors that the sect's leader, David Koresh, knew the raid was coming but that officials went ahead with it.
"It could have been called off," he said.


L.I.R.R. Takes On Terminator 2


The Outcome in Japan: Business Almost as Usual
Just two days ago, when Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa was threatening to quit unless Parliament passed his political reform program, he said the nation was at a critical juncture.
"We must answer the question of whether or not the people of Japan, as part of the international community, can reform themselves and construct a mature democratic nation," he said on Thursday.


Eloquent Movies With Eloquent Soundtracks
IS IT POSSIBLE TO PUT MUSIC TO the Holocaust without obscenely softening its horror?
Could any popular song begin to encompass the tragedy of AIDS?
Can instrumental music depict and even speak for a character who is mute?
Such thorny questions are raised by the soundtrack albums for three of the most serious films to be released late last year.
In the scores for "Schindler's List," "Philadelphia" and "The Piano," music is asked to do far more than fulfill its ordinary functions of pushing emotional buttons, decorating scenes and filling holes.
It seeks to evoke and, in some small way, to heal deep human wounds.


Sustained Sour Notes
To the Editor:
Guy Garcia's article "Rock Finds Religion. Again"  [ Jan. 2 ]  emphasizes the tragic rift separating the religious from the nonreligious (or from religions based in contradictory mythology).
The remark by the former free-thinker and born-again curmudgeon Bob Dylan that "people without faith are like walking corpses" chillingly illustrates the failure of the faithful to comprehend anything beyond their own persuasion.


Wall Street; A Question of Timing for Diana Corp. Stock
THE DIANA CORPORATION, a meat and seafood distributor, "is one of the more obscure companies on the Big Board," Business Week wrote in touting the stock in the Inside Wall Street column that went to press in the wee hours of Jan. 20.
So why, before advance copies were sent out after the close of trading that day, did volume jump as the price rose 50 cents to $7.75?
The column was thrust into the spotlight in 1988, after its author noticed suspect pre-publication gains in some stocks he wrote about.
A leak later was found at R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons, which prints Business Week.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Japan: Someplace It's Still Hip to Be Hep
American cars may not sell here, and the Japanese may still be hesitant about American rice, but the fascination with American culture only grows.
Forget for a moment the bilingual radio stations whose announcers switch seamlessly from Japanese to English to give an international air to their pop broadcasts.
Forget the teen-agers who fill Yoyogi Park every Sunday to break-dance and skateboard.


Daly to Return March 31
John Daly, suspended in November by the PGA Tour commissioner, Deane Beman, confirmed today that he will not play again on the tour until the Freeport-McMoRan Classic, March 31-April 3 at New Orleans.
Daly, who was signing autographs here at the Wilson Sporting Goods exhibition during the PGA Merchandise Show, said he has been working hard on his game since he was suspended for picking up his ball during the Lincoln-Mercury Kapalua International.
"I haven't had callouses this big in five years," said Daly, who declined to answer any other questions.


Mary Ann Gibney, Gordon E. Loh
Mary Ann Gibney, the director of research administration at the Hospital for Special Surgery, was married yesterday to Gordon Edward Loh, a financial analyst for Pfizer Pharmaceuticals.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Arthur Leone performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Loh graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in public health from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard X. Gibney of River Edge, N.J.


Commercial Property: Purchasing Rather Than Renting; A Belief in Recovery Jogs Both Buyers and Banks
MATHIAS MEINZINGER does not consider renting a viable option.
His company, Creative Bath Products, makes bath accessories on expensive machinery that requires a lot of electricity to run, and his cost of setting up shop is high.
"If I'm going to pay to improve a building, I'd rather improve one that I own," he said.


Can Love Go Along With Lamaze?
A WEEKEND of romance was what Iris Jumper promised 13 extremely pregnant women.
And on the floor of a Smithtown Sheraton banquet room were huge-tummied women and their spouses in various stages of embrace.
When Ms.
Jumper promises, Ms.
Jumper obviously delivers.
"Ah, but the romance is still to come," she said.
What looked like an obstetrics orgy was actually an educational experience.
Couples were learning all about childbirth.
They were lying down, "because after several hours of lectures that's probably the most comfortable position," Ms.
Jumper said, "especially for the women."


Giuliani Urges New Tack on Homeless
Speaking in the face of bitter heckling, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani appealed yesterday for new approaches to the problem of homelessness, saying that is wrong to lump all homeless people together in a single group.
"We are dealing with very different people that have to be addressed in different ways," he said.
"We tend to oversimplify it in a way that becomes very destructive."


Young Olympic Squad Penalized by Penalties
Ready or not, the young, goal-happy United States Olympic hockey team played its final game in America today before leaving for Europe and the Olympics.
Significantly, the squad committed too many penalties in losing to the Canadian Olympic team, 6-5, at Nassau Coliseum.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Germany: Blame It On Butt-head
Germans are fixated on American television on any intellectual level, from "General Hospital," "Mr. Ed" and "I Dream of Jeannie" to "Bonanza," "Hawaii Five-0" and "Murphy Brown" to "Lonesome Dove" and "Roots." Old American movies are shown every night.
Jay Leno is here, too, and David Letterman will arrive soon, in English and German versions.
"The Civil War" aired three times.
Other documentaries challenged official versions of the murders of John F. Kennedy and the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Beavis and Butt-head, the cartoon bad boys, arrived just months ago and are only seen late on weekend evenings.
But that inaccessibility has apparently contributed to their rise to cult status among "adolescent loudmouths with a developed feeling for guitars and a still undeveloped feeling for taste," as The Suddeutsche Zeitung observed.


Turning Trash Into Treasure for the Soil
GARDENERS are learning to be good recyclers.
Each year more of them learn that composting is an excellent way to recycle wastes like weeds, leaves, vegetable peelings and grass clippings.
They add the decomposed organic material to soil, even potting mixes, and learn that the compost does wonders.
In fact, the compost has earned such a marvelous reputation, it has gained a new appellation: black gold.
Technology is catching up, ever so slowly though, on this recycling effort.
The problem has always been that too much waste is accumulated with no market to absorb it.
About 40 percent of the solid waste that goes into landfills is paper.
Industry figures indicate that an average person disposes of 1.6 pounds of paper a day.


Where Women Can Turn for Aid
FROM shoestring to shoestring, or how to run a successful volunteer agency on almost no money, is the story of WISH -- Women in Self-Help.
From a small room in a church in New Rochelle, 20 English-, Japanese- and Spanish-speaking volunteers offer other women an anonymous free telephone counseling and referral service.
From its beginnings in 1976, WISH has helped women help themselves with all kinds of problems -- but only on the telephone, because the service does not have the resources to offer free face-to-face counseling.
To date, the organization has received 40,000 calls from abused women, from depressed women, from women with family problems, from lonely women far from home, from women undergoing numerous crises in their lives.


Yale Rep Offers 'America' Premiere
THE Foundling Father, a black man who lives in the past, is such a dead ringer for Abraham Lincoln, that he is told he ought to be shot.
A gravedigger by trade "with a steady business," he does an assassination act as a sideline.
In a theme park somewhere, sometime in the Great Hole of History, passers-by are invited to drop a coin into the slot atop a bust of the 16th president and take a shot at the Lincoln look-alike seated in a theater box, wearing a stovepipe hat.


Rock-Bottom Rooms
New York City for $17 a night?
Well, yes, if you're willing to bunk down with three other roommates at the Big Apple Youth Hostel, 109 West 45th Street, near Times Square.
The Big Apple is one of over 1,000 frill-free, basement-priced crash pads listed in Jim's Backpacker's Bible, a 128-page guide for the United States and Canada. (The cover copy promises $20 or less a person a night, though an informal sampling found a few $30 and $40 rooms in the mix.)


Double Duty 101
To the Editor:
In his essay "Schools That Level the Playing Field for New Yorkers"  [ Jan. 16 ]  Herbert Muschamp notes that in all three of the schools he was discussing the auditorium is designed in such a way that it "can be used by the community after school hours." He further notes that when it is used for such purposes, other parts of the building need not be opened, saving money that might otherwise be devoted to heat, light and so on.


SURFACING
MARKETING  Funny, you don't smell like you went to Harvard: A few colleges, including the Universities of Miami, Alabama and Indiana, are selling men's colognes in a venture with Wilshire Fragrance of Ann Arbor, Mich.
IMAGE  Heavy actresses: Defying conventions about how actresses should look are Darlene Cates, above, in the film "What's Eating Gilbert Grape?"; Claudia Shear, in her one-woman stage show "Blown Sideways Through Life," and Camryn Manheim, whose show "Wake Up, I'm Fat," ran in New York last year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  CRIME WAVE IN RUSSIA  A wave of organized crime gripping Russia is so severe, a Government report says, that 70 to 80 percent of businesses are forced to pay tribute to criminal gangs.  1  COMPROMISE IN JAPAN  News analysis: The Prime Minister of Japan, in order to pass his political reforms, was forced to compromise, with the result that the changes will not be the shock therapy that he had anticipated.  3


A la Carte; Some Hamptons Restaurants Experiment in the Off Season
WORD of new chefs, exciting menus, exceptional meals and unusual dishes flow from the Hamptons in the warm-weather months.
But not all restaurants at the tip of the Island hibernate for the winter.
Some persevere, and a few even try out new concepts in the off season.
The Honest Diner in Amagansett is one such restauarant.
It continues to perk along on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, and its new chef, Peter (Pep) Myers, is providing a midwinter barbecue fix for East Enders.


The Executive Computer; Curtain's Rising on a Third Generation of On-Line Services
THE fashionable joke floating around the Internet last week was that the "information superhighway is just like CB radio, but with more typing."
There is no disputing that computer networks and on-line services -- spurred on in part by Vice President Al Gore and his promotion of the "national information infrastructure" -- are currently the nation's biggest craze.


Northeast Ski Areas Report Hefty Snowfall
Ski areas in New England and upstate New York, which in recent seasons have relied heavily on machine-made snow, are reporting the best early-season natural snowfall in years.
Depths on mountain summits are being measured in feet -- up to six feet at many areas -- rather than the usual inches.
"Ski areas had the best December in seven years," said Tom Meyers, marketing director of the Vermont Ski Areas Association.
"It's the first Christmas that it didn't rain sometime during the holiday. We had two or three days of extremely cold weather, but it's been snowing from Dec. 19 on."


IN SHORT: FICTION
NEW ORLEANS INTRIGUE VOODOO DREAMS A Novel of Marie Laveau.
By Jewell Parker Rhodes.
St.
Martin's, $22.95.


After 22 Years, a New Dodge Ram
I HAD just shut off the snowblower and trudged inside when the phone rang.
"We have a new Porsche for you," the car people said.


UPPER East Side, Stylish or Homey
BARKING DOG LUNCHEONETTE ++  (212) 831-1800; 1678 Third Avenue, at 94th Street; $; no credit cards
This quaint and cozy spot has dark wood paneling, ocher walls, soft lighting and padded booths.
Bookcases and built-in shelves hold old books and antique cookie cans.
The wide-ranging menu offers everything from breakfast, soups, salads and sandwiches to larger meals in the evening with a selection of hot plate dinners.
There is a cobb salad with grilled chicken, bacon, sprouts, avocado and blue cheese; or grilled vegetables with roasted red pepper and garlic sauce.
Sandwiches, with homemade vegetable slaw, include honey-glazed smoked ham and Swiss cheese with Russian dressing on focaccia bread; roast turkey with bacon and cranberry mayonnaise on whole grain, and burgers on focaccia.
For dinner, try the meat loaf with mushroom gravy and mashed potatoes; baked penne and Cheddar cheese, or roast leg of lamb with balsamic vinegar and mint sauce, with scalloped potatoes. ($25 and Under: 2/12/93)


UPPER East Side, Stylish or Homey
BARKING DOG LUNCHEONETTE ++  (212) 831-1800; 1678 Third Avenue, at 94th Street; $; no credit cards
This quaint and cozy spot has dark wood paneling, ocher walls, soft lighting and padded booths.
Bookcases and built-in shelves hold old books and antique cookie cans.
The wide-ranging menu offers everything from breakfast, soups, salads and sandwiches to larger meals in the evening with a selection of hot plate dinners.
There is a cobb salad with grilled chicken, bacon, sprouts, avocado and blue cheese; or grilled vegetables with roasted red pepper and garlic sauce.
Sandwiches, with homemade vegetable slaw, include honey-glazed smoked ham and Swiss cheese with Russian dressing on focaccia bread; roast turkey with bacon and cranberry mayonnaise on whole grain, and burgers on focaccia.
For dinner, try the meat loaf with mushroom gravy and mashed potatoes; baked penne and Cheddar cheese, or roast leg of lamb with balsamic vinegar and mint sauce, with scalloped potatoes. ($25 and Under: 2/12/93)


In Other Words, Just Make It Perfect
From 13 Guiding Principles to Govern Redevelopment on the Downtown Brooklyn Waterfront, compiled by the Brooklyn Bridge Park Coalition. 1a.
The Plan shall celebrate the unparalleled vistas and historic nature of the site with a world-class design affording a spectacular entry into Brooklyn.


A Timely Call For Reform in Nasdaq Trading
WHEN you hire a broker to be your agent, should you expect that broker to look out for your best interests, or to ignore them in an effort to increase his own profits?
Unfortunately, all too often the brokers who make markets in Nasdaq stocks figure that customers are there to be exploited rather than served.
As the Securities and Exchange Commission made clear last week in its long-awaited "Market 2000" report, some practices that have grown up over the years in Nasdaq take advantage of customers in ways that would never be allowed on a stock exchange.


Acquittal Revives Fear Of 'The Maze'
The Maze -- and shock over a killing there more than a year ago -- refuse to go away.
For years the zigzag passageway between warehouses on 74th Street near 52d Court in Maspeth has had an exciting, forbidden appeal to youngsters, who used it as a hangout, a hideaway and private graffiti gallery.
On Dec. 6, 1992, the police say, 16-year-old Ryan Dionne was kicked, then stabbed 18 times, in an angry dispute over money.
He died on the spot, in the presence of horrified friends.


Fingerprints-for-Welfare May Widen
Louis Jeanty did something this morning that some say could save the state welfare system millions of dollars but that others see as demeaning to him.
He had his fingerprints taken.


'Secure Rental Oasis For East New York'
To the Editor:
The reason the density is so high for the low-rise Spring Creek Gardens housing complex, which we designed  [ "A Secure Rental Oasis for East New York," Jan. 9 ] , is that it was done through a Large Scale Residential Development provision in New York City's zoning rules in exchange for superior site planning and other amenities.


L.I.R.R. Takes On Terminator 2


Sound Bytes; Tough-Talk Consultant To a Darwinian Industry
AS founder and president of Forrester Research Inc., the Cambridge, Mass., consulting firm, George Forrester Colony has become one of the most quoted consultants in the world of high technology.
Mr.
Colony's early proselytizing about client/server computing -- as far back as 1987 -- put him in the spotlight as that computing trend has become the watchword of the 1990's.
Forrester Research is now predicting an annual market of $4.5 billion for client/server hardware and software by 1996.
After five years at the Boston-based high-tech consultancy the Yankee Group, Mr.
Colony started Forrester in 1983, fascinated with the Darwinian nature of high technology.
"In our industry," he said, "change can be fast, brutal and unforgiving."


A Tour Exists
To the Sports Editor:
"Don't Just Go in Circles, Figure Skaters, Go on Tour" (The Times, Jan. 16) was the most under-researched and one-sided article I have read in a long time.


A Warm Conclusion (in Part) To a Tale of 2 Tropical Birds
A search for two tropical birds in Central Park has ended, with mixed results, one of the birdwatchers said yesterday.
One of the birds is alive and well in his benefactor's apartment; the other seems to have fallen victim to the harshness of nature.
Three tropical birds had been flying loose in the park since summer's end.
Birdwatchers had seen a red-tailed hawk kill one in November.
As temperatures dipped below zero, they had not spotted the others in a week.


Bulgarian Hunts Criminals of Communist Era
The Bulgarian prosecutor, Ivan Tatarchev, is determined to put 22 former officials in jail on charges that they secretly and illegally channeled arms and money during the 1980's.
His determination persists despite the fact that secrecy was a hallmark of the Communists, and that dictatorial governments generally claim whatever power they want.
But Mr.
Tartarchev maintains that the officials spent money that wasn't accounted for in the budget, as the Communists' own law required.


Jan. 23-29: Reno's Troubles; Yet Another Job Opening, This Time at Justice
The forced resignation last week of Philip B. Heymann, the second-highest official at the Justice Department, brought to the surface long-simmering tensions in the agency's top ranks.
For months Justice Department lawyers said it had grown increasingly evident that Attorney General Janet Reno was tiring of Mr.
Heymann and the scholarly ways of the 61-year-old Harvard law professor.
In an uncomfortable joint news conference, each blamed conflicts in approach and an absence of chemistry, but neither would discuss specific grievances.


The Wet-Shirt Coolant
To the Editor:
Again, technology has diverged widely from what is possible and environmentally sustainable, as shown in the backsliding over car coolants ("Scarcity of Car Coolant Could Prove Costly," Dec. 26).


Karen Naughton, C.J. Killmurray
Karen Ann Naughton, a daughter of Eugene and Phyllis Naughton of East Brunswick, N.J., was married there on Friday to Christopher John Killmurray, a son of Francis and Marilyn Killmurray of Sewaren, N.J.
The Rev.
Fred Conoscenti performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church.
The bride, 32, is an associate tax counsel at the CSX Corporation, a transportation conglomerate, in Liberty Corner, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a law degree from Touro College and a master of laws degree from New York University.


Introduction to the New Florida Cuisine
UNTIL recently, Florida was not exactly famous for its cuisine.
But some of the best restaurants in the country have opened in the Miami area in the last few years.
The influx of Cubans, Nicaraguans and Colombians and immigrants from Caribbean islands like Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad have resulted in a fascinating cross-pollination of ethnic foods, which has made something of a field day for enterprising young chefs.
As recent visits have proved, Miami now holds its own with New York and Los Angeles when it comes to good, interesting food.
Steven Raichlen, a cooking teacher and food writer who lives in Coconut Grove, has come out with a fascinating and eminently usable cookbook, "Miami Spice: The New Florida Cuisine" (Workman).
His recipes are inventive yet simple to cook and combine exotic flavors and ingredients in exciting new ways.
Moreover, these dishes are just the thing to bring in a little tropical cheer on a wintry day in the North.


Female Crew's Skipper May Try America's Cup
The women's team on the 64-foot sailboat, Heineken, was caught in a squall off the coast of Tasmania.
The sea was as flat as cardboard, but the wind, rain and hail were kicking up their own version of hell.
A 68-knot breeze had turned the yacht into a bullet train on water.
Heineken was sailing at a steady 25 knots, an exhilarating speed for a boat that big.
"It was really pretty exciting and intense," said the yacht's skipper, Dawn Riley.
"I was the only one on the wheel. I had my goggles on, but I could barely see the compass. There was spray everywhere."


BEST SELLERS: January 30, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
2
77
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
13
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
4
1
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
5
6
2
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
6
1
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in Buenos Aires in 1942.
7
4
42
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
8
5
46
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
9
7
23
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
10
9
16
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
11
10
7
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
12
12
8
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
13
1
GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A romantic encounter between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large hotel chain.
14*
8
12
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
15
13
6
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
38
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
6
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
4
11
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
4
3
23
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
7
21
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
6
6
17
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7
8
9
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
8
12
3
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
9
5
15
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
10
11
17
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
11*
10
77
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
12
26
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13
2
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the prism of his favorite sport.
14
9
8
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
15*
13
3
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
14
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
2
27
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
3
3
36
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
4
2
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editor's choices of recent books of particular interest) BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of spiritual apprehension.
THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.
A DRINKING LIFE: A Memoir, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Mr.
Hamill's drinking is the organizing theme for the 37 years covered here, but the more fundamental matter is a fine portrait of the emerging artist, boy and man, in a New York that is no more.
FRAUEN: German Women Recall the Third Reich, by Alison Owings. (Rutgers University, $24.95.) Ms.
Owings hoped, by interviewing German women 70 and older, to find they had been nobler than German men in the Nazi era.
They weren't, but the excursion is fascinating.
A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr.
Gaddis's fourth novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation.
GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A road novel that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937, by Robert Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.
LEAVING HOME: A Memoir, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) What he's really trying to do with his humor, Mr.
Buchwald says, is get even for a dark, poverty-stricken childhood.
Most readers would agree his revenge is complete.
LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD.
From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War Zones, by Peter Arnett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A lean, engrossing memoir of reporters and war by a correspondent who was among the first to arrive and the last to leave in Vietnam, and virtually the only voice from Baghdad during the gulf war.
PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly realized world of 1960's Dublin.
SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.


Super Bowl Rings
WHAT: The most coveted piece of jewelry at this time of year does not come from the Joan Rivers collection of home-shopping trinkets.
No, it's the Super Bowl ring, symbolic of victory in the National Football League's annual overhyped, usually soporific championship game (and no, the ring is not available on QVC).
Some players wear them.
Some store them.
Some have even sold them.
Every player and coach lusts for one, despite its habitual lack of subtlety or modesty.
These are very, very big gold and diamond rings.


Alden Jones, Richard Perkins 3d
Alden Landry Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Graham E. Jones of Boston, was married there yesterday to Richard Sturgis Perkins 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Perkins Jr. of Topsfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Seymour St.
John, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Perkins, 30, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a senior project manager at Spinnaker Software, which makes, sells and installs software, in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is the chief financial officer at Practice Management Systems in Needham, Mass., distributors of computer software for medical and dental offices.


Why Edith Wharton Was a Pain in the Neck
To the Editor:
I can only assume that Marc Aronson loves the critic William Crary Brownell, the subject of his doctoral thesis, with the same defensive passion I lavish on Edith Wharton.
How else to explain his skewed description of Brownell's relationship with Wharton when he was her editor ("Wharton and the House of Scribner: The Novelist as a Pain in the Neck," Jan. 2)?


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Junior's Makes a Pitch For a Corner on Cheesecake As Junior's Restaurant lays plans to set up cheesecake kiosks in malls around the country, its owners are seeking to elevate the company's image back home in Brooklyn.
They have asked Community Board 2 to support a campaign to add the words "Cheesecake Corner" to the street signs at the corner of Flatbush Avenue Extension and DeKalb Avenue, where Junior's offices are located.
The board is scheduled to vote on the matter on Feb. 9.


Conversations/Patrick T. Murphy; A Defender of Chicago's Children Refuses to Be Polite About Abuse
IT is impossible in this city to be neutral about Patrick T. Murphy.
Call him a passionate and dedicated children's advocate, who arrives at his office every morning by 5:30 A.M. to call, write, yell, swear and sue anyone from incompetent bureaucrats to abusive parents.
Or call him a polarizing figure whose yen for confrontation and intemperate grandstanding sometimes prolong the very cases he is working to resolve.
He is so driven by outrage that he dismisses diplomacy as a tactic of those who would sacrifice children's best interests.
"Our job is to confront people on behalf of my clients," he said.
"My clients are not the type you negotiate on behalf of because they're getting screwed. And if you stick them with D.C.F.S.  [ the state Department of Children and Family Services ] , it gets even worse. Will the kid go through 12 foster homes? Get beat up and maybe raped?"


Say What You Will
To the Editor:
I was reading Calvin Woodard's review saying to myself, "Yes, yes, finally!" when suddenly I reached the last part of the discussion: his introduction of the notion of instrumentality.
I have reread those final paragraphs several times, and I still have only the dimmest sense of what he is talking about.


A Team So Cool It Should Play in Leather Jackets and Sunglasses
For quarterback Troy Aikman, it was like an out-of-body experience.
The concussion he received last week in the National Football Conference title game had left his memory so ravaged, he could only remember the pre-game introductions and one incomplete pass.
He watched the game a few days later on tape, and saw this strange guy in his uniform.
"I watched game film and I couldn't believe how I remembered almost nothing about the game," Aikman said.
"It was like, 'Hey, that's me out there.' I was watching an impostor in my uniform."


Or Maybe It's Just Director Somnolence
To the Editor:
"Drawing the Line on Corporate Boards" (Viewpoints, Jan. 16) does an excellent job of discussing how boards have become more serious in their corporate oversight duties.


A Simmer of Hope
Stew occupies a precarious place in the collective culinary subconscious.
When the slow simmer of a potful of food makes an unctuous whole far greater than its parts, the dish has triumphed over the mundane, achieving an edible synthesis of a culture, be it Hungarian goulash or Creole gumbo.
When, on the other hand, a stew fails to reconcile disparate ingredients, it can be a poignant reminder of the limits of human effort, sad to think about, horrible to taste.
Desire flirts with the possibility of disaster when you hanker for a stew.
But few primitive appetites have ever been risk-free, so stew persists.
Outside the kitchen, to stew is to fret, to be vexed and worried, to fall victim to your own actions.
In the kitchen, however, to stew is to hope -- to hope that the choice of ingredients will meld felicitously as they mellow together in a pot.
Instinct is needed to season properly, and to temper the developing stew with basic touches -- more broth or water, a counterpoint of vinegar or lemon, a blast of fresh herbs.


House That Ice Built
Residents of tiny Saranac Lake, N.Y. (population 6,000) celebrate their subzero days with an annual Winter Carnival, complete with parades, pancake breakfasts and an enormous ice palace.
But the killer winter of '94 affected even Saranac Lake, and its preparations for the event.
"We got 32 inches of snow," said Mayor William Madden 3d.
And that dumped eight inches of slush on the bay where the palace's ice is harvested in 800-pound blocks.
At last report, the volunteer fire department was hosing down the slush, and construction of this year's palace, a French chateau, was almost on schedule.
Like previous palaces, which can be as high as 60 feet, this year's will be brightly lighted and, if all goes well, open to visitors. (Last year's featured an interior maze.)


'Them' That's Got (or Not)
DOWNTOWN -- "I've never seen this many of them in one place before," Catherine McGann, a photographer, was saying Tuesday at a men's fashion-week party given by Details magazine and Joop.
The "them" in this case referred to the fashion athletes cruising inside 1950, a retro-chic furniture store on Lafayette Street, in clingy track-suit gowns and slacks, platform shoes and wool ski caps over shaved heads.


Breaks In Filing Returns
TAX considerations, both old and new, will have an impact on homeowners in a variety of circumstances in the upcoming filing season.
Those affected include, among others, people whose homes were damaged in severe storms, flooding or fire last year, families who may be relocating this year and anyone who owns a co-op apartment.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Haiti: Malcolm X, Sure. But Demi?
In Haiti, frozen in a political stalemate and isolated by an international embargo, the runaway favorite films last year were two American hits that each offered a kind of escape.
The first was "Indecent Proposal." The capitalist love triangle involving Robert Redford, Demi Moore and Woody Harrelson was so popular that Port-au-Prince's two leading movie houses each devoted all their screens to it.
Its theme -- the use of money and power to win romance from someone poorer -- struck a chord among many Haitians.
Humor aside, they saw reflections of questions about concubinage and polygamy in this deeply class-divided country.


Minorities and Adult Education Give Women's Colleges a Boost; Not for Middle Class
To the Editor:
"Women's Colleges Find a New Popularity" presents elite women's colleges in a positive light, but fails to tell the negative side.
As a white, male, married, middle-class father, who has been through the application process, I became an expert on their discriminatory financial aid policies.
The idea of academic merit has got lost in their selection of students.


Weather Was Frightful But Not a Showstopper
AN absent clarinet soloist, a dance company unable to rehearse, canceled classes and sparsely filled theaters have strained the resources and nerves of performing arts groups this icy month.
But ingenuity, doggedness and humor have prevailed, and for better or worse, most shows have gone on.
Lyndon Woodside, music director of the Westchester Choral Society, gave a pep talk to the 95-member ensemble last Sunday shortly before its annual winter concert.
"The audience has paid to hear us sing," he told the choristers assembled on the stage of the Concert Hall at Purchase College here.
"They aren't interested in knowing that we missed three rehearsals because of the weather."


A Ranger Misses New York City Weather
After a week of hockey games in California, Sergei Zubov misses the cold air, the windchill, the snow and the slush.
The Ranger defenseman prefers New York weather, which is closer to the climate of his native Russia.
"The problem in California is the warm weather and the air," Zubov said Friday night after the Rangers lost, 3-2, to the Mighty Ducks.
"It's tough to breathe. I don't like it, seriously. You breathe this air, and it goes all around your whole body in the oxygen. I don't like it."


Arrest in Shooting of Boy
A bullet that hit a 9-year-old boy in the neck Friday night as he watched television in his living room in Elmhurst, Queens, was fired by a man who lives across the street, the police said yesterday.
George Brown, 27, of 55-37 96th Street, was charged yesterday with assault and other crimes stemming from the shooting, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
He was arrested Friday, after the shooting, for disorderly conduct outside the boy's house, she said.
Officers seized an unregistered .25-caliber handgun from Mr.
Brown's house, Sergeant Haimeck said.
"We don't have a motive yet." The boy, whose name was not released, was in stable condition yesterdat at St.
John's Episcopal Hospital.


Images and Fantasies From Down on the Old English Farm
THE England on view at the Yale Center for British Art is not all that picturesque, but the countryside is verdant, the skies are overcast and the people docile and industrious.
This is agricultural landscape from 1780 to 1890, a period that was molded by the Industrial Revolution, the French Revolution and other upheavals.
While the show is titled "Toil and Plenty," Blake's "satanic mills" are nowhere to be seen, however.
One work, George Clausen's dour 1883-1884 view of a harvest, is Social Realism influenced by photography and there are scenes of hop picking, which, as industrialization advanced, became increasingly an occupation for urban poor people (and a rare chance for them to breathe fresh air).
But the pickers in a circa-1870 watercolor attributed to George Pinwell have but hop vines in common with those described by George Orwell in the 1930's.
By that time the annual descent of the harvesters must have been about as welcome as the crowd for a World Cup soccer game today.
But the show's purpose is not so much to rip the lid off 19th-century English landscape as to remind viewers that it should not be taken at face value.


Southern Exposure
IN this country, women of the South, especially, have been presented in our literature like an army of determined Scarlett O'Haras, sweet and flowery on the surface, but with indomitable spirits that will get them through the toughest of times.
Whether that is justified probably depends on geographic location.
But the idea of strong, courageous Southern women does exist, and it forms the foundation for Robert Harling's tragicomedy "Steel Magnolias" now at Theater Three in Port Jefferson through Feb. 12.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
On Martin Luther King Day, the President and I launched our community empowerment program ("The Myth of Community Development," by Nicholas Lemann, Jan. 9).
We issued a call to all Americans to come together to help distressed communities and their residents to realize the American dream.
Our challenge is not simply another "revitalize-the-ghetto scheme," based solely on trying to create "a lot of new economic activity in poor neighborhoods."
The principles underlying our community empowerment initiative focus on both economic growth and the development of a sustainable community.
Our program is dedicated to expanding economic opportunity by involving the private sector throughout each local region in revitalizing its communities.
It is also committed to creating communities where the streets are safe, the air and water are clean, housing is secure, human services are accessible, learning is a lifelong commitment and the residents' civic spirit is nurtured -- the types of investments that Lemann himself appears to embrace.


The Not-So-Mysterious Dishes of India
INDIAN food, like India itself, seems diverse, extraordinary and, most of all, exotic.
That is, exotic as in foreign, foreboding even mysterious.
As a result of this perception, many Long Islanders give Indian restaurants and the sometimes confusing curries, chutneys and chapatis served at them a wide berth.
Yet here on the Island, as elsewhere, a few Indian restaurants break through and achieve popularity, even with conservative diners.
Diwan in Port Washington, with its combination of traditional tandooris, tikkas, biryanis and kebabs and its slightly unconventional veal chops and rack of lamb, is successfully attracting patrons who want authentic dishes while reaching out to the American mainstream as well.


Jan. 23-29; There's No Escaping Sad and Sordid Reality. Even in the Comic Pages.
Last week was a bad one for idols real and fictional.
Michael Jackson agreed to pay undisclosed millions of dollars to get a 14-year-old boy to drop a civil lawsuit accusing him of sexual molestation.
The settlement -- which may take the wind out of a continuing criminal investigation -- was to many a tacit acknowledgement by the pop superstar of immoral behavior, even though he maintained his innocence.
Mr.
Jackson avoided embarrassing scrutiny in court, at least for now, but his popularity and career are in unmistakable decline.


Quake Brings Down Walls, And Neighborhood Emerges
This week, for the first time in the four and a half years that they have been next-door neighbors, nodding and saying hello but nothing more, Vera Marx and Dinah Freedman visited each other's homes.
The earthquake left both their houses in shambles.
"We're talking now," Mrs.
Freedman, who is rearing five children, said the other evening as she prepared dinner in the garage, where her family has been camped out for the last 10 days.


Business Diary: January 23-28
THE ECONOMY Pleasant Economic Surprises The good economic news just keeps coming.
On Friday, the Commerce Department said the economy grew at a 5.9 percent pace in the fourth quarter of 1993 -- better than the already upbeat projections of most private analysts.
It was the best quarterly performance for the gross domestic product in six years.
Perhaps as good as the strong and broad-based gain was that core inflation grew just 1.3 percent in the quarter, the best since 1967.
Economists are predicting that growth in coming months will not be as powerful as last quarter's rate, but it should be strong enough to keep consumers upbeat about the future.
In 1993 over all, the G.D.P. grew 2.9 percent.
It was the best rate since 1988 and a better annual rate than in any year during the Bush Administration.
Understandably, the number delighted the Clinton Administration.


Copeland's Cooks On 125th Street
Copeland's, one of Harlem's best-known restaurants, is planning to open a branch on 125th Street, a thoroughfare that is long on bustle and short on dining opportunities.
The owner, Calvin Copeland, started his small dynasty with a fried-chicken outlet on West 145th Street in 1970, eventually turning it into a cafeteria.
In 1981, he expanded next door with a sleek restaurant that is still serving everything from chitterlings and pigs' feet to champagne.


David Rabe Plays a Double Part: Writer-Director
Somehow David Rabe, the playwright, has turned all the haunting, ponderous bulk of the past itself into a character in his new play, "Those the River Keeps." And somehow David Rabe, the director, will get this character to dance tomorrow night, darkly fox-trotting him forth onto the New York stage from the underworld where Mr.
Rabe would plumb the dreadful depths of memory's claim on people.
"When I wrote it, I knew it would be. I just came upon it," Mr.
Rabe explained, with a bit of inexplicable wonder at the fox-trot scene.
He talked during one of the final rehearsals of the play, which opens tomorrow Off Broadway at the Promenade Theater.
The dance is unusual for the fact that two men -- a cynical hoodlum and a hyperkinetic escapee from the underworld past of the two -- come together half casually and half fearfully in a moment of morbid nostalgia as the old doo-wop tune "Angel Baby" thumps out from the stage.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
109.90
111.55
124.65
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7425
1.7540
1.6115
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3245
1.3116
1.2679
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4960
1.4920
1.4865
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$377.30
$381.50
$328.70
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Nigeria: Bruce Lee Is No Fresh Prince
In Nigeria, recent releases like "Jurassic Park" are impossible to find: the few theaters that exist offer low-budget horror films and Bruce Lee retreads.
On bootleg video, just about anything by Sylvester Stallone or Arnold Schwarzenegger sells well.
Television shows with well-to-do black Americans occupy a secure niche: "Fresh Prince of Bel Air," "A Different World" and "The Cosby Show." By contrast, while T-shirts with the "X" from Spike Lee's film about Malcolm X were ubiquitous, the movie itself did not find much of an audience for its sober message.
Elsewhere in black Africa, one sees sharp contrasts: In Zaire, after 20 years of economic turmoil, there is not one movie theater left in Kinshasa, the capital.
The public television station relies heavily on South African nature documentaries, month-old European soccer matches, horror films and Government news.
Among Zaireans, eager for any cultural stimulation from abroad, American evangelical programs have become tremendously popular.
Jimmy Swaggart, dubbed in French, is a star here; his foot-stomping, hellfire-and-damnation sermons are an electrifying alternative to the straitlaced crusading by local missionaries.


Tenant Rift Roils Calm In Gramercy
Gramercy Park, an oasis of privilege and pride on Manhattan's East Side, has been long cherished for its beauty and serenity.
But behind the stately facade of 15 Gramercy Park South the atmosphere is anything but serene: a long dispute between factions at the National Arts Club has landed in court.
Seven club members who occupy stunning duplex apartments in the club's studio building are facing eviction.


State of the Union
In the past quarter century, debutante balls, drawing-room soirees and white-tie dinners faded from the national dance card like fine ink on an old invitation.
Yet the Wedding remained, a preserve of the Age of Innocence, a rigidly choreographed display.
A dwindling leisure class with its battalions of servants probably eroded most elaborate entertainment.
Moreover, as American style -- at once democratic and rambunctious -- matured, partygoers began to rail against prescribed Victoriana as if it were whalebones in a corset.
But unlike the dinner party or the backyard barbecue, the wedding (theoretically) is a one-time-only singular affair.
And so, like a lumbering animal with one chance to procreate, wedding style evolved at a glacial pace.


Disabled Truck Near the . . .?
Traffic reporters may have until the end of the decade to decide on a substitute reference point for the Elmhurst tanks, the twin towers that stand conveniently near a frequently jammed section of the Long Island Expressway.
Brooklyn Union Gas, which permanently closed the antiquated tanks last spring, still does not have a timetable for the removal of the tanks and their white and red tower frames.
"It's not a priority item, but we'll slot it into our plan and budget at some point" by the end of the decade, said Robert H. Preusser, vice president and chief engineer.


The New Colossus: American Culture As Power Export
Spielbergian Dinosaurs devouring entire national film industries at a single gulp!
Silver-haired villains and sloe-eyed ingenues setting new soap-opera standards for political incorrectness as half the world watches!
Teen-agers from Bangkok to Beirut wearing Chicago Bulls caps backwards and lamenting Michael Jordan's retirement!
Smoke bombs and lasers and thrusting pelvises and outraged clerics and intellectuals from Paris to Teheran to Beijing denouncing Michael Jackson and Madonna!
As the millennium approaches -- "Angels in America" is also big worldwide, but rather higher of brow -- American popular culture has never been more dominant internationally, nor more controversial.
American cultural exports swell at least some of us with pride and help reduce the trade deficit.
Serious money is involved; this is America's second-biggest export after aircraft.
But just as some Americans have doubts about our pop culture -- its propensity to celebrate violence, sexual stereotyping and sheer lowest-common-denominator crassness -- those doubts multiply abroad, especially when the imports are seen as a threat to local cultural identity.


An American From Paris
JOSEPHINE The Hungry Heart.
By Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase.
Illustrated. 532 pp.
New York: Random House. $27.50.


Menendez Trials' Collapse Discourages Both Sides
Nobody can be happy today about the prospect of starting all over again in the Menendez brothers' murder trial after six months of effort, expense and high emotion collapsed on Friday in a mistrial.
The results, with two separate juries locked in severe divisions, offered little encouragement for either the prosecution or the defense.
Given the strong competing emotions aroused by the issues of parental killings and of child abuse, the new trial promised by District Attorney Gil Garcetti seemed to point toward new deadlocks.


Daisy Newman; Writer, 89
Daisy Newman, a novelist and Quaker historian, died on Tuesday at her home in Lexington, Mass.
She was 89.
The cause was heart failure, said her son, J. Nicholas Newman of Wayland, Mass.


SUNDAY, January 30, 1994; Blue Noses: Greensleeves!
Listen to any folk music lately?
Well don't, not when children are around.
At least with rap and music videos you have the help of numerous concerned citizens trying to censor the living daylights out of the lyrics, to protect the youth of America.
But it seems that folk music is ignored.
"I held a knife against her breast/As into my arms she pressed." What?
That's not from Snoop Doggy Dog, or any other "gangsta" rapper.
It's from Joan Baez singing "Banks of the Ohio." Or how about the Kingston Trio: "I met her on the mountain/There I took her life/Met her on the mountain/Stabbed her with my knife." That's from "Tom Dooley," and another, more recent version of the song has the line, "If you'd a heard her laughin', you'd a done the same as me." Earth to Tipper!
Are you asleep at the switch!?


Getting on Line Before You Go
PEOPLE with computers, modems and memberships in one or more of the on-line services can act as their own travel agents.
It isn't always easy, and it isn't free, but it can be rewarding.
One can gather information on flight schedules, hotels and automobile rentals; examine a restaurant guide; see if the State Department has issued an advisory about a foreign destination; find visa requirements, and exchange messages with other members.


Commentary Or Shlock?
To the Editor:
Guy Garcia's examples of rockers with insight only show that they've finally learned the lesson of the 60's -- that it's hip to sing about deep stuff.
They have convinced the public (and some journalists) that pop entertainment has redeeming moral content.


An Artist's Chronicle Of a Death Foretold
HANNAH WILKE SPENT MUCH of her life posing for the camera in ways that raised eyebrows.
In 1954, when she was just 14, she had her picture taken wearing nothing but her mother's mink stole, vamping coyly in front of a wall on which her name was spelled in big letters: Arlene H. Butter.
By the early 1970's, after art school and a failed marriage, Wilke began taking pictures of herself stripped to the waist, her well-shaped torso dotted with little folded shapes of chewing gum that had a none too vague clitoral aspect. (These tiny objects, miniaturized versions of Wilke's sculptures made of fired clay and then latex, were part of her pursuit of a "formal imagery that is specifically female.")
Over the next two decades one became accustomed to seeing photographs of Wilke, usually partly or entirely nude, in magazine articles and books about feminist art or performance art, as well as in her gallery shows and on her exhibition announcements.
Good-humored, almost girlishly awkward, these images blended feminism, narcissism and exhibitionism in unsettling ways.
They seemed to be little more than the artist's enthusiastic exploitation of her own dark-haired good looks.


Tenant Rift Roils Calm In Gramercy
Gramercy Park, an oasis of privilege and pride on Manhattan's East Side, has been long cherished for its beauty and serenity.
But behind the stately facade of 15 Gramercy Park South the atmosphere is anything but serene: a long dispute between factions at the National Arts Club has landed in court.
Seven club members who occupy stunning duplex apartments in the club's studio building are facing eviction.


In New Haven, Taking Action Against AIDS
THE other evening in New Haven, George Bucheli and Phil Haskell were driving down a dark stretch of road near the Long Wharf section of the city.
They pulled into a parking lot and spotted a young man sitting in a red Toyota sedan.
"He's alone," Mr.
Bucheli said.
"Let's get him."
After he pulled up to the curb, Mr.
Haskell grabbed a plastic bag full of condoms from a box in the front seat and slid out of the car.
Clutching the condoms under his arm he walked over to the red sedan, knocked on the window and offered them to the man.
The man accepted them.


F.Y.I.
Perks for the Press Q.  All around the city I have seen cars with license plates that are marked with a small diagonal "N Y P." I have also spotted signs that prohibit parking for all vehicles except those with these plates.
Who are these drivers, and why do they rate reserved parking?


Oregon Governor Decides Against Re-election Bid
Citing personal misfortunes and the overwhelming demands of the job, Gov.
Barbara Roberts announced today that she would not seek a second term.
But it was clear, too, that she was responding to a growing anti-incumbent sentiment in this state and wounds still festering from last year's debate over the state budget.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Israel: Bring on Clint, Hold the Neurotics
So, who would you think is more popular in the Jewish state -- Woody Allen or Clint Eastwood?
No contest.
Even wheezing alongside the President's limo, macho Clint has far more appeal than neurotic Woody, whose self-absorbed New York shtick is alien, and even objectionable, to most Israelis.


Angry Threats Shadow South African Campaign


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ARTIST AS CRITIC  Two artists from different generations, sharing a singular passion for righting the wrongs of society with humor and compassion, are joined in an exhibition opening on Tuesday at the Nardin Galleries in Somers.
It will remain on view through March 14.


Honest, Now -- That's All Folks!
To the Editor:
Thomas M. Sawyer's letter (. . . And Punning Pedants Will Be de-Professed," Jan. 23) on idiosyncratic offenses and the terms for the resultant dismissal should not go unpunished. Furthermore:


Linda A. Breda, K. Dean Neely
Linda Andrea Breda, the daughter of Leo and Tillie Breda of Wayne, N.J., was married yesterday to K. Dean Neely, the son of Roberta Scolnik of Warren, Mich., and the stepson of the late Himey Scolnik.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Orr performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Neely is the vice president of marketing and sales for Morgan &amp; Brother Manhattan Storage Company in New York.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College.


Wanted: News Of Mother's Farm
To the Editor:
What are you, nuts?
Put Anne Raver back in Styles of The Times!
I don't even garden, and still, I turn each week to see what's new down on her mother's farm and which oddball plants she's crammed into her tiny apartment.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
TALES OUT OF SCHOOL: Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education By Joseph A. Fernandez with John Underwood.
Back Bay/Little, Brown, $11.95.
This memoir offers two compelling stories: how the former Chancellor of the New York City schools challenged the system and how this same man evolved from a drug-addicted Harlem teen-ager into an educational innovator.
Last year our reviewer, Robert Kuttner, called it "an engrossing discussion of the nuances and politics of school reform."  FRAUD By Anita Brookner.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
Anna Durrant is a middle-aged woman who has sacrificed her youth to care for others, notably her mother.
After this parent finally dies, Anna disappears, an event that mirrors the emotional disintegration she has been suffering for years.
Anita Brookner's revelation of where Anna is -- and where she has been -- makes for "an immensely satisfying novel with unsettling insights into what can happen when the boundaries between aging parents and their children dissolve," Ursula Hegi said here last year.
Vintage has also reissued Ms.
Brookner's earlier novel PROVIDENCE ($10), about a female professor in England who believes more in romantic love than in religion.
The author is "uncommonly deft, witty and serious," Judith Gies said here in 1984.


Sports of The Times; Decision Means the Mick Might Make It to 65 or 70
I always figured there was only one column left about the Mick -- the one about his being found dead in a hotel room, or blown away by some tough guy who didn't appreciate Mantle's behavior in a bar, or maybe even tumbling down a hillside in a pickup after going out for drinks on Christmas Day, just to match his old pal Billy Martin.
Maybe that gloomy column will never get written quite that way.
Or at least in the meantime, there is this hopeful column about Mickey Mantle, age 62, checking himself into the Betty Ford Center, the rehab clinic to the stars.


The World; South Africa's Communists Arise, and the West Yawns
SOUTH AFRICA may not be the only country where Communists are on the rise -- just ask Boris Yeltsin -- but it is probably the only one whose Communists arouse so little comment in the West.
Mainstream Western politicians who speak with foreboding of the Communists' resuscitation in Eastern Europe scarcely mention Nelson Mandela's partnership with the Communists in South Africa.
American and European businessmen scouting opportunities here seem unfazed by it.
Yet if the pollsters are even close in their forecasts for South Africa's first free elections, to be held April 27-29, South Africa will have a higher proportion of Communist Party members in its new Parliament than Russia has in its.


Or Maybe It's Just Director Somnolence
To the Editor:
Thomas A. Cole's advocacy for board involvement with strategic planning and fiscal forecasting ("Drawing the Line on Corporate Boards") seems almost self-evident.
Mr.
Cole's description of the failure of many boards to define their role in these areas is a malady experienced not only by corporations but by nonprofit organizations as well.


Jan. 23-29: The Shock of Chiapas; Spurred by a Rebellion, Mexico Promises Reforms And a Fair Election
After peasant rebels seized several towns in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas on New Year's Day, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had the state Government issue a communique saying the trouble had been caused by "200 individuals" making vague demands.
Wishful thinking, perhaps.
Last week the rebellion's reverberations were felt at the foundation of Mexican politics.
After days of hurried negotiations spurred on by the uprising, the political machine that has governed Mexico since 1929 joined eight opposition parties in a series of commitments to insure a fair presidential election on Aug. 21.
Whether the Government will keep its promises is open to question, but it will break them at its peril.


The Magician
IMAGES My Life in Film.
By Ingmar Bergman.
Translated by Marianne Ruuth.
Illustrated. 442 pp.
New York: Arcade Publishing. $27.95.


BENEFITS
For the Parkside School  MONDAY -- A musical review of the work of the late lyricist Yip Harburg, will benefit the arts program of the Parkside School, an institution for children with speech and language disorders.
Mr.
Harburg wrote the lyrics for the film "The Wizard of Oz" and the Broadway show "Finian's Rainbow." The show begins at 7 P.M. at the Village Gate, 160 Bleecker Street, and will be followed by dessert at a private home in SoHo.
Tickets, $200, or $100 for the performance alone, from (212) 721-8888.
Party for Phoenix House  THURSDAY -- Phoenix House, the drug-rehabilitation organization, will benefit from a party at Landmark at the Park in the Universalist Church at Central Park West at 76th Street.
The party, sponsored by the friends of Phoenix House and Vibe magazine, begins at 8 P.M.
It will include cocktails and hors d'oeuvres and will feature performances by Kim Jordan, a jazz pianist; Giant Step's Groove Collective, a jazz band, and other musicians.
There will be a silent auction of a weekend trip, clothing and other items.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 595-5810, extension 7800.
For the Israel Philharmonic  THURSDAY -- The violinist Itzhak Perlman will join Zubin Mehta, the music director of the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, in a fund-raising gala at Carnegie Hall.
The 7 P.M. concert will be followed by a dinner-dance at the Plaza.
Transportation will be provided to the hotel.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, or $150 for those 35 and younger, from (212) 697-2949.
Heartshare Auction  THURSDAY -- Lauren Hutton will be the host of an auction and cocktail reception at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street, beginning at 6 P.M.
The artists Red Grooms, Christo and Claes Oldenberg have contributed artwork and jewelry, and fashion designers have donated items from their collections.
The proceeds will benefit Heartshare Human Services of New York, a private, nonprofit social-services agency in Brooklyn.
Tickets, $150, from (718) 330-1101.
For Anti-Defamation League  THURSDAY -- The young leadership division of the Anti-Defamation League is sponsoring a dinner-dance in the Delegates Dining Room at the United Nations.
The league's education and action program will benefit from the evening.
The black-tie event begins with a cocktail party.
Dietary laws will be observed.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 490-2525.
Three by Scorsese  FRIDAY -- The director Martin Scorsese will present three of his short films, "The Big Shave" (1967); "Italianamerican" (1974), and "American Boy: A Profile of Steven Prince" (1978).
The screening, which begins at 7:30 P.M. at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, will raise money for the Caron Foundation, which operates a nonprofit chain of chemical-dependency treatment centers.
Mr.
Scorsese will answer questions after the films, and a reception will follow.
Tickets, $60, or $35 for the screening and the director's talk, from (800) 678-2332, extension 191.
For Park Safety  SATURDAY-- The New York Road Runners Club will raise money for its Central Park Safety Patrol with a dinner-dance at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 423-2278.
A Celebrity Tag Sale  SATURDAY-- The clothing designer Todd Oldham will be the host of a benefit for the Children's Hope Foundation, a pediatric AIDS organization, with a celebrity tag sale that will include clothing from Kate Pierson, a singer with the B-52's rock group; Mr.
Oldham; the actress Susan Sarandon, and others.
The event, which begins at 8 P.M. at the Garage, an antiques flea market at 112 West 25th Street, will also feature a silent auction of clothes by Mr.
Oldham and Betsey Johnson, and other items.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 463-0200, or $45 at the door.
For the Hearing Impaired  FEB. 6 -- The New York League for the Hard of Hearing will benefit from a dinner-dance at the Pratt Mansions, 1027 Fifth Avenue at 84th Street.
The evening will begin with a 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception.
KT Sullivan, a cabaret singer, will perform.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 741-3144.
Drama League Benefit  FEB. 7 -- The Broadway writer and director James Lapine, the playwright Joseph Stein and the writer Peter Stone will be honored at a benefit for the Drama League, an organization that operates workshops and supports developing theater artists.
The event at the Pierre will begin with cocktails at 7:30 P.M., followed by dinner and performances by Tommy Tune, Christine Baranski, Jonathan Hadary and others.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 302-2100.
The Fashion 'Oscars'  FEB. 7 -- The fashion industry will gather at the New York State Theater to honor the designers Calvin Klein, Richard Tyler and others at the annual Council of Fashion Designers of America awards gala.
The evening, which will raise money for the breast cancer and AIDS research programs of the Council of Fashion Designers Foundation, will begin at 9 P.M. and will include dessert and dancing.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 685-1095.
A Theater Auction  FEB. 7 -- The Pearl Theater Company, now in its 10th season of classical repertory, will benefit from silent and live auctions beginning at 6:30 P.M. at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street.
Featured items include a dinner with Linda Lavin, Michael Learned and Joanne Camp, who play in "The Sisters Rosensweig" on Broadway.
Among the celebrity memorabilia to be auctioned are autographed scripts from the playwrights Wendy Wasserstein, Terrence McNally and Tina Howe.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 647-1796.
For Family Counseling  FEB. 7 -- A Mardi Gras cocktail buffet will benefit Steps to End Family Violence, a family counseling organization in New York.
The party will begin at 6 P.M. at B. Smith's Rooftop Cafe, 771 Eighth Avenue, at 47th Street.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 410-4200.
Glimmerglass Opera Benefit  FEB. 8 -- Brendan Gill of The New Yorker magazine will speak and Jonathan Miller, a physician and stage director, will conduct a mini-master class at the Victory Theater, 207 W. 42d Street, beginning at 6:45 P.M.
The evening will benefit the Glimmerglass Opera, based in Cooperstown, N.Y.
The event then continues at 8:30 P.M. at 219 West 42d Street, where dinner will be served and Lauren Flanigan, a soprano with the Metropolitan Opera, will deliver a cabaret performance.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 874-5457.
Family Night at the Met  FEB. 9 -- The Metropolitan Museum of Art is sponsoring a family night, beginning at 6 P.M., where children can make their own works of art.
There will be a museum hunt, where young people can follow clues and look for happy faces hidden in the museum's art collections.
Refreshments will be served throughout the evening.
The American Grease Band, a rock group, will perform, and the Denim and Diamonds Outlaw Dancers will teach the two-step.
Children must be accompanied by an adult.
Tickets, $75 for adults and $35 for children, from (212) 570-3956.
A Party for Diffa  FEB. 9 -- A Valentine's Day party, sponsored by Playboy magazine, will raise money for the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS.
The dance party -- at Maxim's, 680 Madison Avenue, at 61st Street -- will feature the comedian Sandra Bernhard speaking about safer sex.
The hosts include the authors John Updike; Erica Jong; Mortimer B. Zuckerman, chairman of The Daily News, and Mimi Rogers, an actress.
The evening begins with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 727-3100.


Kirsty Hamilton and Harrison Young 3d
Kirsty Jane MacKnight Hamilton, a daughter of Alexander R. Hamilton of Melbourne, Australia, and the late Mitta B. Hamilton, was married in New York yesterday to Harrison Hurst Young 3d, the son of Harrison H. Young Jr. of Glenside, Pa., and the late Margaret Ann K. Young.
The Rev.
Luther Kriefall performed the Lutheran ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
Ms.
Hamilton, 44, is keeping her name.
She is the manager of the computer, reference and family-life style news sections at the Prodigy Services Company, the on-line computer service, in White Plains.
She graduated from Monash University in Melbourne and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Luck Helps Freeways in Quake-Prone Tokyo
When asked why highways and bridges in this earthquake-prone city had not collapsed in recent earthquakes as they had in Los Angeles last Monday and in San Francisco in 1989, experts cited not superior design or construction but mainly luck.
There have been many earthquakes here that registered 6 or more on the Richter scale of ground motion since most of Tokyo's major highways were built.
But the epicenter has always been fairly far from the city or deep underground, which lessens the quake's impact.


Some Recent 'Losers' Have an Understanding of the Bills' Position Today
John Schuerholz thinks it is a shame that the Buffalo Bills have lost three successive Super Bowls.
"That's why I'm going to cheer like hell for them," Schuerholz said.
"Not because of what has happened with us. But I tip my cap to them for what they've done. They've done too much and they've succeeded too well to be regarded as less than what they are."
To Mike Schmidt, it doesn't matter what the Bills do against the Dallas Cowboys tonight in Atlanta.


U.S. Urged to Shift China Policy on Trade
Robert E. Rubin, director of the National Economic Council, says he would like the Clinton Administration to ultimately adopt a China policy that ended the link between trade and human rights.
At a breakfast with journalists on Friday, Mr.
Rubin repeated the Administration's view that China needed to make more progress on human rights to win annual renewal of its preferred trading status with the United States.
But pointing to the size of China's economy, he added that ending the link between human rights and trade "is a very good objective to shoot for."


Introduction to the New Florida Cuisine
UNTIL recently, Florida was not exactly famous for its cuisine.
But some of the best restaurants in the country have opened in the Miami area in the last few years.
The influx of Cubans, Nicaraguans and Colombians and immigrants from Caribbean islands like Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad have resulted in a fascinating cross-pollination of ethnic foods, which has made something of a field day for enterprising young chefs.
As recent visits have proved, Miami now holds its own with New York and Los Angeles when it comes to good, interesting food.
Steven Raichlen, a cooking teacher and food writer who lives in Coconut Grove, has come out with a fascinating and eminently usable cookbook, "Miami Spice: The New Florida Cuisine" (Workman).
His recipes are inventive yet simple to cook and combine exotic flavors and ingredients in exciting new ways.
Moreover, these dishes are just the thing to bring in a little tropical cheer on a wintry day in the North.


An Alternative to Sludge Plants: Move It Out
Although nobody in Maspeth wants it, city officials are busily designing a $300 million sewage sludge composting plant to be built there under a Federally imposed deadline.
But because of the opposition, the city has also started drafting a substitute proposal to not build the plant and instead to transport the sludge residue out of town.
"We would be firing off fireworks of joy if that happens," said Francis J. Principe, a leading critic and president of the West Maspeth Local Development Corporation.
Despite the city's denials, he said the plant would create offensive odors and pose health hazards: "It's still human excrement and highly contaminated. I'm hopeful we can stop the plant, but we're far from out of the woods."


Dueling Scissors
FOR a considerable number of people, there is an individual in their lives of incalculable value, someone easily worth whatever his price and in whom they can blithely entrust the most scabrous secrets.
If it becomes absolutely necessary, they will abandon a career for him, relocate to another country, even switch to a new gel.
Obviously, we are talking about their hairdresser.


A Book in Search of a Buzz: The Marketing of a First Novel
This essay is the first of two parts about the marketing of a first novel and the beginning of a writer's career.
Part 2 will appear next week.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; England: Sunset For the Yanks?
In England, the laboratory for American cultural imperialism, there are signs that the cultural invasion may have peaked.
The made-in-America label on movies is not always a sure thing, and some television writers believe that American-produced shows have never been less popular.
The last big American series was "Dallas" in 1984.
The English prefer a British context and now do their own versions of shows like "The Golden Girls."
American films are still on top of the heap, and British audiences are adept at catching the references, laughing at "Dave," for example, despite its political in-jokes.


The Designers Who Saved Chrysler
IN the old days at the Chrysler Corporation, Michael Santoro's curve would surely have died a quick death, and for the most prosaic of reasons: lack of a hinge.
You see, the curve may have profoundly moved an artsy car designer like Mr.
Santoro -- light would bounce off it prettily, and it would make the sedan feel roomier -- but to a pragmatic engineer, faced with the grittier task of freezing the design in steel and then stamping out hundreds of thousands of durable duplicates, it was a migraine.
No one could remember a sedan's sides curving so sharply (both front to back, like a horseshoe, and top to bottom, like parentheses).
No hinge existed that would make the doors swing properly, the engineers assigned to the project said when they saw Mr.
Santoro's clay model.


Coast Guard Accused of Error Leading to Spill
For two years when New York State thought it had barred barges operated by the Berman/Frank families from New York Harbor because of environmental violations, at least some of the vessels were returning regularly to New York for inspection and relicensing by the Coast Guard.
One barge, the Morris J. Berman, came to New York Harbor in July for its regular every-other-year inspection and recertification.
On Jan. 7 it spilled 600,000 gallons of heavy oil on the beaches of San Juan, P.R., after it ran aground there.


Islanders Can't Reach Bigger Goal
They shut their opponent down for two full periods, their rookie goalie made 41 saves, and they put forth the level of effort necessary to spare them the wrath of their coach.
But because the Islanders failed to match their good intentions with goals, all was for naught.
Again.
In the end, after the Bruins had swept this back-to-back series with Friday's 3-0 shutout and tonight's 2-1 victory at Boston Garden, the Islanders were left to ponder lost chances and wonder whether their six-game winless streak is ever going to end.


An Abnormal Symphony Tailored to Inhuman Times
LAST SEASON, KURT MASUR ROSE to a major challenge when he led the New York Philharmonic's impressive first performances of Shostakovich's Symphony No. 13, "Babi Yar." But on Thursday evening, he faces a bigger test, when he and the orchestra tackle another Shostakovich blockbuster, the Symphony No. 7, "Leningrad."
The "Babi Yar" is no piece of cake, but at least there is general agreement in the West that the piece is of genuine stature.
The reputation of the "Leningrad," even among Shostakovich enthusiasts, is so equivocal that it is surprising to realize that the piece is actually performed with some frequency. (There have been at least 23 recordings.)


Trying to Freeze Out a Strip Joint
Four months after persuading the owner of a bar in a residential neighborhood not to convert his business into a cabaret presenting nude entertainment, members of Community Board 12 are embroiled in a dispute with another club owner who recently brought in strippers.
The club, near Laconia Avenue on East Gun Hill Road, was a members-only establishment that was called Barclay's Athletic Club.
The owner changed its name last fall to New York Vibes and began offering topless entertainment there several nights a week.


A Washington City Full of Prozac
If the people in this valley of big pears and blushing apples seem inordinately happy -- or at least less prone to crankiness -- it may be in no small part because of Dr.
James D. Goodwin.
Dr.
Goodwin and the drug Prozac arrived here about the same time, bringing a whole new approach for treating depression to a place that calls itself the "Apple Capital of the World." A clinical psychologist and Vietnam War veteran with a get-to-the-point attitude from years in the military, Dr.
Goodwin soon became known as the "Pied Piper of Prozac," the antidepressant drug now used by more than six million Americans.


F.Y.I.
Perks for the Press Q.  All around the city I have seen cars with license plates that are marked with a small diagonal "N Y P." I have also spotted signs that prohibit parking for all vehicles except those with these plates.
Who are these drivers, and why do they rate reserved parking?


Plenty of Banks, But Fewer Loans
Along Canal Street in Chinatown, banks now outnumber restaurants.
At the intersection of Mott, rival branches occupy all four corners: Chase, Chemical, Abacus and United Orient.
The bank proliferation in the last decade has been fueled by waves of immigration and investment from Hong Kong, Taiwan and China that have doubled deposits in Chinatown to $4 billion.
But Federal and state regulators say that some banks are not reinvesting enough of that money locally in loans.
"It's a major concern," said David Chen, executive director of the nonprofit Chinatown Planning Council.
"There's a real problem for a great number of banks who may be getting all this business but not doing adequate outreach."


Winning at Cost
To the Sports Editor:
Anyone who condemns the win-at-all-costs mentality that led to the assault on Nancy Kerrigan while silently watching college athletic programs sacrifice their players for victories and sports franchises their fans for their bottom lines is a hypocrite.


Money and Metaphysics: New-Age Wall Street
WALL STREET has traditionally been home to bulls and bears.
But lately, more extraordinary beings are finding their way to the trading rooms and executive suites of the city's financial community.
These are the psychics, hypnotists and astrologers who bring an extra dimension to the already arcane science of investing money.
Call it a foolish fad, but believers claim that billions of dollars are managed by people who consult planetary movements in advance; and some 27.5 million Americans review the stars to make decisions, according to a 1990 Gallup poll.
No one has calculated how many do so for investments, but a mini-industry has emerged around New-Age Wall Street.
Consider: A hotel near the stock exchanges is offering a new guest service, a tarot card reader.
At the Wall Street Hypnosis Center, 165 William Street, a dozen or so traders visit monthly to keep their unconscious minds honed for split-second decisions.
And at the New York Astrology Center, Eighth Avenue at 37th Street, computers and stars are used for investment advice.


Shhhh! From White Noise to Entirely Soundproofed Walls
REDUCING noise in a house is fairly easy and inexpensive.
But complete soundproofing is difficult and usually expensive, because it usually involves major remodeling.
A simple strategy for combating noise to sleep or concentrate is to use a "white noise" generator.
The device, which sells for about $60 and can fit under a bed, produces a gentle rushing sound that helps block noises like traffic and voices by masking them.


World Cup Skiing Star Dies After Crashing During Race
The Austrian skier Ulrike Maier, a two-time world champion on the Alpine circuit, died today after crashing and breaking her neck during a World Cup downhill race in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
Maier, 26 years old, lost control of her right ski in a narrow section on the lower third of the 1.7-mile course while traveling at a speed approaching 65 miles an hour.
She hurtled off the course, slammed her head against a timing post, lost her helmet and tumbled over several times before sliding limply to a stop in the middle of the run.


Slaves to Fate
CROSSING THE RIVER By Caryl Phillips. 237 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Escape From New York
Now there were no more poll results to spin, no more secession hotline calls to field, no more parchment declarations to sign at goofy news media events that poignantly managed not to attract the news media.
At last, the front-page, days-until-the-vote countdown stood at zero.
The secessionists could rest.
They had carried their crusade to churches and fairs and luncheons.
They had stood in the ferry terminal passing out Vote Yes bumper stickers and Vote Yes wooden nickels.
Vote Yes wooden nickels were practically the coin of the realm now, scattered from Tottenville to St.
George, and only some pretentious, hairsplitting outsider -- somebody from the other side of the bridge or across the water, somebody off-island -- would bother asking why true believers devoted to a cause would promote it with symbols of counterfeit. (They got a cheap bulk deal is why, but never mind.)
Practically every true believer who had carried the standard turned out for the Election Night celebration at the Island Chateau in Grasmere.
The secessionist politicians were led by State Senator John J. Marchi, the conservative Republican and classicist who had quoted Sophocles in the preamble of the proposed new city charter ("the city is the people"), and who was saluted that very day in The Staten Island Advance as "the Father of Secession." For the business view, Joe Madory, a banker, could be heard telling friends he'd just returned from Poland and, damn if they weren't talking about Staten Island and secession over there!


Obeying the Tax Laws: Small Business' Burden
IN the grand scheme of a Federal tax system that collects more than $1 trillion a year, Dante's Restaurant Inc., a modest three-city chain in Pennsylvania, counts for little.
But to people like Lewis Kamin, Dante's controller, the Internal Revenue Code is a year-round headache.
There are the biweekly remittances of Social Security and withheld income tax, quarterly reports of payroll and unemployment taxes, quarterly estimated corporate income taxes and, of course, the maintaining of various related records, including tips, Form W-4's for withholding and I-9 citizenship forms.


The Bad Guy Is a Mogul? Find an Exit
THE SENSE OF DEJA VU I EXPERIENCED recently while watching the premiere of Dominick Argento's "Dream of Valentino" at the Washington Opera had nothing to do with having once seen "The Sheik," the silent film starring Rudolph Valentino.
The feeling of familiarity came instead from one of those coincidences the Zeitgeist tosses up now and then for our amusement.
Just a few months ago, the New York City Opera gave the premiere of Ezra Laderman's "Marilyn," which also focused on the travails of a film star who kindled sexual fantasies, Marilyn Monroe.
Both stars died in their 30's; both were rumored to have been murdered (he by poison from a romantic rival, she by a drug overdose administered by various conspirators); both were wildly worshiped (fans' suicides followed his death; an outpouring of obsessive writing continues to follow hers), and both, decades after their deaths, suggested the possibility of grand opera to skillful composers who stumbled badly along the way.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; South Africa: A Fluke Of British Unionism
The Americanization of South Africa was abetted by a fluke of the anti-apartheid movement.
Although 40 percent of South African whites are of English descent, South Africa was long cut off from most British films and television because the actors' union in England observed a stringent boycott.
As a result, a culture that might naturally have a British accent is dominated by Americans.
Seven of the 10 most-watched entertainment shows on television are American, topped by "Who's the Boss?" (Could it be the title sums up the country's basic political dilemma?) In a nation where legal cases are argued by robed barristers, the popular courtroom series is not "Rumpole of the Bailey" but "L.A. Law." Shows with black stars do well -- even the hip lip of "In Living Color," which seems as if it should be too intrinsically American to export.


Let Her Skate
In the soap-opera debate over whether Tonya Harding should be allowed to go to the Olympics, our vote is a guarded yes.
Americans' emotions tell them that the attack on Nancy Kerrigan was unforgivable and that somebody should pay.
Although Ms.
Harding says she did not know about the attack beforehand, many suspect she is not being truthful.
But there is no sure way to find out before the Olympic Games, unless Ms.
Harding herself changes her story.
If she sticks to it, she must be considered innocent until she is proved guilty.


Reluctance Turns Witness Into a Defendant; Memory-Lapse Claim in Murder Trial Brings Rare (and Vigorous) Perjury Prosecution
Lying about a serious matter is a mortal sin and, according to church teachings, grounds for a toasty afterlife in hell.
Perjury in the first degree, its legal counterpart, is a felony.
But though almost any veteran trial lawyer will concede that witnesses embroider, fib, and yes, even lie on the stand, a perjury prosecution is virtually unheard of.
There were only four cases in New York City in 1992 in which perjury was the top count -- three ended in conviction and a fourth was dismissed.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $140,500
244 West 23d Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 725-sq.-ft. duplex loft; elevator, 11-ft. ceilings; maintenance $393, 40% tax deductible, listed at $154,500, 2 years on market (Broker: Selena Goudeau Associates)


Clinton Health Plan Beats What We Have Now
To the Editor:
Senator Bob Dole, in his rebuttal to the President's State of the Union Message on Jan. 25, pointed menacingly to Senator Arlen Specter's chart of the Clinton health plan.
He did this to show its complexity and in this way to put people off the plan by making them fearful or suspicious of it.
What he was actually doing was playing two misleading, partisan tricks on the American people.


'Heinous Whore-Oglyphics'
To the Editor:
John Tierney's article on the relationship between sex and communications technology since the dawn of civilization  [ "Porn, the Low-Slung Engine of Progress," Jan. 9 ]  raises the inevitable question: When did the first priggish bluenose swagger onto the stage of history to castigate the evils of eroticism?
My guess is that it happened all too soon.
I can envision some Pharaonic philistine demanding that the cops destroy all the extant "heinous whore-oglyphics" because they offend the dignity of those gentle, innocent, good-natured Egyptian deities.
HOWARD SCHNEIDER  Rego Park, N. Y.


Foundations Help Without Fanfare
ON a cold Friday this month, Christine Todd Whitman was the guest of honor at a pre-inaugural reception at the Newark Museum.
Arriving early, Mrs.
Whitman viewed quilts made by elementary-school children as part of a project called "New Jersey Through Its Children's Eyes."
She also greeted community leaders trained as part of the Neighborhood Leadership Initiative and saw framed pictures made and sold as part of the Kids in Business program at the 15th Avenue School in Newark.
Later, the 500 guests at the reception were entertained by the Newark Boys Chorus, a group that also sang at last January's Presidential inauguration.


Moscow's Metro
To the Editor: The article by Christopher S. Wren, "Beneath Moscow, a Piece of Its Soul" (Dec. 12) recalled similar images of the Moscow Metro that I experienced on a visit to Moscow in January 1992.
As the author so aptly pointed out, the Metro is the place to really observe the vast panorama of both social history and social change.
Not only can one see the sweep of Stalinist architecture but one can also experience the range of Muscovite humanity, from beggars to political activists to prostitutes to budding entrepreneurs.
Yet neither the Metro system nor the people pose any danger to the traveler.


Port Washington Police Enmeshed in Suits Contending Bias
THE Port Washington Police District, facing suits over reported discriminatory practices, has lost the first case, which involved sex bias in hiring.
The district also faces a revote of the election for police commissioner last month.
A court recently overturned the result.
In December, Judge Adele Graham of the state's human rights division ruled that the district was guilty of sex discrimination when it refused to hire Karen Arsenault, 33, of Port Washington.
Judge Graham ordered the district to hire Ms.
Arsenault, to pay her $100,000 for emotional damages and to give her the seniority that she would have had if she had been hired in 1989, when she applied.


The Warring of the Green
For almost two decades, Park Slope's annual St.
Patrick's Day parade has escaped the bitter clashes that have become associated with Manhattan's Fifth Avenue march.
But this year, a sudden breath of discord is sweeping from Park Slope to Bay Ridge, as plans for an insurgent parade take shape.


If It's Dry and Mild, Can It Be the New York Area?
Floodwaters subsided, roads reopened and hundreds of homeowners pumped out basements yesterday as the New York region took a weekend breather from a cruel winter and mopped up after torrential downpours that disrupted life across the metropolis on Friday and caused the death of a Putnam County woman.
While the region surveyed another round of storm damage, from mud-caked homes to potholed highways, yesterday was relatively mild -- a consolation prize of 40-degree temperatures and no rain or snow -- and forecasters said that two new storms would probably bypass the area, one today and another tomorrow.


Recitals Abound With Ensembles and Returning Celebrities
RETURNING celebrities, distinguished visitors and performances by several local artists make it a banner musical week in Connecticut.
The flutist Eugenia Zukerman, calling two retired teachers at William Hall High School in West Hartford "great influences in my life," is looking forward to having William Stanley and Clarine Coffin Grenfell in the audience when she gives a recital with the harpist Yolanda Kondonassis at 8 P.M. on Wednesday at Jorgensen Auditorium in Storrs.
A student at Hall High School from 1959 to 1962, Ms.
Zukerman went on to the Juilliard School.
In addition to performing she is an author and a commentator for the CBS television program "Sunday Morning." Ms.
Kondonassis made her debut at 18 with the New York Philharmonic, and subsequently appeared with leading orchestras nationwide.
Their recital in Storrs lists solo pieces and duets by about a dozen composers, from Scarlatti through Gershwin; for reservations, the box office number is 486-4226.


Minorities and Adult Education Give Women's Colleges a Boost
To the Editor:
Re "Women's Colleges Find a New Popularity" (front page, Jan. 15): Two other drivers of the enrollment surge at women's colleges are adult women and women of color.


And in the Beginning, There Was Gaumont Making Films
DURING RECENT TRADE negotiations, the French representatives infuriated their American counterparts by insisting that products of French culture, like film, were special and had to be exempted from the treaty's provisions.
A new retrospective that opened on Friday at the Museum of Modern Art, "Gaumont Presents: A Century of French Cinema," offers American audiences strong evidence that the French may be right.
The idea for this series of 50 programs, running through April 14, had its genesis when Laurence Kardish, curator of film at the museum, began looking for a way to mark the centennial of cinema. (Most film historians regard 1895 as the birth of the movies.) Mr.
Kardish and his colleagues immediately thought of France, given its importance to the medium's artistic and commercial development.
Fortuitously, they were approached at the same time by the venerable French film company Gaumont, which agreed to pay for the show.
Gaumont opened its archives, and Mr.
Kardish and the co-curator of the retrospective, Edith Kramer, director of the Pacific Film Archives in Berkeley, Calif., made their selections.


Acquittal Revives Fear Of 'The Maze'
The Maze -- and shock over a killing there more than a year ago -- refuse to go away.
For years the zigzag passageway between warehouses on 74th Street near 52d Court in Maspeth has had an exciting, forbidden appeal to youngsters, who used it as a hangout, a hideaway and private graffiti gallery.
On Dec. 6, 1992, the police say, 16-year-old Ryan Dionne was kicked, then stabbed 18 times, in an angry dispute over money.
He died on the spot, in the presence of horrified friends.


A Glimpse of The Times
BEHIND THE TIMES Inside the New New York Times By Edwin Diamond. 437 pp.
New York: Villard Books. $24


Awaited for a Decade, Project Gets Started Too Suddenly
The day before New Year's Eve, Thomas Lucania, the district manager of Community Board 11, received word that, finally, the refurbishing of the dilapidated Pelham Parkway station on the No. 2 line -- a project that community officials requested more than a decade ago -- was about to begin.
In four days.


CHANGE IN WELFARE IS LIKELY TO NEED BIG JOBS PROGRAM
President Clinton's pledge to make welfare recipients work could require a much larger public jobs program than previously acknowledged, according to a confidential paper that is the subject of sharp dispute inside the Administration.
A preliminary estimate prepared by the Department of Health and Human Services suggests that as many as 2.3 million people could be subject to the work requirements when the program is fully in place.
To put them all to work would require three to four times the number of jobs the Administration appears willing to create.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CHELSEA;
For two years, preparations for a $100 million Federal project to repair the Williamsburg Bridge have been complicated by a thorny neighborhood problem: where to move 120 sanitation trucks on the Manhattan side of the bridge.
Now, faced with the hangman's noose -- an ultimatum to find a new site for the first 60 trucks or lose the money -- the city appears to have found a solution in Chelsea.
On Thursday, three days after a Federal deadline, the city said it had probably found a temporary site for the 60 trucks: a warehouse on 30th Street near 12th Avenue.
Community Board 4 in midtown west is not thrilled with the idea of more trucks moving through the neighborhood in order to serve the East Side.
But Ross Graham, chairwoman of the board, said she saw the writing on the wall.


The Nation; Can't Tell Viacom From QVC?
THE fight over Paramount Communications has been the gaudiest epic in American business since Henry Kravis wrested control of RJR Nabisco in 1988.
If all goes as planned, a winner will emerge this week in a drama of revenge and betrayal that has brought to the stage some of the more flamboyant characters in corporate casting.
After months of analysis and editorial agonizing about the effect of the merger on the future of electronic communications, the victory will no doubt be treated as front-page news.
But in the end does it really matter who wins?
To the shareholders of Paramount and its suitors, QVC and Viacom, the answer is clearly yes.
But it is not so clear that most other people should care very much.


She Knows Her Lines
Some of Helen Quinn's fans think that Communism could have survived if there had been line-management experts like her in the Soviet Union.
That is debatable.
But there's no disputing her accomplishments in New York.
I can't think of anyone who has brought so much comfort, discipline and leisure time to the waiting masses.
She has been doing it for a quarter-century without any salary or office or formal title (although she is sometimes called the Queen of Standees).
At age 68, Quinn works out in the cold and relies solely on her own devices: a lawn chair, a clipboard, some scraps of paper and a voice that sounds like Ethel Merman as a drill sergeant.
"If you don't like the way the line is run," she explains, "go home!"


TRIUMPH OF THE FRILL
If God is in the details, then this year's bride can count her blessings.
From a flurry of feathers and billowing tulle to panniers of silk taffeta, there's an unabashed largess to current wedding couture, a kind of confectionary splendor.
The romance of the modern wedding gown takes its cues from the past.
Note the big, gauzy skirts and the boned bustier.


Trying to Freeze Out a Strip Joint
Four months after persuading the owner of a bar in a residential neighborhood not to convert his business into a cabaret presenting nude entertainment, members of Community Board 12 are embroiled in a dispute with another club owner who recently brought in strippers.
The club, near Laconia Avenue on East Gun Hill Road, was a members-only establishment that was called Barclay's Athletic Club.
The owner changed its name last fall to New York Vibes and began offering topless entertainment there several nights a week.


American Style
ETATS-UNIS ** (212) 517-8826; 242 East 81st Street; $$$; all major credit cards


Three Strong Aftershocks Cause More Destruction in Los Angeles
Nearly two weeks after a major earthquake brought normal life to a standstill here, three strong aftershocks rattled the city early this morning, causing a new round of slightly damaged highways, collapsed walls and frazzled nerves.
The new quakes were felt throughout the city and they all occurred within an hour of each other.
One aftershock registered 5.0 on the Richter scale of ground motion and lasted 20 seconds.


Salary Roster Provides Look at Where Power Is
For a few weeks, anyone looking for a guide to power in the Giuliani administration had to be content with scrutinizing office floor plans.
But now that executive chamber salaries have been set, more has become clear.
Dennison H. Young, Jr., the counsel to the Mayor, is earning $112,000, the same salary as the Deputy Mayors.
Randy M. Mastro, the chief of staff, and two mayoral advisers, Richard J. Schwartz and Carlos M. Rivera, are all earning $110,000.
The clue that Peter J. Powers, the Deputy Mayor for operations, really is first among equals comes not in his salary but that of his chief of staff, Gordon Campbell, a Dinkins administration holdover, who is earning $96,000, or $4,000 more than the chiefs of staff for the other three deputy mayors.


Untapped Potential
To the Editor:
There is no doubt that basic human sexual instincts and behavior shape culture in many ways.
But sex in not intrinsically demeaning; it is essentally the opposite, one of our highest, most productive life forces.


Mixing Present And Past In Hartford
WHAT does a play about the sinking of the Titanic (April 15, 1912) have to do with a play about the assassination of Abraham Lincoln (April 14, 1865)?
Theatergoers need not venture too far to sense connections between "Scotland Road," produced by Theater Works in Hartford, and "The America Play" at the Yale Repertory Theater in New Haven.
Both plays maneuver history-shaking events to provide takeoff points for other, similar themes: the intermixing of the past and the present, the exploration of an all-consuming obsession and the capriciousness -- the filling in and the editing out -- of memory.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; France: Deja Vu Is Au Courant
Paris is the most hyperactive, sophisticated movie-watching city on the planet, but its pop-culture image of America seems increasingly nostalgic and familiar.
Perhaps the American movies and television series the French watch are constrained by French-inspired European quotas on American fare.
Some top-line American films open here almost simultaneously with their U.S. release, but others, like "Nuits Blanches a Seattle," are delayed for months.
"Jurassic Park" was a heavy-breather, but it was nosed out for the top spot by "Les Visiteurs," a French farce about medieval knights time-warped to the present.
To be fair to American dinosaurs, "Visiteurs" opened in early January while "Jurassic Park" was delayed here until October.


Turning Trash Into Treasure for the Soil
GARDENERS are learning to be good recyclers.
Each year more of them learn that composting is an excellent way to recycle wastes like weeds, leaves, vegetable peelings and grass clippings.
They add the decomposed organic material to soil, even potting mixes, and learn that the compost does wonders.
In fact, the compost has earned such a marvelous reputation, it has gained a new appellation: black gold.
Technology is catching up, ever so slowly though, on this recycling effort.
The problem has always been that too much waste is accumulated with no market to absorb it.
About 40 percent of the solid waste that goes into landfills is paper.
Industry figures indicate that an average person disposes of 1.6 pounds of paper a day.


On Sunday; Gently Pressing For Women In Priesthood
CRITICS and friends may think combining feminism and the Catholic Church is a non-starter, a fruitless pursuit, for Nancy Small.
But the 31-year-old church organizer, armed with a master of divinity degree, thinks she and a score of like-minded scholarly women, busy in some shadowy church activities, are on the cusp of the priesthood.
That's right, the Catholic priesthood -- one of the longest-lived male bastions, two millennia old, and enduring in its power, whatever modern challenges and scandals arise.
Feminism would not seem to get much more radical than that: intimations of the priestess for a church ever dedicated to male hierarchy.
Ms.
Small, however, recognizes the "radical feminist" accusation from offended Catholics as too easy a label of dismissal of women intent on the sacramental ministries.
They are no more radical, she argues and increasingly preaches, than Lydia, an overlooked Christian who aided the great apostle Paul.
In asserting her role as a pioneer church organizer, Lydia "would not take no for an answer," to quote a scrap of scripture dear to Ms.
Small.


Trial By Fire
CHOOSING the site for a fashion show is a lot like looking for a house or an apartment: location means everything.
Maybe Todd Killian, a fledgling men's-wear designer, should have used a broker.
Mr.
Killian's first runway show was scheduled to begin at 2:30 last Monday afternoon at Gilda, a new Italian restaurant on East 49th Street, which donated the space in hope of getting some exposure.
The 30-year-old Mr.
Killian, who has been in business for three years and has sold his oversize cotton and linen shirts to Barneys, Bloomingdale's and Bergdorf's, thought the restaurant would be convenient for buyers and journalists who would be attending two must-see shows: John Bartlett's on West 40th Street at 1:30 P.M., and Calvin Klein's on West 39th Street at 4 P.M.


POSTINGS: In the Metropolitan Club; A Fifth Avenue Link To the Janiculum Hill
Charles Follen McKim gave life to the American Academy in Rome 100 years ago.
So it seems fitting that he should also have provided -- in a roundabout way -- the new home for the academy's New York office.
It was in 1894 that McKim proposed the establishment in Rome of what was originally called the American School of Architecture, where artists and scholars from this country could pursue their studies.
That same year saw the completion of the Metropolitan Club, at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street, by the firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White, which later designed the academy's main building on the Janiculum Hill in Rome, where winners of Rome Prize fellowships are housed.


Allan F. Smith; Law School Dean, 82
Allan F. Smith, a professor emeritus and former dean of the University of Michigan Law School, died on Jan. 21 at his winter home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 82 and also lived in Ann Arbor, Mich.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Alene.


Eliot Armstrong, Jonathan Foote Jr.
Eliot Saunders Armstrong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas N. Armstrong 3d of New York, was married yesterday to Jonathan Lipe Foote Jr., a son of Mr.
Foote Sr. of Livingston, Mont., and Anne B. W. Foote of Tiruvannamalai, India.
The Rev.
Timothy J. Tate, a minister of the Universal Life Church, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the home of Richard Branson, the British airline and music executive, on Necker, the British Virgin Islands.
The bride, 26, graduated from New York University and is studying for a master's degree in nutrition and public health at Columbia University.
Her father, the former director of the Whitney Museum of American Art, is now the director of the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh.
The bride is a great-granddaughter of the late Charles A. Stone, a founder of Stone &amp; Webster Inc., a construction and engineering company in New York.


Introduction to the New Florida Cuisine
UNTIL recently, Florida was not exactly famous for its cuisine.
But some of the best restaurants in the country have opened in the Miami area in the last few years.
The influx of Cubans, Nicaraguans and Colombians and immigrants from Caribbean islands like Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad have resulted in a fascinating cross-pollination of ethnic foods, which has made something of a field day for enterprising young chefs.
As recent visits have proved, Miami now holds its own with New York and Los Angeles when it comes to good, interesting food.
Steven Raichlen, a cooking teacher and food writer who lives in Coconut Grove, has come out with a fascinating and eminently usable cookbook, "Miami Spice: The New Florida Cuisine" (Workman).
His recipes are inventive yet simple to cook and combine exotic flavors and ingredients in exciting new ways.
Moreover, these dishes are just the thing to bring in a little tropical cheer on a wintry day in the North.


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Italy: Voting With Their Footwear
Gucci, beware.
Borsalino, watch out.
A generation of young Italians has been nurtured on American movies, serials and soaps, and it is starting to show.
Advertisements for clunky sneakers with Ian Zering of "Beverly Hills 90210" are aimed at teen-agers who usually crave finer footwear.
Baseball hats are favored among the motor-scooter set, though some older types still sport the traditional trilby.
The intrusion is not surprising.
American movies rank No. 1 at the Italian box office, sometimes retitled in freewheeling ways: "Home Alone" became "Mama, I Missed the Plane." "Son of the Pink Panther," a flop in the U.S., was No. 4 here because it starred Roberto Benigni, a comedian Italians adore.


Parents Travel From Scotland to Protest Son's Death


Duke Cools Off Maryland
A young Maryland team came to Cameron Indoor Stadium this afternoon determined to assert itself against one of the perennial powers in the Atlantic Coast Conference.
Instead, spurred by pre-game boasts by the visitors, No. 2 Duke rose to the occasion, using its size and experience to break open a close contest at the start of the second half in a 75-62 victory over the No. 18 Terrapins.


MATCHUPS
QUARTERBACKS The Bills' Jim Kelly is hot.
After a mediocre regular season, in which he threw 18 interceptions, Kelly has had two strong performances in the playoffs.
Troy Aikman threw just six interceptions this season.
He left last week's game with a concussion.
But if he is 100 percent, he is more dangerous than his counterpart.
Edge: Cowboys.
RUNNING BACKS Emmitt Smith has won three straight rushing titles, but has been slowed recently by a separated shoulder.
Thurman Thomas rushed for 186 yards in the A.F.C. championship game.
Edge: Bills.
RECEIVERS The Bills' Billy Brooks, Andre Reed and Don Beebe do not match the explosiveness of Dallas's Michael Irvin and Alvin Harper.
Edge: Cowboys.
OFFENSIVE LINE Two big, powerful groups that like crushing opposing defensive fronts.
The Cowboys averaged 135.1 yards per game rushing in the regular season, and the Bills averaged 121.4 yards a game.
The Cowboys' line, in particular, has provided Aikman with excellent protection. assing and just six interceptions thrown.
Edge: Cowboys.
DEFENSIVE LINE Bills defensive end Bruce Smith had a strong season, with 14 sacks and 24 quarterback pressures.
But his greatness has become expected, so what he did went relatively unnoticed.
Cowboys defensive end Charles Haley has a bad back and if he plays, he will be limited.
The Cowboys are very quick and strong and come with a ton of pressure.
Edge: Bills.
LINEBACKERS Marvcus Patton and Mark Maddox have given the Bills some aggressiveness and hard hitting in the middle.
Add Cornelius Bennett and Darryl Talley on the outside and you have trouble.
Dallas middle linebacker Ken Norton has played much of the season with a torn bicep.
Edge: Bills.
SECONDARY Cornerback Kevin Smith, whose six interceptions were the second highest in the N.F.C., and safety Thomas Everett give the Dallas unit the bite to back up their bark.
Bills safety Henry Jones is a versatile player who could draw some responsibility for trying to stop Emmitt Smith.
Edge: Cowboys.
SPECIAL TEAMS Buffalo's Danny Copeland is a tough kick returner who has run back a punt for a touchdown this year.
And Steve Tasker is a perennial All-Pro.
Dallas's Kevin Williams is a dangerous performer who returned two punts for touchdowns this year.
Playing in the Georgia Dome should not have a bearing on the field-goal attempts by Buffalo's Steve Christie or Dallas's Eddie Murray.
Edge: Cowboys.
COACHES Marv Levy has overcome three previous Super Bowl losses to get his team in a position for one more shot.
Unfortunately, on Super Bowl Day, there is always a short-circuit with the Bills' game plan.
Dallas's Jimmy Johnson excels at having his team mentally and physically prepared for big games.
And in football there are none bigger than the Super Bowl.
Edge: Cowboys.
OVER ALL If the Bills can stay away from turnovers, they have a shot to stay close.
The Bills bring an awful lot of baggage to this game, and it will be hard for them to unload it unless they have a big lead going into the fourth quarter.
That probably won't happen.
The winner: Cowboys, 38-17.
TIMOTHY W. SMITH


The Executive Life; In Personal Mergers, The Trend Is Low Key
WHEN you consider how much luau billionaire Bill Gates could have bought for his Jan. 1 wedding in Hawaii, there's only one word to describe the nuptials: restrained.
But that puts him in the same league with a number of other marrying executives these days, who -- except for Donald J. Trump, that is -- find that a private and romantic ceremony is the way to wed.
Executives today are "usually more low key," said Stanley Horowich, a planner at Weddings Inc., a wedding consultant in Chicago.
Rather than staging elaborate to-dos, they are "looking for more elegance and something conservative," he said.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Nicholas Lemann writes that when members of the National Economic Council came up to Capitol Hill to present the President's Empowerment-Zone legislation, I remarked, "That's a Fabian idea." A comment, Lemann continues, "that anyone who knows him well would recognize as a put-down."
The idea of Empowerment Zones was first broached in a 1975 pamphlet entitled "Inner City: Initiatives in Local Government," written by Nicholas Falk and Haris Marinos and published in London by the Fabian Society.
There is nothing too much the matter with knowing where ideas come from.
For over a century, since its founding in 1884, the socialist Fabian Society has been an unfailing source of intelligent, if not always practical, ideas about social issues.
I simply thought it interesting that one of its more recent proposals should have found such a welcome in Washington among Republicans and Democrats alike.


Manager's Profile
Chuck Heeren Fund: Lutheran Brotherhood Income, $1 billion in assets.
Manager since 1986. (Sponsor: Lutheran Brotherhood Research, Minneapolis.)


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


When TNT Produces a Movie, Ted Turner Opens His Checkbook
With more and more competitors crowding the screen, many cable channels are emphasizing original programming -- as opposed to, say, reruns of "Laverne and Shirley" -- as a way of distinguishing themselves.
Since its inception in 1988, TNT, the channel owned by Turner Broadcasting, has relied mainly on old movies.
But even in that first year, the channel commissioned a remake of "A Man for All Seasons" with Charlton Heston as Sir Thomas More, the role Paul Scofield played in the 1966 original, and announced that it would bring forth a new project each month.
The original movies, documentaries and retrospectives sought by TNT tend toward a traditional but stylish look; feature big-name stars and film makers, and are given a slightly burnished patina by their historical subjects.


RESULTS PLUS
LUGE  Perennial Champion Drives Past Kennedy  Markus Prock of Austria won the overall World Cup luge title for the fourth straight year yesterday, winning the final race of the season, at Altenberg, Germany, while a disappointing showing ruined Duncan Kennedy's shot at the title.
Prock, the Olympic favorite, had the best time in the second heat, which was run in driving snow.
Prock finished with 160 points, while Kennedy, of the United States, ended with 148. (AP)


Don't Blame The Druids
To the Editor:
While I enjoyed learning in Patricia Leigh Brown's "A New Sphere" (Jan. 9) that there will be a Whole Earth Catalog for the millennium, the description of the band putting it together as "techno-druids" was inappropriate.


Super Triumphs and Super Flops
TO America and the rest of the world, the big football game tonight will be Super Bowl XXVIII.
Madison Avenue, though, counts it as Super Bowl X.
That's because the 1994 Super Bowl in Atlanta marks the Xth -- er, 10th -- anniversary of Super Sunday being as much an advertising event as it is a midwinter holiday.
Viewers have learned they will be treated to at least a couple dozen extravagantly expensive, lavishly promoted, painstakingly produced commercials featuring new products, sports and entertainment celebrities, contests and other attention-grabbing gimmicks.


U.N. Aide Reproves U.S. on Somalia Pullout
The head of United Nations peacekeeping operations has bitterly reproached the Clinton Administration for its plans to withdraw United States forces from Somalia by late March, saying it failed to prepare Congress and the public for the possibility that the troops would suffer casualties.
As a result of Clinton Administration policy, "the impression has been created that the easiest way to disrupt a peacekeeping operation is to kill Americans," Kofi Annan, the Under Secretary General in charge of peacekeeping, said Friday night at a New York University Law School conference.


Bringing You a Musical . . . With No Music
James L. Brooks did not want to make just any old movie about the movie business.
Not the man who won three Academy Awards for "Terms of Endearment" (writer, director, producer) and went on to make the crowd-pleasing "Broadcast News" in 1987.
Not the man who spent the last 25 years working on television classics like "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," "Rhoda," "Taxi," "Lou Grant" and "The Simpsons."


Performance-Based Compensation = More Firings
To the Editor:
The cause for the deluge of company plant shutdowns, of terminating people and throwing them out of their jobs to be swallowed up by the streets, has been incomprehensible, at least to me.
Until, that is, I read "Fashioning Top Pay to Fit New Regulations" (Executive Life, Jan. 9).


The Rising Role of Youths in Crime
THE number of serious crimes committed in Westchester may be decreasing, according to recent statistics, but law enforcement officials in cities and towns throughout the county say they are witnessing a disturbing new trend: an increase in crimes committed by those under 16, and not just among members of gangs.
From the larger cities to the smaller villages, police officials say there is hardly a community that has not had to grapple with the problem of young people turning to violence.
In an effort to lower statistics for crimes in all age groups and combat the growing numbers of youth crimes, local police departments are stepping up patrols of officers on the beat.
And several municipalities have turned to the Federal Government for help with their crime-fighting efforts, hoping that Congress will provide funds for community policing efforts.


Super Bowl Frenzy for the XXVIIIth Time!


REBELS IN MEXICO PROMISED CHANGE
Linking the guerrilla war in southern Mexico more strongly than ever to the political future of the entire country, the Government's negotiator said today that peace in Chiapas State demanded a firm commitment to fair elections and democracy.
"The dilemma is clear," the negotiator, Manuel Camacho Solis, said at a news conference.
"Either we make a peace with democracy or what we have now hardens and endures as it is."


The Loss of a Bookstore Turns Pocketbook Issue
To the Editor:
My apprehension over the super-bookstores' predilection for gobbling up the little guy was not assuaged by "A Bibliophile's Baedeker," Richard Bernstein's happy account in the Jan. 16 issue of the survival of so many of New York's smaller bookshops.


Madlyn Gleich and Richard Primoff
Madlyn Beth Gleich, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Gleich of Brooklyn, and Richard Glenn Primoff, the son of Arlene S. Kelvin of Bayside, Queens, and the late Melvin I. Primoff, were married in Brooklyn last evening.
Rabbi Jay J. Sangerman officiated at the Palm House in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Primoff, 29, is an associate at the law firm of Battle Fowler in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a newspaper deliverer for The New York Times.


Wall Street; Pssst! Have I Got a Deal for You!
Mr. . . .
I am not going to tell you that I'll make you a millionaire overnight.
However, what I am going to tell you is that in the next 1 to 12 months, conservatively speaking, I can potentially increase your investment by 50 percent to 75 percent. . . .
So let's get you started!
Not pulling out your checkbook yet?
Well, you might be by the time the broker using this cold-call script gets to the stuff about the "98 1/2 percent" chance of profit, and the "minute risk."


Jan. 23-29: Kerry and McCain; Clinton Gets Political Cover To End Vietnam's Embargo
Two decades after United States forces ignominiously pulled out of Vietnam, the war still rankles many Americans, largely because of the suspicion that Hanoi has never been fully forthcoming about the fate of missing American servicemen.
That is why it took the leadership of two decorated Vietnam veterans last week to push through a bill in the Senate forgiving the onetime enemy.
The non-binding amendment -- sponsored prominently by Senator John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat, and Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican and former prisoner of war -- calls for lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam "expeditiously."


Let's Hear From the Nurses
To the Editor:
I read "A Guide to Lower Health Care Costs" (At Work, Jan. 9) with delight.
The article gave credit where credit is due -- to professional registered nurses.
In the age of medical cost-consciousness where the buzz word is "prevention," please be advised that nurses have been contributing to the lowering of health care costs via education and prevention since professional nursing was founded by Florence Nightingale.


U.N. Says 'Ethnic Cleansing' by Serbs Intensifies
In the past week, Serbian nationalist gunmen have intensified their efforts to expel Muslims and Croats from their homes in northern Bosnia, United Nations officials here said today.
"Murder and terrorization of minorities continues," the United Nations said in a report on Serbian-held areas around Banja Luka.
"Persecution is intensifying." On Jan. 22, three Muslims, 65 to 70 years old, were found with their throats cut in the nearby town of Prijedor, the report said.


Crown Heights Case 'Very Difficult'
Justice Department officials say the renewed attempt to prosecute the 1991 stabbing of a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights will be even more difficult than the first effort, which ended with the acquittal of one of the two current suspects in the killing.
On Friday the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, Zachary W. Carter, met in Washington with officials of the Justice Department's civil rights division to discuss the strategy for what will be a joint investigation that his office and the division will conduct before a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn.


Speaking of Japan -- America Needs Engineers
To the Editor:
Many of the statements in "Japan Faces the Unthinkable: A Shortage of Engineers" (Jan. 2) reminded me of my own observations concerning what might have been a new generation of talent, observations made as an engineer in this country in the late 1970's and early 1980's:


POP CULTURE: Channel-Surfing Through U.S. Culture in 20 Lands; Spain: Polygraphs By Mr. Gelb, L.A.P.D.
Gypsies singing "flamenco blues," LaToya Jackson on "Lie Detector Machine" on television and teen-agers hanging out in a disco called the Peach Pit, inspired by "Beverly Hills 90210." Offbeat bits of American culture are everywhere.
In honor of "Jurassic Park," amusement parks have added dinosaurs.
At the movie's opening in downtown Madrid were life-size jungle cutouts.
They stood for about a week -- until it rained.
A father in line, aware of the testy negotiations over quotas on American films, said, "I thought I'd better take the kids before 'Jurassic' gets banned."


In Pittsburgh, a Question of Too Little History
THE HEINZ Architectural Center, a new division of the Carnegie Museum of Art here, is off to a fumbling start.
A new architecture museum doesn't open every day, and the Heinz Center comes handsomely endowed at a time when many arts institutions are struggling to stay afloat.
This one's going to have to work a little harder, too, if it doesn't want to dissolve into the placid intellectual torpor displayed by its inaugural show.
Founded in 1990 with a $10 million grant from the Drue Heinz Foundation, the center opened officially in November in attractive new quarters inside the Carnegie Museum.
Designed by the New York architects Ann Kalla and Pietro Cicognani, the center opens off the balcony of the Carnegie's Hall of Sculpture, a gallery scaled to the noble proportions of the Parthenon.
The Heinz center's scale, by contrast, is cheerfully domestic.
Entered through a three-story atrium with walls of rich Pompeian red, the galleries and study rooms will remind some visitors of the beloved Soane Museum in London.
A town house lodged inside a palace, the center is an intimate counterpoint to the museum's sprawling, Gilded Age grandeur.


Introduction to the New Florida Cuisine
UNTIL recently, Florida was not exactly famous for its cuisine.
But some of the best restaurants in the country have opened in the Miami area in the last few years.
The influx of Cubans, Nicaraguans and Colombians and immigrants from Caribbean islands like Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad have resulted in a fascinating cross-pollination of ethnic foods, which has made something of a field day for enterprising young chefs.
As recent visits have proved, Miami now holds its own with New York and Los Angeles when it comes to good, interesting food.
Steven Raichlen, a cooking teacher and food writer who lives in Coconut Grove, has come out with a fascinating and eminently usable cookbook, "Miami Spice: The New Florida Cuisine" (Workman).
His recipes are inventive yet simple to cook and combine exotic flavors and ingredients in exciting new ways.
Moreover, these dishes are just the thing to bring in a little tropical cheer on a wintry day in the North.


An Alternative Super Bowl Halftime Activity; The Second-Place, Runner-Up, Not-Quite-There Quiz
LThe Buffalo Bills should be a symbol of tenacity: Tonight they are playing in their fourth straight Super Bowl.
Instead, "Buffalo" has become shorthand for loser because they failed to win in their first three tries at football's championship.
But second place isn't the end of the world.
As the quiz below notes, sometimes the stand-in becomes the star.
Sometimes the also-ran is better known than the front-runner.
Sometimes Nos. 1 and 2 are equally obscure.


Oh, How Very Downtown
Celebrating Wolfgang Joop's New York men's-wear debut, SoHo, Jan. 25.


Narrow-Blasting
The era of 500 cable channels is upon us.
With advances in digital compression, narrowcasters like the Western Channel, the Pet Channel and Ross Perot can all have equal access.
Will such rich choices "reinvent" television as a bold world of new ideas, or will it recycle old television for more balkanized audiences?
One network scheduled to begin transmission on June 6 is the Military Channel.
The visionary behind it is L. Douglas Keeney, a documentarian responsible for such programs as "Frontline Pilots," "Eagles Over the Gulf" and "Challenge of Flight." He is a man giddy with dreams.
"We're on a path to clear three million households at sign-on," Keeney says.
"It's no record, but it's solidly up there with the Cartoon Network."


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


SUNDAY, January 30, 1994; Have a Nice Super Bowl
It's a big day.
You're excited.
But guys, before the game, take a look at that sticker on your helmet.
And hey, let's be careful out there.


SOME SAY YES, SOME SAY NO
The prospect of a Beatles reunion once had the potential to rock the world.
Does it still?
"It's a mistake to add to the Beatles canon. It's a big dump at the end, a commercial product that spoils the perfection of what's come before. If anything it'll be a decent George and Paul album." -- Peter Freedberger, 22, Columbia University student.


Plenty of Banks, But Fewer Loans
Along Canal Street in Chinatown, banks now outnumber restaurants.
At the intersection of Mott, rival branches occupy all four corners: Chase, Chemical, Abacus and United Orient.
The bank proliferation in the last decade has been fueled by waves of immigration and investment from Hong Kong, Taiwan and China that have doubled deposits in Chinatown to $4 billion.
But Federal and state regulators say that some banks are not reinvesting enough of that money locally in loans.
"It's a major concern," said David Chen, executive director of the nonprofit Chinatown Planning Council.
"There's a real problem for a great number of banks who may be getting all this business but not doing adequate outreach."


White House Memo; Clinton Nominations Come Slowly and With Many Setbacks
Less than 48 hours after the State of the Union gathering of Government elite, the abrupt resignation of Philip B. Heymann as Deputy Attorney General made clear anew just how much the state of the Clinton Administration remains troubled by appointments gone awry.
More than any other recent President, Bill Clinton has stumbled when it has come to choosing whom to place in top Government jobs.
Forced immediately after his inauguration to withdraw the nomination of Zoe E. Baird as Attorney General, Mr.
Clinton has now conceded that those he installed as Defense Secretary and placed in the No. 2 positions at the Departments of State and Justice were, in fact, the wrong people for the job.


2 Telephone Exchanges, A 'Mysterious Inevitability'
To the Editor:
Erica Jong is not alone in her nostalgia for New York's distinctive old telephone exchanges ("From Endicott 2 to Rhinelander 4," Jan. 23).
In 1952 I met the man who later became my husband.
His apartment was in Manhattan, mine was in Brooklyn.
Over the past 40 years we have lived in five states and have had many phone numbers, but none could compare with the mysterious inevitability of our original ones.
His was Audubon, and mine was Nightingale.
SANDRA BERLSTEIN  Manhattan


A Book in Search of a Buzz: The Marketing of a First Novel
This essay is the first of two parts about the marketing of a first novel and the beginning of a writer's career.
Part 2 will appear next week.


Columbia is Below .500 but Atop the Ivy
Columbia 77, Yale 58
J.
J.
Waterer scored 6 of his game-high 19 points during a 16-0 run late in the second half, leading Columbia over visiting Yale, 77-58, last night.
The Lions (6-10, 4-0) moved into first place in the Ivy League.
They have not faced either Penn or Princeton.
Columbia trailed Yale by as many as 12 points in the first half before closing to 30-26 on Fred Johnson's 3-point shot before the break.
Yale (5-11, 2-2) held a 50-48 lead with 7:27 left.
But C.J.
Thompkins hit a 3-point shot that put Columbia ahead for good, and the Lions broke away behind Waterer.


Say What You Will
To the Editor:
Calvin Woodard neglects the influence of Herbert Marcuse on Stanley Fish and other so-called liberal thinkers.
Marcuse felt that some utterances must be kept from the marketplace of ideas to protect society from hearing both sides of arguments for which he and his followers held the monopoly on the truth.
He did not specify who would be the judges of what could and could not be discussed, but one presumes that it would be only those whose exact latitude and longitude of political and social viewpoint coincided with his own.
ARNOLD A. PUTNAM  Kennebunkport, Me.


2 Telephone Exchanges, A 'Mysterious Inevitability'
To the Editor:
Erica Jong is not alone in her nostalgia for New York's distinctive old telephone exchanges ("From Endicott 2 to Rhinelander 4," Jan. 23).
In 1952 I met the man who later became my husband.
His apartment was in Manhattan, mine was in Brooklyn.
Over the past 40 years we have lived in five states and have had many phone numbers, but none could compare with the mysterious inevitability of our original ones.
His was Audubon, and mine was Nightingale.
SANDRA BERLSTEIN  Manhattan


Joycelyn Elders
On the desk of Dr.
M.
Joycelyn Elders, Surgeon General of the United States, sits an arrangement of faux roses fashioned from the red wrappers of several Lifestyles condoms.
The bouquet says much about her.
The first African-American (and the second woman) to serve as the nation's top doctor, the 60-year-old Elders is at once plain-spoken and salty.
She is also a determined advocate of contraception, sex education and legal abortion, divisive issues that a more politic Surgeon General might soft-pedal.
But Elders enjoys a good fight.
In Arkansas, where for five years she was Gov.
Bill Clinton's State Health Director, Elders organized school-based health clinics and made contraception available to sexually active teen-agers -- over the ceaseless opposition of local religious conservatives.
She was so effective that when Bill Clinton was elected President, she was one of his first appointees.


On Sunday; Gently Pressing For Women In Priesthood
CRITICS and friends may think combining feminism and the Catholic Church is a non-starter, a fruitless pursuit, for Nancy Small.
But the 31-year-old church organizer, armed with a master of divinity degree, thinks she and a score of like-minded scholarly women, busy in some shadowy church activities, are on the cusp of the priesthood.
That's right, the Catholic priesthood -- one of the longest-lived male bastions, two millennia old, and enduring in its power, whatever modern challenges and scandals arise.
Feminism would not seem to get much more radical than that: intimations of the priestess for a church ever dedicated to male hierarchy.
Ms.
Small, however, recognizes the "radical feminist" accusation from offended Catholics as too easy a label of dismissal of women intent on the sacramental ministries.
They are no more radical, she argues and increasingly preaches, than Lydia, an overlooked Christian who aided the great apostle Paul.
In asserting her role as a pioneer church organizer, Lydia "would not take no for an answer," to quote a scrap of scripture dear to Ms.
Small.


Sumerian Poetry Vs. Penthouse Pet
To the Editor:
John Tierney confuses mechanistic porn with truly sexy erotica.
There is a world of difference between the poetic and sensual evocation of a woman's "sweetness" -- as in the fragment of Sumerian love poetry Mr.
Tierney quotes -- and the crude impersonal image of a user-friendly Penthouse playmate who presents her wet lips and highly interchangeable body parts with the invitation: "Let's get interactive."


Jan. 23-29: First Challenge: Korea; For the Top Defense Job, You Can't Be Too Choosy
William J. Perry wasn't President Clinton's first choice to succeed Les Aspin as Defense Secretary.
Or his second choice.
Or even his third choice.
But when Bobby Ray Inman abruptly withdrew his name and other well-known figures like Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia turned down the job, Mr.
Clinton turned last week to the safe and solid, though unspectacular, Mr.
Perry, now the Deputy Defense Secretary.


Flood Tunnel Project Is a 'Boondoggle'
Regarding the Dec. 26 article on the Passaic River flood tunnel: How many more years must the people of New Jersey be haunted by this bureaucratic nightmare?
It's tragic that Gov.
Jim Florio never took a position on this issue, which has long threatened our region.
It will be a disgrace if Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman changes her tune and decides to support it.


Latvians Appeal to U.S. for Assurances on Russia
In the face of growing tensions with Russia, leaders of Latvia's Parliament will travel to Washington this weekend to seek American assurances over a compromise mediated by the United States that is intended to speed the withdrawal of Russian troops from Latvia.
Foreign Minister Georgs Andrejevs of Latvia and the leaders of rival political groups will meet with State Department, White House and Congressional officials for three days, beginning Sunday, to listen to details of a plan diplomats here say would allow Russia to maintain civilian control of its early-warning anti-ballistic missile installation near Skrunda, on the Latvian coast, for four more years.


Jan. 23-29; Putting the Vietnam War to Rest


Ad In, Women
To the Sports Editor:
Robin Finn's "Ad Out for Women: No Sponsor, No Accord" (The Times, Jan. 7) touches on none of the noteworthy progress that women's professional tennis has achieved over the past two years.
In focusing on a single remaining issue relating to the tour's internal organization, Finn attempts to highlight division rather than the unity and cooperation that has pervaded the agreements reached over the past two years.


Streetscapes/375 Canal Street; On a Garish Thoroughfare, Oh-So-Slow Compliance
TWO years ago, the city's Corporation Counsel announced that the little brick building at 375 Canal Street had the most violations of any Landmark in the city and proceeded to file suits against the owners of this and 17 other buildings on Canal Street.
The suits were aimed at forcing them to remove illegal signs, restore demolished details and generally make their century-plus-old structures presentable.


Davis Distributing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Brush Wellman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Commonwealth Energy System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Defense Wrests: Washington Got Everything but the M.V.P.
The Dallas Cowboys are a team that thrives on big plays.
The Buffalo Bills are a team that makes knucklehead blunders in the Super Bowl.
Put that combination together and what do you have?
Another trophy for the Cowboys.
The big play for Dallas in Super Bowl XXVIII was not made my Emmitt Smith.
Or Troy Aikman.
Or Michael Irvin, the playmaker.


Beverly Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
A Jeep driven by MARY WILSON, one of the Supremes, ran into a freeway median in southern California and overturned, injuring the entertainer and killing her 14-year-old son, a coroner's official said yesterday.
The son, RAFAEL FERRER, was pronounced dead at Barstow Community Hospital about two hours after the 7:30 A.M.
Saturday crash, said MONIKA PADILLA, San Bernardino County Deputy Coroner.


It's Fourth-and-Heartbreak as the Bills Lose One More
It was the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVIII running up the middle and around the ends and into the end zone.
It was Buffalo putting pressure on the Dallas Cowboys' potent offense and limiting it to two field goals.
It was Buffalo with the better passing game, the better kicking game, the better scheme and with fewer mistakes.
It was Buffalo by 13-6.


Foes' Troops Pouring In, Bosnia Says
Yugoslavia and Croatia are pouring troops into Bosnia and Herzegovina, a clear violation of international protocols, according to a Bosnian intelligence report.
The report follows similar accounts by United Nations officials and Yugoslav and foreign journalists.
The Croatian Government has mounted the "broadest mobilization" since the breakup of the old Yugoslav federation flared into warfare in 1991 and has sent more than half a dozen brigades into Bosnia, the intelligence report says.


BBDO Gets More Sterling Business
Sterling Winthrop Inc. in New York has consolidated its worldwide analgesic and cold and flu products account at BBDO Worldwide, which already handles the company's analgesic brands in Europe and Latin America.
It dismissed Ayer Inc. in New York on Friday from the North American portion of the account, with billings estimated at $30 million to $40 million, and moved it to BBDO's New York office.
The consolidation was not unexpected.
Trade publications have been reporting since mid-December that Ayer was in jeopardy of losing the North American account, which it has held since 1991.
It includes products like Bayer aspirin, Bayer Select nonaspirin analgesics and cold and flu medicines, Midol menstrual pain medication and two moribund brands, Vanquish and Panadol.


Advanta Corp(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DeVry Inc(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Amli Residential Properties Inc., Chicago, an initial public offering of 9.2 million common shares.
Merrill Lynch.


A Full Docket, but No Profits, for Court TV
Sure, it's great to have the Menendez juries deliberating at the same time Lorena Bobbitt is on the witness stand.
And, yes, it's flattering to be hailed as the CNN of the legal system.
And it's thrilling to get your first Nielsen ratings and find they are higher than you expected.
But short bursts of publicity, as Steven Brill, the founder and editor in chief of Court TV, acknowledges, do not necessarily translate into long-term gains.
What will determine if his all-litigation-all-the-time cable channel succeeds, Mr.
Brill says, is whether it can establish the right brand identity.


Levitt's Legacy: Families Took Root in His Town
"These houses may be small, but they're solid and well-built," said Michael Hale, hauling yet another load of old wood and insulation to the Dumpster at the curb.
Mr.
Hale, a printer by day, has been spending his nights and weekends stripping the interior of the house at 20 Farm Lane so he can remodel it.
The house was built nearly half a century ago by William J. Levitt, the Long Island developer regarded by many historians as the man who made suburbia affordable to the middle class.


Power's Fast Track
To the Editor:
It's interesting how swiftly the wheels of government operate when the topic is power, rather than issues.
The selection of an interim Speaker of the New York State Assembly (news article, Jan. 21) appears to begin and end with stunning rapidity, within moments of the announcement of Sol Weprin's health emergency.
But matters of substance often drag for months or years through the State Legislature, endlessly discussed, dissected and compromised upon.
Delegating power seems to be the one universal motivator.


ISRAEL AND P.L.O. SAID TO BE CLOSE TO PEACE ACCORD
Israel and the P.L.O. are on the verge of concluding an accord on a limited Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza strip and the West Bank town of Jericho, ending a four-month deadlock, senior Israeli, Palestinian and Egyptian officials said here early today as they ended a marathon round of talks.
On Sunday, Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman; Shimon Peres, the Israeli Foreign Minister, and Amr Moussa, Egypt's Foreign Minister, described their efforts in the most positive tone heard since the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel signed a peace agreement in Washington on Sept. 13.


Market Place; Copley Pharmaceutical reports some good news for investors.
COPLEY PHARMACEUTICAL Inc., the embattled generic drug maker in the midst of a major recall and threatened by lawsuits, was able to report some good news on Friday.
But investors will still have to wait for the other shoe to drop.
Copley said the Food and Drug Administration had approved its versions of two widely used drugs that had recently lost patent protection: naproxen sodium tablets for arthritis pain, originated by Syntex, and Lopressor for high blood pressure and angina, a Ciba-Geigy drug.


Indiana Journal; Yes, Ma'am, Actor Has A Museum
People here in Jimmy Stewart's hometown spent years suggesting that different types of museums be erected in his honor.
Mr.
Stewart, as shy off screen as on, rejected them all.
But when he was told last fall that a museum dedicated to him could bring a financial lift to this depressed coal-mining region, he had a change of heart.
Events began to take on the appearance of scenes from a sequel to "It's a Wonderful Life," the 1946 movie that enshrines small-town values and remains Mr.
Stewart's favorite.
In the movie, George Bailey, played by Mr.
Stewart, is a soft-hearted operator of a savings and loan who is saved from suicide by an angel and helped out of a tight spot by generous neighbors rallying to his side.


Right on the Money
In speaking to Congress last week about health care reform, President Clinton was too polite to name the lawmakers who have been getting huge chunks of money from medical-industry political action committees.
But Mr.
Clinton seemed to have this gold rush in mind when he paused midway in his State of the Union address to recall some history.
For 60 years, going back to Franklin Roosevelt, Presidents have been trying to reform health care, only to be blocked by powerful special interests.
"The work of change, frankly, will never get any easier," Mr.
Clinton stated, "until we limit the influence of well-financed interests who profit from this current system."


Foundation Health Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


To Keep Its Promise, the Post Office Provides an Extra Day of Service


Seeking 'Fair Deal' for a Black Cadet
More than a century ago, a young black West Point cadet from South Carolina was found unconscious, slashed and beaten, his arms and legs tied to his bed in his dormitory.
Instead of searching for his attackers, administrators at the United States Military Academy set in motion two years of nationally publicized hearings against the cadet, Johnson C. Whittaker.
They accused him of staging the incident and then discharged him from the academy.


Do-It-Yourself Justice
To the Editor:
I am shocked by "Violence and the Bobbitts," your Jan. 22 editorial on the Lorena Bobbitt verdict.


Exide Electronics Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hershey Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
LEE GRANTwill take center stage today, not as an actress, nor as a director, her usual personae, but as a migraine sufferer.
Ms.
Grant has had the painful headaches for more than 20 years, and she will discuss the effect they have had on her at a symposium the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences is holding at the Mark Goodson Theater at West 52d Street.


Homedco Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
'Falling Angels'  Lisa Giobbi and Timothy Harling Atlantic Theater 336 West 20th Street Chelsea
It is clear that a great deal of thought, imagination and work went into "Falling Angels," a new full-evening piece by Lisa Giobbi and Timothy Harling that was presented on Saturday night.
Ms.
Giobbi and Mr.
Harling, who call themselves the Motion Pictures Movement Theater, are expert trapeze artists as well as dancers.
In their newest piece, they have created a suite of arresting, dreamlike images.
But not all of those well-conceived images take flight, and some are sustained past the point of magic.


Dozens Flee Oil Spill
Dozens of residents of an East Harlem building yesterday spent part of the afternoon on the street, forced from their apartments by fumes from leaking heating oil.
Within two hours, the oil had been removed, and residents returned to their homes at 4 East 107th Street, said Elbert Washington, a spokesman for the Fire Department.
Firefighters responded at 12:24 P.M. to reports of noxious odors in the 24-story brick building.
They found that diesel oil used to heat the building had leaked from a rooftop tank and spilled down a stairwell, Mr.
Washington said.
The building was not evacuated, and many residents did not leave.
The Emergency Medical Service treated some people for headaches and dizziness.


Awards Issued For TV Spots
Three agencies and a commercial production company won the Best of Show Grand Awards as the New York Festivals presented its 36th annual international television advertising awards on Friday.
Hunt Lascaris TBWA in Sandton, South Africa, won for best commercial, for Roche Products.
Pytka, a production company in Venice, Calif., won for best television campaign, for McDonald's.
Leo Burnett in Oslo won for best creative and production achievement for Braathens SAFE Airlines.
And Martin/Williams in Minneapolis won the award for best public service announcement for its American Humane Association work.


Correction
The Sports of The Times column on Saturday reversed the formal given names of Cookie Gilchrist, the former Buffalo Bills fullback.
He is Chester Carlton Gilchrist.


RESULTS PLUS
LUGE  U.S.
Woman Wins  Cammy Myler stunned Europe's top lugers yesterday in Altenberg, Germany, becoming the first American woman to capture a World Cup race.
The 25-year-old Myler, who finished fifth at Oberhof, Germany, two weeks ago for her best showing of the season, slid to victory with the second-fastest time in each heat -- 44.255 and 44.029 seconds.
It was the last World Cup race before the start of the Lillehammer Olympics in Norway on Feb. 12.
Myler, fifth at the 1992 Olympics, finished with a combined 1 minute 28.284 seconds, followed by Jan Bode of Germany with 1:28.400 and Doris Neuner of Austria with 1:28.501. (AP) GOLF  Senior Skins to Floyd  Raymond Floyd, who didn't earn a cent the first day of the Senior Skins, made up for it yesterday, winning $240,000 and the four-man tournament title at Mauna Lani, Hawaii.
The two-time defending champion, Arnold Palmer, finished second with $115,000 in earnings, including $70,000 on the final day.
Lee Trevino, the first-day leader with $80,000, failed to win a hole on the second.
Jack Nicklaus, after winning $15,000 on the first hole of the tournament, was shut out the rest of the way in the match of golf Hall of Famers. (AP) Glasson a Winner: Bill Glasson, producing the best round of the day, shot a seven-under-par 64 yesterday and came from two strokes behind to win the Phoenix Open by three strokes.
He finished with a 16-under total of 268 in capturing the sixth title of his career.
Glasson won $216,000 with his first 1994 finish in the money. (AP)
SKIING  Here Comes Tomba  Even with a sore shoulder, Alberto Tomba was good enough to win a slalom race in the men's World Cup yesterday in Chamonix, France.
Tomba, his shoulder hurting from an injury he received while playing squash, gained his third victory of the season and 32d World Cup triumph of his career.
The Italian led after the first run and held his advantage, finishing with a total time of 2 minutes 1.37 seconds.
Tomba is the only Alpine skier to win consecutive Olympic gold medals in the same event, the giant slalom in 1988 and 1992.
He also won the slalom gold medal in 1988. (AP) SPEED SKATING  World Mark for Jansen  The American speed skater, Dan Jansen, set a world record in the 500-meter event at the world sprint speed skating championships in Calgary, Alberta, yesterday, dipping below the 36-second mark for the fourth time in his career.
Jansen, of Greenfield, Wis., was clocked at 35.76 seconds in breaking his world record of 35.92 seconds, set Dec. 4 in Hamar, Norway.
It was the sixth time Jansen either set or tied the world 500-meter mark.
The three-time Olympic gold medalist, Bonnie Blair, of Champaign, Ill., won all four races she skated during the two-day competition and set a world points record to win her first world championship since 1989.
Jansen was fourth to Kevin Scott of Canada in the 1,000-meter event, but combined with Blair to win the individual championships. (AP) SOCCER  U.S.
Ties Russia  Alexi Lalas scored on a header in the 85th minute to give the United States a 1-1 tie with Russia in an exhibition soccer game Saturday night at the Kingdome in Seattle.
The Americans were nearly out of chances when Claudio Reyna faked a shot off a free kick from 30 yards and passed to Mike Lapper, who passed the ball across the goal to Lalas, a defender.
Lalas leaped above a Russian defender and headed the ball between the left goalpost and the Russian goalkeeper Zaour Khapov. (AP)


Milton J. Bluestein, Clothier, 90
Milton J. Bluestein, founder of Plymouth Shops, a women's clothing retailer, died on Friday at his retirement home in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Blue stein, who lived most of his life in Manhattan, was 90.
The cause was heart failure, said a grandson, Peter Galison.


INSIDE
Looking Inward at Pentagon
William J. Perry's nomination to be Defense Secretary has pleased those who say the Pentagon's most pressing concerns are internal.
Page A12.
Mixed Results on the Beat
Queens's 103d Precinct shows the mixed results of community policing: more officers on the beat, but confusion about their mission.
Page B1.
Standing on the A Train
Somewhere in New York City, two prototypes for the subway of the future quietly glide along, with fewer seats but more windows.
Page B3.
Bosnia Says Enemies Pour In
In defiance of international peace efforts, Yugoslavia and Croatia are sending more troops into Bosnia, its intelligence experts say.
Page A9.
A2 Arts


Harding's Participation Likely Up to U.S.O.C.
Skating and Olympic officials said over the weekend that Tonya Harding's participation in the Winter Games will likely depend on a ruling by the United States Olympic Committee's administrative board.
The board consists of nine U.S.O.C. officials -- and others who could be named -- and is charged with resolving disputes that have not been settled by the time the United States delegation has left the country.


Water Main Break Floods Upper West Side and Leaves Hundreds Without Water


Candidate Seeks New Armor For Crusade Against Cuomo
It was a Herbert London kind of crowd: middle class and brimming with discontent about high taxes, failing schools, illegal immigrants, welfare mothers and Ford Foundation liberals.
Chilled by the freezing rain outside, they looked in no mood for moderate nostrums -- and the man seeking the Republican and Conservative party nominations for Governor did not disappoint.
He would cut taxes deeper than Christine Todd Whitman.
He would sentence repeat felons to life in prison after two convictions, not three.
He would slash the state work force, put every able-bodied welfare recipient to work and reintroduce capitalism into this, the last socialist state.


Buffalo Fans Turn Ugly As Hopes Fade Away
The collective dream once again turned into a recurring nightmare and the anger erupted even before the players left the Atlanta field.
"I hope they never come back; I hope they stay down in Atlanta -- forever," a devastated Dan Benesk, a United States Army recruiter, said as he watched the final minutes of the Super Bowl in a cavernous nightclub in which the Bills' quarterback, Jim Kelly, is the name partner.


Veterans Challenging the View Hanoi Helps Fully on the M.I.A.'s
As the Clinton Administration moves toward lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam, it is still embroiled in a dispute over the most emotionally wrenching issue in the debate: whether Hanoi has done enough to return the remains of Americans missing from a war that ended nearly 20 years ago.
At issue in particular are 67 sets of remains that Vietnam has turned over to the United States, an act that won high marks from Administration officials.


Coachman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
Danspace Project
St. Mark's Church
Allyson Green and Jose Navas picked the perfect title for the work they presented on Friday night as part of Libre-Echange, a program of choreography from Montreal and New York.
"Dream Report: Rapport des Reves" caught the mood of the evening.
All six dances were like states of mind or being.
Though seemingly unmediated by the blandishments of logic, the dances had a dark elegance and serenity that welcomed one into the choreographers' worlds.


First Moves In the Battle Of the Budget
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has invited leaders of the City Council to meet with him this afternoon to hear his ideas for closing a projected $2.3 billion deficit in next year's budget.
Mr.
Giuliani will confer with Speaker Peter F. Vallone, Herbert E. Berman, chairman of the Council's finance committee, and Archie Spigner, the deputy majority leader.
The Council leaders said yesterday that they had some concerns about the plan, as outlined by senior Giuliani administration officials in newspaper accounts.
But they said they would not criticize the proposals before receiving more information.


Butler Manufacturing Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Opera; Kurt Weill Goes Back to the 'Hood In a Near-Forgotten 'Street Scene'
Was it his fascination with democracy that made Kurt Weill crowd "Street Scene" with 30 principal players?
This is opera as free-market economics, a clamor of energy, hope and anguish jockeying for our attention.
Its slice of New York tenement life is Gershwin's Catfish Row transposed northward and variegated in race and culture.
Weill, the happy immigrant, left his operatic dukes and emperors behind in Europe.
"Street Scene," like "Porgy and Bess," makes a neighborhood its star.
The Houston Grand Opera put on Weill's near-forgotten American masterpiece last night in a splendidly natural production directed by Francesca Zambello.
Realizing how good "Street Scene" is barely advances its fortunes, however.
It is big and complicated, and Houston owes its success not just to Weill's amazing stagecraft but to Ms.
Zambello's fluency with the teeming resources he presents her with.
The company's financial muscle didn't hurt, either.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People of Middle East Share a Desert Problem; Mojave Ecosystem
To the Editor:
"A Test Case for Nuclear Disposal," your Jan. 24 news account of the controversy about siting a nuclear waste dump in California's Ward Valley, refers to the desert site as probably the most "useless" tract of land in the United States.


Federal Signal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abroad at Home; Running The Gantlet
Though he had no ground for complaint himself, Bobby Inman had a point.
It is true that men and women named to high government office these days are often savagely abused.
We ought to think about what has gone wrong.
Lani Guinier, one of the victims, said on National Public Radio recently that what was said about her made her feel like Alice in Wonderland -- who was so transformed after she fell down the rabbit hole that she hardly knew who she was.
The people who advised her on the confirmation process, Professor Guinier said, spoke "with a cynicism and a despair that were truly frightening."


Fiserv Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F.C.C. 'Pioneer' Policy Under Attack
Until last month, the Omnipoint Corporation was just one of hundreds of promising high-tech start-ups getting by on a few research dollars and a dream.
But on Dec. 23 the Federal Communications Commission handed the tiny Colorado corporation a license to sell enhanced wireless voice, video and data services to the 27 million people in metropolitan New York.
Although the license is conservatively valued at $250 million, the commission considered Omnipoint a technological pioneer in the field, and granted it the license free.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
G.M.'s president and chief executive said the company's North American operations had "absolutely" turned the corner.
John F. Smith Jr. also hinted that the company's 1993 earnings would surpass its goal, attributing the improvement to cost-cutting, the company's restructuring, and to the strong yen, which has raised the cost of some Japanese cars in the U.S.  [ Page D1. ]


World Economies


Giuliani Plan For Hospitals Facing Fight
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to turn city hospitals over to private groups has upset many black and Hispanic lawmakers and members of the hospitals corporation board, who say the Republican-Liberal Mayor does not understand the political ramifications of such a move in working-class and poor neighborhoods.
The black and Hispanic caucuses, with 22 seats on the 51-member City Council, are a force to be reckoned with, a block of votes the new Mayor cannot afford to ignore if he hopes to win approval for what is likely to be an austere budget with plenty of service cuts, Council officials said.


New Defense Nominee Is Taking On Pentagon's Unwieldy Buying System
During the buildup for the Persian Gulf war, the Air Force placed an emergency order for 6,000 radio receivers built by Motorola.
But the urgent wartime deal struck an impasse over a bureaucratic hitch: the company lacked the accounting records the Pentagon required to insure that it was receiving the lowest-available price.
An American officer resolved the problem with an unusual solution, persuading the Japanese Government to buy the receivers and donate them to the Air Force.
Still, the situation typified the kind of military red tape that drives William J. Perry crazy.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income . . .
Dec.
Farm Prices . . .
Dec.


Conspiracy Claim Raised In Meadowlands Death
The parents of a college sophomore who was fatally injured during a Grateful Dead concert at the Meadowlands Sports Complex in 1989 have asserted that their son was murdered by security guards and charged that New Jersey law-enforcement officials conspired to cover up the crime.
In documents filed recently as evidence in a civil suit in New Jersey Superior Court here, Jay and Linda Katz of South Orange contend that the state officials withheld evidence and obstructed justice to stymie a homicide investigation in the death of their son, Adam, 19, a University of Hartford student, and to make it appear that he either committed suicide or died accidentally after taking the hallucinogen LSD at the Oct. 14, 1989, concert.


Clearing San Fernando Valley's Image
When most people think of the San Fernando Valley, they envision a white, middle-class section of Los Angeles with tree-lined streets, spacious homes and bratty teen-agers hanging out at the mall, using words like "rad" and "totally awesome."
But the earthquake and the politicians who descended on the ravaged valley helped to reveal a section of Los Angeles undergoing radical change in its racial and socioeconomic identity, while still gaining political clout.


Radiation Experiment Met Ethical Tests
To the Editor:
News reports on human radiation experiments have been long on sensationalism but short on facts, particularly regarding the health hazards incurred and the medical standards for experimental use of radioisotopes in humans.
An undercurrent theme is that innocent people were subjected to hazardous experiments as part of irrational cold war mania.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BUDGET SESSION IS SCHEDULED
After grappling with a budget plan he will present this week, Mayor Giuliani will meet with leaders of the City Council to present his ideas for closing a projected $2.3 billion deficit.
The Council leaders said that they have some concerns about the plan -- whose details they have so far received from newspaper accounts.
They added that they were unwilling to criticize the proposals until they been received more information about them.
B3.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The people at People discuss the magazine's first 20 years.
THE first television commercials for People that sell the magazine itself rather than individual issues do not use a jingle.
If they had, it might have gone something like this, with apologies to Barbra Streisand:
"People, people who work at People, are the pluckiest people in the world . . . "


Albany International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Delmarva Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Belo (A.H.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


More U.S. Troops Leave Somalia


Knicks Head for Home, Their Game Reborn
The Knicks' road trip was a three-game joy ride.
Beating another quality opponent with an impressive performance, New York rolled to a 103-93 victory tonight over the Portland Trail Blazers.
The Knicks handled all three opponents on this trip -- the Los Angeles Clippers, the Seattle SuperSonics and tonight the Trail Blazers.
And New York reached the halfway point of the 82-game regular season with a 30-11 record, riding a four-game winning steak.


Block Drug Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Compuware Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; Bill Cosby as Spy, Cop and Producer
William H. Cosby Jr. makes programming bets this week on two movies in which he is listed as an executive producer.
As plain old Bill Cosby, he is also the star of each.
After becoming fabulously rich with the success of NBC's "Cosby Show" in the 1980's, the man obviously has reached a point where he gets his way.
But he can still stumble, as was evident in the fizzle of his syndicated revival of Groucho Marx's "You Bet Your Life" game show.
These new movies, while hardly triumphs, put him on firmer footing.
In one, CBS's "I Spy Returns," Thursday at 8, Mr.
Cosby returns to his past, reuniting with Robert Culp for a fond tip of their hats to the NBC adventure series that ran from 1965 to 1968.
In the other, "The Cosby Mysteries" tonight on NBC, the performer looks to the future with a sleuth format designed as the first in a series of movies, perhaps providing for Mr.
Cosby the kind of neat annuity Peter Falk has found with "Columbo." Not so coincidentally, "The Cosby Mysteries" was co-written by William Link, who created "Columbo" with Richard Levinson in 1971.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Cilcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Buffets Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Review/Theater; Would-Be Lovers Find Little but Sex In an Endless Dance
Sex is sex and love is love, and the distinction between the two is readily apparent only to those who aren't in the mood.
Peel back the bedsheet or return the stare of the creature under the street lamp, and it's not so simple.
Fantasies kick in, and come-hither proposals start sounding like forever-after promises.


The Bills' No. 1 Draft Pick in 1994: Sisyphus?
When you've basically told America "too bad, everyone, we're back," then leave a fourth straight Super Bowl loss on the nation's doorstep, you might as well line up for down five.
So it was that the Buffalo Bills tried to couple the frustration of their 30-13 defeat by the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl XXVIII tonight with pride in their accomplishments and a promise to work just as hard to get back.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Journalists' acceptance of big fees for speeches brings a new round of questions about objectivity.
JOURNALISTS, who often question other people's ethics, sometimes squirm when their own are questioned.
Lately, Sam Donaldson, co-anchor of "Prime Time Live" for ABC News, has been doing the squirming.
He is Exhibit A in the current round of a periodic debate about moonlighting by celebrity journalists.
At issue are the big fees for speeches that make some members of the Fourth Estate rich -- and that give critics of news organizations a chance to say that journalism is for sale.


Critic's Notebook; Innovation And Incest, Glitches And Tinsel
In the year of dysfunction at the Sundance Film Festival -- when abused, violent and delusional characters ruled the films in competition -- the Audience Award for most popular dramatic film was given to "Spanking the Monkey." It is a surprisingly witty and engaging story about an ordinary teen-ager whose relationship with his mother turns incestuous.
The first feature written and directed by David O. Russell was one of the few festival movies to avoid the talk-show cliches of its lurid subject, and the film's deftness marks Mr.
Russell as one of the most original directors to come out of Sundance in years.
Fine Line Features bought the movie just minutes before the awards were announced on Saturday evening, at a misbegotten ceremony loaded with technical snafus and thank-yous to corporate sponsors.


In West, Russia Still Hails the Market
In the last few years, Russian leaders have made a habit of taking a January break from their domestic turmoil to come to the World Economic Forum at the Alpine ski resort here, where they pitch their country's prospects to the West.
At this year's conference, after the departure of the West's favorite Russian ministers -- former Finance Minister Boris G. Fyodorov and former Economics Minister Yegor T. Gaidar -- the task of the Russian team was particularly arduous.


Commonwealth Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Administration Plans Revision To Ease Toxic Cleanup Criteria
The Clinton Administration is about to propose a major revision of the Superfund law to ease the requirements for cleaning up some toxic waste dumps, based on plans for their use.
It would also allowing community groups to be involved in the decisions.
The Administration's bill will be one of the most important and most debated pieces of environmental legislation Congress considers this year.
It is expected to be made public this week with the endorsements of several Congressional leaders.


Cal Leaves No. 1 U.C.L.A. In Wake
California 85, U.C.L.A. 70
Jason Kidd took over the game, and once again a new team will take over the No. 1 ranking.
Kidd had 18 points, a career-high 14 rebounds and 12 assists, leading California to an 85-70 upset of top-ranked U.C.L.A. today in Oakland, Calif.


Community Policing: A Case Study; In a Precinct in Queens, a Mixture of Praise and Opposition
It was when the bomb squad started calling, asking what it could do for his people in community policing, that Sgt.
Louis W. Luciani figured things were getting out of hand.
"That was, like, ridiculous," said the community police supervisor long with the 103d Precinct in Jamaica, Queens.
"If we need the bomb squad, we'll call the bomb squad."
The call showed, at least, that the word was out about community policing, and the importance attached to it by the New York City Police Department.


Is Souvenir Chief Out? Baseball Keeps It Under Its Cap
And now for a new element of intrigue from the sport that has no commissioner, no labor agreement between club owners and players and a league president whose arm must ache from all the twisting owners have done to keep him from leaving.
Richard White either is or is not president of Major League Baseball Properties, the highly lucrative licensing division that has generated between $2 million and $3 million per club annually.
Baseball owners and officials who were reached over the weekend either said they didn't know White's status or, if they knew, declined to clarify it.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news and listings appear today on pages B6-7.


SUPER BOWL XXVIII: TV Sports; Cowboys And NBC Take 2 Straight
As soon as the Super Bowl telecast began at 6:22 last night, NBC became the most experienced pro football network.
CBS is out of the game after 38 years.
Fox (or CBS West) is new.
ABC is now second in gridiron experience.


Bridge
No partnership has ever managed back-to-back victories in the 30-year history of the prestigious international bridge pairs championship played each January in London, but two Americans came close last week.
Bobby Levin of Miami and Gaylor Kasle of Palm Springs, Calif., who won a year ago, were in the lead on Friday going into the final round, but were then overtaken by two reigning European champions, Adam Zmudzinski and Cezary Balicki of Poland.
The event, long sponsored by The Sunday Times of London, is now sponsored by Macallan malt whisky.


Ingersoll-Rand Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CITY WORKERS
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani releases his fiscal plan Wednesday, he is expected to call for retrenchment in New York City's municipal work force to help close a $2.3 billion budget gap.
Most city agencies shrunk during the Dinkins administration.
The net reduction was about 10,000 jobs.
But a few agencies grew.
The Police Department added about 4,000 jobs.
Its hiring is governed more by the public's concern about crime than by fiscal concerns, budget officials say.
The Department of Environmental Protection continues to expand -- largely because of the growth of the city's watershed protection and water conservation programs.


After Passage of Reforms, Japanese Stocks Soar
Stock prices soared nearly 8 percent here today in one of the biggest one-day rallies ever, after the Japanese Parliament broke a major legislative bottleneck by passing political reform bills late Saturday.
The Parliament's action cleared the way for the Government to focus on long-delayed emergency measures to revive the economy, sending spirits and stock prices soaring.


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC. (N)
Texas Instruments set records for revenue, profit and earnings per share in 1993, thanks to a strong performance by its semiconductor business.
Earnings per share doubled from 1992 on a 14.6 percent increase in revenue, the company said Friday, and fourth-quarter earnings were up 72 percent.
But the company said it would eliminate about 700 jobs worldwide, primarily in its shrinking military business.


HBO &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Candidate Seeks New Armor For Crusade Against Cuomo
It was a Herbert London kind of crowd: middle class and brimming with discontent about high taxes, failing schools, illegal immigrants, welfare mothers and Ford Foundation liberals.
Chilled by the freezing rain outside, they looked in no mood for moderate nostrums -- and the man seeking the Republican and Conservative party nominations for Governor did not disappoint.
He would cut taxes deeper than Christine Todd Whitman.
He would sentence repeat felons to life in prison after two convictions, not three.
He would slash the state work force, put every able-bodied welfare recipient to work and reintroduce capitalism into this, the last socialist state.


Cadmus Communications Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bahjat Talhouni of Jordan Is Dead At 82; Served 8 Times as Premier
Bahjat Talhouni, who was Prime Minister of Jordan eight times between 1958 and 1970, died yesterday, the Jordanian Government announced.
He was 82.
The cause of death was not given.


Callaway Golf Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Smith Grabs Ball, Dallas Grabs Game
At halftime of today's Super Bowl, with the Buffalo Bills leading the Dallas Cowboys, 13-6, Emmitt Smith, the Cowboys' gifted tailback, talked in the locker room to Norv Turner, his offensive coordinator.
"Get the ball to me," Smith said.


Separatist Winning Crimea Presidency
A separatist candidate who wants Crimea to leave Ukraine and integrate with Russia won more than 70 percent of the vote today in run-off presidential elections, preliminary results showed.
His victory sets the stage for a direct confrontation between Ukraine and Crimea, a Black Sea peninsula that is dominated by ethnic Russians.
The separatist, Yuri A. Meshkov, has promised to press ahead with a referendum in March on Crimean independence despite Ukraine's threat to "take decisive action" against steps to violate "Ukraine's territorial integrity."


Football Can't Hurt Any More Than This
Two Super Bowls ago someone hid Thurman Thomas's helmet under a bench before the start of the game and he missed the first two plays while trying to locate it.
By the conclusion of this year's Super Bowl Thomas would have gladly traded places with that misplaced helmet.
There wasn't a hole big enough on the Bills' sideline for him to crawl into.
The gifted running back had two fumbles that resulted in 10 points for the Cowboys.
And the second one, which was returned 46 yards by the Dallas safety James Washington, shifted the momentum of the game in the third quarter and paved the way for Dallas's 30-13 victory in Super Bowl XXVIII tonight at the Georgia Dome.


Patents
BEFORE AIDS became a public concern, hardly anyone thought there was a need for a female condom.
One is now available through some family-planning clinics and will go on sale this spring.
Inventors are also turning their attention to creating a vaginal sheath for women that is more important as a barrier to disease than as a contraceptive.
Jane Hunnicutt, a Sebastopol, Calif., seamstress and inventor, patented a female condom that she says will be simple to insert and comfortable to wear.
It will still aim to prevent pregnancy, but halting the spread of AIDS was Ms.
Hunnicutt's main concern.


U.S. to Give I.R.A. Political Chief Visa to Attend Talks in New York
Citing what it called newly conciliatory comments by the leader of the Irish Republican Army's political wing, the Clinton Administration announced today that it would issue him a visa to attend a conference on Northern Ireland in Manhattan on Tuesday.
The Administration had been leaning against issuing the visa to the official, Gerry Adams, the head of Sinn Fein, leaving the White House caught between the British Government and a powerful bloc of Irish-American legislators who favored the visa.


No Headline
I've lived here all my life, so I don't really know what it would be like to live anywhere else.
But this is a great place, so I guess Mr.
Levitt did a good job. -- RYAN BERTSCHI, 16, of Levittown, L.I.  [ B5:4 ]


Woman, 83, Slain In Her Apartment
An 83-year-old woman was stabbed to death in her apartment in a housing project in upper Manhattan Saturday night after an argument with a man who occasionally ran errands for her, the police said yesterday.
The man was arrested on a charge of murder.
The victim, identified as Vida Zuniga, of St.
Nicholas Houses, 237 West 127th Street, in Harlem, was stabbed once in the neck and once in the chest about 8 P.M., said Lieut.
Thomas Sbordone, a spokesman for the housing police.
She was pronounced dead at Harlem Hospital.


SUPER BOWL XXVIII: Sports of The Times; For Battered Buffalo, It Will Be a Colder And Longer Winter
TURN up the furnaces in Buffalo; it's going to be an ever longer, colder winter there now.
The Bills lost another Super Bowl.


International A2-9 ISRAELI-P.L.O. ACCORD NEAR   Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, meeting in Switzerland, said that they were close to breaking their deadlock on the details of Palestinian self-rule for the Gaza Strip and Jericho.  A1


Frank Schuld 2d, 66, Owner of Bridge Club
Frank P. Schuld 2d of Glen Head, L.I., a leading bridge player and club proprietor, died yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 66 years old.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his wife, Diana.


Lemieux Is Almost Ready
Mario Lemieux will be back soon, but not soon enough to play against the Rangers tonight at Madison Square Garden.
Lemieux, who has played in only four games for Pittsburgh this season and scored only 1 goal, is scheduled to play at home against Florida tomorrow night.


Connecticut Finds Itself In the Land of the Elite
Connecticut cleared another hurdle at Pittsburgh on Saturday, this time without its head coach, and the Huskies are now farther into territory never before explored by a UConn men's basketball team.
The next challenge will come at Syracuse tomorrow night and the confidence built among the players has brought them to the lip of invincibility in the Big East Conference.


Harman International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
'Time's Fool'  Performance Space 122
"Time's Fool" had a start.
And, after an hour and 15 minutes, it stopped.
But it did not have what composition teachers might call a formal beginning, in which specific themes were introduced.
Nor did it have an ending in which thematic complications were resolved.


Kaman Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
Sara Pearson/Patrik Widrig and Company  Bessie Schonberg Theater
Large crates dominated the stage when Sara Pearson/Patrik Widrig and Company presented "Do You Remember?" on Wednesday night.
Sometimes the crates in this hourlong production, designed by Carlo Adinolfi, were simply solid objects to dance on and around.
At other times they symbolized friendly and hostile powers.


Essay; Who Lost Russia?
You can't throw a snowball at the World Economic Forum in this ski resort without hitting a rejected Russian reformer.
Early last week, Russia's reformist Finance Minister, Boris Fyodorov, walked into President Boris Yeltsin's office with a him-or-me ultimatum: Either fire the inflationary Central Bank chief, Viktor Gerashchenko, who was on a ruble-printing binge to prop up inefficient industry, or I quit.


Freeport McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Community Policing, Bratton Style
Community policing is the most promising trend in urban law enforcement.
It aims to involve police departments in crime prevention, not just crime reaction, by assigning more officers to street patrol, exposing them to neighborhood concerns and training them to identify troubled individuals and bring in social service agencies to provide help.
President Clinton lauded the idea in his State of the Union address, using New York City's program as a prime example.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, however, has made some criticisms -- about abuses in the program, and about what he considers time-wasting social work.


Americans Got Value In Iran-Contra Inquiry
To the Editor:
In "Mr. Walsh's Summing Up" (editorial, Jan. 19) you speak not for the people, but for the press, when you state that the final report by Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra independent prosecutor, "consists largely of information that the public has already absorbed."


Enquirer/Star Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Aleksandr Adamovich, 66, Writer And Activist Democrat in Belarus
Aleksandr Adamovich, a Belarussian author and advocate of political democracy, died on Wednesday in Moscow.
He was 66 and had been active at the heart of cultural and political life in Moscow since the late 1980's.
His wife said the cause was a heart attack, the Interfax news agency reported.


Tea Maker Settles Dispute With Shop
Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago and Celestial Seasonings in Boulder, Colo., have agreed to settle a legal dispute over advertising services out of court for undisclosed terms.
Celestial Seasonings had unexpectedly dismissed Tatham in October, only two months after hiring the agency, and moved its account, with billings estimated at $6 million, to Grey Advertising in New York.
Tatham sued Celestial Seasonings in November in Federal district court in Chicago, seeking an estimated $500,000 in damages to compensate it for expenses that it said it had incurred in handling the herbal tea maker's account.


Neediest Cases Helps Woman Regain Control of Life
Shirley R. has never known the sound of a voice, but she knows the ways of the streets.
In the freezing temperatures, she knows it is too cold for strangers to reach into their pockets for spare change.
But she does not have to rely on their handouts anymore.
"This," she says with her hands, indicating her new home in Brooklyn, "is much better."


Geon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cartagena Journal; On Tranquil Coast, Colombia Traffics in Tourists
Dropping anchor here the other day, the Queen Elizabeth II brought more to this old Spanish colonial port than platoons of sneaker-clad American and European tourists.
The serene white lines of the cruise ship spoke of a tourism renaissance in Colombia's calm corner, the Caribbean coast.
In September 1989, drug traffickers bombed the Hilton Hotel in Cartagena, killing two guests and sending tourism into a tailspin.
The number of cruise ships docking here plummeted to 5 in 1990 compared with 68 in 1989.
But the traditional tranquillity of Cartagena has since returned, attracting 89 cruise ships in 1993 while making this enclave on the Caribbean a magnet for international tourism.


Simms Doubtful for Pro Bowl
Giants officials said today that a variety of lingering injuries may keep quarterback Phil Simms from playing in the Pro Bowl on Feb. 5 in Honolulu.
Simms is not believed to be seriously injured, but the season took a toll on him and he has told Giants officials that he may pull out of the game.
If he does pull out, it is not known who would replace him.
Dallas quarterback Troy Aikman and San Francisco quarterback Steve Young are the National Football Conference selections; Simms was named the alternate.


Kevorkian Begins Ballot Drive for Suicide Measure
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian today kicked off his ballot drive for a state constitutional amendment to legalize doctor-assisted suicide, telling members of an audience in a large suburban church that they were facing an issue of rights.
"What this is all about is the right not to have to suffer," the 65-year-old retired pathologist told a crowd of 700 in St.
Paul's Presbyterian Church in this western Detroit suburb.
"This is really a right that already exists, and we already have, but which we have to put in writing because of human irrationality. Every reasonable adult is going to have to realize that if he votes 'no' on this, he is throwing his right away."


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Puerto Rican Boom for Florida
Two decades ago, this was just another small and sleepy Central Florida town, a place of orange groves and cattle ranches.
Today, it is the center of what demographers say is the fastest-growing Hispanic population in the country, a new promised land for Puerto Ricans in San Juan and New York who are fleeing crime, overcrowding and urban angst.
From 1980 to 1990, the Hispanic population of Osceola County, which is just south of Orlando and includes much of Disney World, grew by 1,082 percent, the largest percentage increase of any county in the United States, according to census data.
Hispanic people constituted more than 10 percent of the county's population of 107,000 in 1990 and are expected to account for as much as a quarter of a population of nearly 200,000 by the end of the decade.


Mary Moorman Dies; Poet's Biographer, 88
Mary Moorman, a noted biographer of the English poet William Wordsworth, died on Jan. 21, The Times of London reported.
She was 88 and lived in Durham, England.
Mrs.
Moorman's biography of Wordsworth, an early leader of Romanticism who lived from 1770 to 1850, appeared in two volumes, published in 1957 and 1965.
"William Wordsworth: A Biography" came to be considered the standard account of the poet's life.
It has won praise from critics as solid, shapely, durable, extremely thorough and warmed by its author's affection for the poet's countryside.


Tenneco Chief Is Recovering
A year after Tenneco Inc. announced that Michael H. Walsh, its chairman and chief executive, had brain cancer, the company said yesterday that surgeons had removed dead tumor tissue and that he was expected to recover fully.
In November, Tenneco and Mr.
Walsh, who is 51, announced he had beaten back the cancer.
But in recent months he has had problems with balance and weakness on his left side, a company spokesman, Thomas C. Hayes, said yesterday.


Treasury To Sell Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
There will be an auction of one-year bills on Thursday.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.92 percent; a six-month bill was 3.10 percent, and a one-year bill was 3.33 percent.


ALC Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Hopes Japan Will Turn Its Attention to Trade
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa saved his job this weekend with an 11th-hour compromise to reform Japan's political system.
Now, the United States hopes, he will come up with another last-minute compromise, this one to salvage floundering American-Japanese trade negotiations.
Clinton Administration officials said this weekend that they ware preparing to step up the pressure on Japan in the next few days, hoping to get the Prime Minister and other high officials to intervene in talks and help forge agreements by a Feb. 11 deadline.


Corning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Connecticut Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
Rosanna Gamson and Andy Teirstein  Dia Center for the Arts SoHo
Rosanna Gamson choreographically celebrated the magic of storytelling in the bewitching fragment from "Alf Layla Wa Layla (One Thousand Nights and One Night)," which she offered on Friday night.
The work, when completed, will last a full evening and is a collaboration between Ms.
Gamson and the composer Andy Teirstein.
The 45-minute excerpt they presented also included music by Dina Emerson.


Holy Bull Runs to the Head of the Class
The undefeated colt Holy Bull made a smart and speedy 1994 debut today when he won the Hutcheson Stakes at Gulfstream Park, ran his winning streak to five and stepped to the head of the candidates for the Triple Crown classics.
Some of the stars of the class weren't there.
Dehere, who won the Eclipse Award as the juvenile champion of last year, was back in the barn nursing a stomachache.
Brocco, who won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile in November but ran second in the voting for the championship, was home in California resting for his season's start in March.


Gerber Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Though JONATHAN DEMME's film "Philadelphia" has broken barriers against focusing on AIDS as the theme of a major movie, it is not the director's last word on the subject.
" 'Philadelphia' is the tiniest little chink in the curtain," Mr.
Demme said the other day.
"We need hundreds, no thousands, of films on AIDS."


Candidate Seeks New Armor For Crusade Against Cuomo
It was a Herbert London kind of crowd: middle class and brimming with discontent about high taxes, failing schools, illegal immigrants, welfare mothers and Ford Foundation liberals.
Chilled by the freezing rain outside, they looked in no mood for moderate nostrums -- and the man seeking the Republican and Conservative party nominations for Governor did not disappoint.
He would cut taxes deeper than Christine Todd Whitman.
He would sentence repeat felons to life in prison after two convictions, not three.
He would slash the state work force, put every able-bodied welfare recipient to work and reintroduce capitalism into this, the last socialist state.


G.M. Profit May Top Goal for '93
Saying that the North American operations of General Motors had "absolutely" turned the corner, G.M.'s president and chief executive, John F. Smith Jr., hinted in an interview Saturday that the company's 1993 earnings would beat its own goal.
"The trend in improvement is rather interesting," Mr.
Smith said.
In the past, he pledged that the North American operations, which lost $17 billion from 1990 through 1992, would break even before interest, taxes and other special charges.
But in the interview he said "we will be black" before such charges.


St. John's New Name: How About Red-Faced?
Shawnelle Scott draped a towel over his shoulders and took a long look around the half-empty Madison Square Garden during a late-game timeout.
He grimaced and reluctantly sat down.
This was not the senior season he envisioned.
"I'm definitely caught off guard," the St.
John's senior center said.
"A week ago I would have never thought we would get blown out in the Garden two times in a row."


While Its Neighbors Founder, Czech Republic is Succeeding
Extraordinary as it may seem, this heavily industrialized country in the center of Europe boasts low unemployment and a balanced budget even as it takes on the treacherous task of transforming itself from Communism to capitalism.
Squeezed between well-off Germany, where 10 percent of the work force is jobless, and struggling former East Bloc countries that face the possibility of 20 percent unemployment this year, the Czech Republic is proud of its 3.5 percent figure.


Dallas Wins Super Bowl; Bills 0 for 4
The Dallas Cowboys made it two in a row over the Buffalo Bills yesterday, sweeping to victory in Super Bowl XXVIII by 30-13.
For the Cowboys, making a record seventh appearance in the National Football League championship game, the victory in Atlanta brought their Super Bowl record to 4-3 and extended the National Football Conference's victory string over the American Football Conference to 10 games.


The Subway of the Future Isn't a Straphanger's Delight
The New York City Transit Authority has seen the future, and it is generally less deafening, dingy, menacing, noisy and cramped than the present.
It's also harder on the feet.
The agency is now testing two high-tech subway trains -- one made by Bombardier Inc., of Canada, the other by Kawasaki, of Japan -- on the A and No. 2 lines, respectively.
Their mechanical systems and amenities are to be scrutinized in the next three years, with the Transit Authority using the best features in choosing the next series of cars that it will buy, beginning in 1997.


Review/Music; Celebrating the Variety Of the World's Rhythms
If Paul Simon and Peter Gabriel could do it, then so can Stewart Copeland.
The former drummer for the Police has put together his own international band, the Rhythmatists, with members from Spain, Zaire, Cameroon and the United States.
That band is touring with Les Percussions de Guinea, an African drum troupe, and Uakti, a percussion group from Brazil, and at Town Hall on Saturday night, the assembled musicians reveled in percussive timbres and volleyed cross-rhythms all over the place.
It was a concert dedicated not to pop melody or pop emotion, but to the immediate pleasures of kinetic rhythm.
It was, in part, an international exposition: pop-flamenco from the Spanish guitarist Rene Heredia, booming and strutting traditional drum music from Les Percussions de Guinea; a bass solo by Armand Sabal-Lecco, from Cameroon; and subtle, propulsive pieces by Uakti, who nearly stole the show with the novel sounds of homemade instruments.
It was also an attempt to create a musical fusion not dominated by American ideas about pop structure; some of the lyrics were not in English, and few of them mattered as much as the momentum behind them.
The music left the audience dancing, not humming tunes.


Books of The Times; Dying, a Necessary End, Seems Not an Easy Job
How We Die  Reflections on Life's Final Chapter  By Sherwin B. Nuland
278 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
At least twice in his powerfully eloquent new book, "How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter," Sherwin B. Nuland confesses regret over not having been entirely candid with terminally ill close relatives of his.
This may or may not be why he decided to write the present book, but he needn't have any qualms about not having told his readers the truth.


Hillary Clinton Rebuffs Pessimists on Health Plan
Is there enough passion and political skill behind President Clinton's health care plan to get it, or something close to it, passed?
In the nation's capital, there are doubts.
But the plan's hard-traveling champion, Hillary Rodham Clinton, argues that the uncertainty is baseless.
"It has impassioned constituencies, especially in specific parts of the program," she said, citing the enthusiasm of older Americans for the plan's prescription drug benefits, or organizations concerned with children for the promise of care for the young.


Review/Film; Dopey as Ever, Partners Patrol the Streets Again
We already know that nothing is sacred, not when it comes to trawling the depths of popular culture in search of movie ideas.
But "Car 54, Where Are You?" The original series, created by Nat Hiken (also the inspired creator of "Sergeant Bilko"), delivered the most innocently stupid brand of television comedy.
And innocence is not what any present-day movie remake is after.
So is it stupidity?
That's a tricky business.
When it comes to dopiness, "Car 54, Where Are You?" is too convincing for its own good.
Though it has a potentially funny cast, this sprawling comedy has been made in a near-total wit vacuum.
Its humor can perhaps be gauged by the fact that the director, Bill Fishman, manages to insert an obscenity into the title phrase, and that Officer Gunther Toody's familiar cry of "Ooh! Ooh!" is now used in a sexual context.
As the irrepressible Toody, David Johansen mugs endlessly and mimics the grunt of his sitcom predecessor, Joe E. Ross, all the while winking broadly at the audience.
Mr.
Johansen sometimes steps entirely out of his role, jumping into a musical number in one scene and sporting a purple satin suit in another.


As Publishing Houses Shrink, Their Authors Face a Decision to Leave
When Rubin Pfeffer, the president of Harcourt Brace's trade division, said two weeks ago that he would slash the number of titles and dismiss most top staff members in the New York office, telephones began ringing furiously all over town.
Many calls were from editors to agents, first wanting to hear the gossip.
But then they wanted to determine, however gingerly, which authors on Harcourt's rich list they might be able to pry loose and take for themselves.


Arafat's Group Set Back in Professionals' Voting
As Yasir Arafat pressed in Switzerland for a breakthrough in peace talks with Israel, his faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization lost further ground this weekend in the Israeli-occupied territories.
Public support for Mr.
Arafat has slipped steadily since the P.L.O. and Israel signed their outline agreement in September on introducing Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


Is Souvenir Chief Out? Baseball Keeps It Under Its Cap
And now for a new element of intrigue from the sport that has no commissioner, no labor agreement between club owners and players and a league president whose arm must ache from all the twisting owners have done to keep him from leaving.
Richard White either is or is not president of Major League Baseball Properties, the highly lucrative licensing division that has generated between $2 million and $3 million per club annually.
Baseball owners and officials who were reached over the weekend either said they didn't know White's status or, if they knew, declined to clarify it.


CDW Computer Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cadence Design Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Continuum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


More Teachers Write Textbooks Out of the Curriculum
In a library at Public School 6 in Manhattan, teachers went on an unusual shopping trip the other day.
As part of their first "book fair," they were looking for children's literature and historical novels that their classes will use instead of textbooks.
Teachers at the elementary school, on the Upper East Side, do not use textbooks as the framework for their classes in the way most Americans remember.
The curriculum is based on themes, so there is no mandated textbook for every subject, every class and every pupil.


Corel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Towers Accused by Trustee Of Misusing $400 Million
In the most detailed complaint yet against the Towers Financial Corporation and Steven Hoffenberg, its former chairman and chief executive, the bankruptcy trustee overseeing the company said he had found evidence of the theft and squandering of more than $400 million.
A suit filed Friday by Alan Cohen, who was named by the Federal bankruptcy court to protect Towers's creditors, provides fresh and vividly detailed accusations of fraud and a pattern of wrongdoing that it asserts goes well beyond the accusations brought by Federal regulators in a suit filed against Mr.
Hoffenberg and the company last February.


Dividend Meetings


Alliance Capital Management L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ambac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Both Sides Describe Ulster Talks as 'on Track'
Seven weeks after Britain and Ireland formally proposed a framework for peace in Northern Ireland, leaders of both Governments suggest that their plan, while vulnerable, is firmly on the track toward its ultimate goals: an end of violence by the Irish Republican Army and the inclusion of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, in the peace talks.
The leaders, Prime Minister Albert Reynolds of Ireland and Sir Patrick Mayhew, the chief British official in the North, seem to believe that they can convince the president of Sinn Fein, Gerry Adams, that their proposal is not a trap and that it provides a basis for negotiations that he and the I.R.A. can accept without compromising their ultimate goal of a united Ireland free of British control.


Ex-Keystone Kop Lett Has Key Role
In the pandemonium of the Dallas Cowboys' winning locker room, Leon Lett, the defensive lineman with awesome talent and gentle spirit, dressed quietly, quickly.
The private celebration was over: He had hugged teammates, hollered, celebrated let it all hang out.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Honeywell's Route Back To South Africa Market
In the 1980's many companies agonized over whether and how to withdraw from South Africa.
Now, some of those American corporations that bailed out are sweating almost as much over how to go back.
Last week, Honeywell Inc. became the latest of these companies to return to South Africa, and how it went about it suggests that many companies may end up spending more time and resources mapping out their return than might ordinarily be justified, given the amount of business they expect to do there.


In His Own Mind, Chavez Unbeaten
Even as he stormed from the ring with his face swelling into lumps and blood dripping down his nose, Julio Cesar Chavez was pointing his gloved finger at others, anyone but himself.
He blamed the promoter and he blamed the referee for the loss of his title and the first defeat of his career.
Et tu, Don King? was the sense of what he said, although his actual words were much earthier.
Et tu, Richard Steele?


A New York, and Magazine Start-Up, Guide
Here is a story for all the people who are thinking of starting magazines this year.
It is about two people who knew absolutely nothing about magazine publishing, had an idea, set up shop in the corner of a cramped apartment, and started a publication in October 1992.
They are now projecting 1994 revenues of $1 million, or double their 1993 sales.


Democracy Brings Turmoil in Congo
Nearly three years ago, a stripling democracy movement, modeling itself on the campaigns for change that were shaking or toppling governments from East Europe to West Africa, began to take root here.
Without a shot being fired, it forced one of Africa's most determinedly Marxist-Leninist one-party states to hand over power.
But today, most Congolese are afraid, and what seemed like a bold leap into a new era of political and economic freedom has been replaced by gloom and disillusionment.


Good Housekeeping Has New Campaign
Good Housekeeping magazine is declaring 1994 to be the year of the seal -- the Good Housekeeping seal of approval, that is.
The monthly magazine begins running a trade print campaign this week that introduces the theme, "I'll believe it when I see it in Good Housekeeping" as the answer to skeptical reader questions like "The world's quietest dishwasher?" and "I may never have to buy batteries again?"


ROCKET PROGRAM FACES BUDGET AX
Despite its initial success, a revolutionary rocket that takes off and lands vertically, and may greatly reduce the costs of going into space, is about to be killed by the Pentagon.
The Delta Clipper program, which is developing a rocket designed to fly into space and return as one unit, has so far been successful, as high-tech Government projects go.
The program is on schedule and within its budget, and a small-scale prototype has successfully completed three test flights.


Washington's Secret Garden
Washington's secret war over secrecy has taken a predictable turn.
A year ago, President Clinton asked an interagency working group to establish a less secretive system for classifying documents.
The working group labored, and came up with a draft executive order last November, which (naturally) was kept secret.
Fortunately, a copy was leaked to the Federation of American Scientists.
And lo, the federation found that while suggesting a few modest reforms, the draft order would actually close the shutters tighter.
The draft order proposes, with a few exceptions, a maximum classification lifetime of 40 years.
As the federation's analysts point out, Richard Nixon set a maximum of 30 years for most classified documents, and Jimmy Carter fixed the limit at 20 years.
This extended period outweighs the hypothetical benefit of a "balancing test" that would allow declassifiers to weigh the public interest against national security concerns.


High School Equivalency Guarantees Second-Class Status
To the Editor:
You rely uncritically on information supplied by the American Council on Education in "High School Equivalency Test Poses a New Question: Will Taking It Matter?" (Education page, Jan. 5).
The council is the organization that promotes and sells the exam.
At the same time, you ignore a growing body of rigorous research on the General Education Development test, which is dismissed as "simplistic" by the council spokeswoman that you quote so extensively.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People of Middle East Share a Desert Problem
To the Editor:
Whether or not the deserts of the world are growing, as you discuss in "Threat of Encroaching Deserts May Be More Myth Than Fact" (Science Times, Jan. 18), their population surely is.
Many millions of people have nowhere else to go, because half the countries of the earth lie partly or entirely in arid zones.


Freeport McMoRan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


