Oneida Ltd. (OCQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Named Joe Bivona director of special events.
Football  National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed James Burton, cornerback.
Released Dwayne Joseph, cornerback.
Signed Ervin Collier, defensive tackle, to the practice squad.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Ronald Edwards, offensive tackle.
Signed Jeff Hill, wide receiver; Kevin Jefferson, linebacker-snapper; Jerry Reynolds, offensive lineman; and Ramondo Stallings, defensive end, to the practice squad.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Greg Manusky, linebacker.
Waived Ernie Thompson, running back.
Signed Dunstan Anderson, defensive end; Anthony Daigle, running back; and Alan DeGraffenreid, wide receiver, to the practice squad.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Tuineau Alipte, linebacker, to the practice squad.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Eric Green, tight end, to a one-year contract.
Signed Kevin Brothen, offensive lineman, to the practice squad.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Alfonzo Browning and Larry Wallace, wide receivers; Bryce Burnett, tight end; and John Ivlow and Shaumbe' Wright-Fair, running backs, to the practice squad.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Re-signed A.J.
Johnson, cornerback, and Cedric Smith, fullback.
Waived Rick Hamilton, linebacker.
Signed William Bell and Tyrone Rush, running backs; Anthony Abrams, defensive tackle; Damon Wright, wide receiver; and Don Chaney, tight end, to the practice squad.


Indian Boys Turn Up in Alaska; Meeting Planned on Punishment
Two teen-agers who were released from jail last week to a self-described Indian tribal judge who said he was going to banish them to a pair of remote islands have shown up in their home town in Alaska, accompanied by their custodian as well as their victim.
Now people there are mulling over the boys' punishment.
The two Tlingit Indian youths, Adrian Guthrie and Simon Roberts, both 17, arrived in the southeastern Alaska town of Klawock by ferry on Tuesday night.
With them was Rudy James, who had been given custody, and the man the teen-agers had beaten and robbed, Tim Whittlesley, who was accompanied by his wife, Tonya, The Associated Press reported.


Specialty Retailers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


The Pop Life
Class of '69
With Woodstock '94 quickly becoming a historical footnote, musicians who performed at the original festival in 1969 are rushing to capitalize on the new-found attention.
In the case of the musicians who have died, their record labels are busy doing the work for them.
With the exception of Woodstock's more obscure acts, like the Keef Hartley Blues Band (Keith Hartley is now working as a joiner), Bert Sommer (who died of respiratory failure in 1990) and Quill (which disappeared by the early 70's), the question "Where are they now?" can easily be answered for most Woodstock veterans.


Economic Scene; Major health care change may be dead, but something may pass.
MAJOR health care reform, everyone now concedes, is dead for the year -- conceivably for the decade.
But nobody is volunteering, as Hamlet put it, to lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Indeed, it is dawning on initially exultant Republicans as well as disappointed Democrats that the politics of stalemate could be a lose-lose situation.
The image of Bill Clinton as the ineffectual big spender may reinforce hostility among those who already dislike the President.
But it could be more than offset by the stain on the Presidential hopefuls Bob Dole, known in some quarters as the dark angel of gridlock, and Phil Gramm, who is working on his Marie Antoinette impersonation.


Insider Selling Trims Auto Stocks
Share prices of the Big Three auto makers tumbled yesterday, as reports of insider selling at the Chrysler Corporation apparently rekindled fears that the peak in auto sales and profits might have passed.
Chrysler's stock was the first to get pounded, but investors later broadened their selling to shares of the Ford Motor Company and the General Motors Corporation as well.


For Military Suppliers, A Door Opens to Deals
If the giant Lockheed-Martin Marietta merger is approved, military contractors in an acquiring mode will have a bigger pool of businesses to fish in.
But the deal could also give companies ambivalent about staying in the business a final push out the door.
"It has the possibility of making our strategy of acquisition a little easier," said John Leonis, chief executive of Litton Industries in Los Angeles, of the $10 billion deal that the Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation announced on Tuesday.
"We think it will encourage companies that get more of their revenues from commercial businesses than from defense to get out, and in some cases these are $1 billion businesses."


Irwin Maier Is Dead; Papers Chief Was 95
Irwin Maier, former chairman of The Journal Company, which publishes The Milwaukee Journal and The Milwaukee Sentinal, died on Sunday at Bradford Terrace Nursing Home in Milwaukee.
He was 95.
The cause was pneumonia, The Milwaukee Journal reported.


CHRONICLE
If at first you don't succeed, wait.
Your time will come.
ROBBIE CAPP, a freelance book editor who loves Broadway songs, has always had to sing along at home with the likes of Judy Garland and Barbra Streisand because she could never find an amateur chorus specializing in American musical theater, and couldn't interest any organizations in putting one together.
This year, she figured, with all the revivals around, it was time for a serious effort.
She approached ANDREW COLTON, the director of the 92d Street Y School of Music, with her dream and, voila, the Broadway at the Y Chorus was created.
It will begin life next month with NEIL GINSBERG, a conductor, at the helm and will be open to singers of all levels who love Broadway songs.
Well, singers of almost all levels.
"If they sing off-key, I might suggest a ceramics course," Ms.
Capp said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
NATIONAL FIGURES SWARM TO ALBANY RACE With the possible exception of California's gubernatorial race, no statewide election this year is drawing more attention from politicians with an eye on the 1996 Presidential election than the New York campaign, top Democratic and Republican officials say.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  POLICE SEEK SOURCE OF DEADLY HEROIN Searching for the supplier of a deadly blend of heroin that may have killed as many as 14 people in the last week, the police have saturated the Lower East Side of Manhattan with undercover agents and surveillance teams.
B3.
BILLBOARD QUITS SMOKING TO PUSH HEALTH In a head-spinning switch, a prominent billboard in Times Square that spent five years promoting cigarettes is being reborn as a central element in a crusade to encourage healthful nutrition habits among shoppers.
B3.
BOMB TRIAL IS POSTPONED UNTIL DECEMBER Acting over the objections of 11 defendants, a Federal judge postponed for more than two months the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 12 others accused of conspiring to wage a war of urban terrorism on the United States.
B3.
EMERGENCY SHELTERS WITHOUT KITCHENS Struggling to find shelter for the more than 150 homeless families who are sleeping in New York City offices each night, the city will again put homeless families in hotel rooms without kitchens because its existing shelters are full.
B3.
GETAWAY CAR HITS BICYCLE, KILLING A BOY A car chase through the Hollis section of Queens, with robbers in one car exchanging gunfire with a store owner in another, ended after the robbers' car struck and killed a teen-ager riding his bicycle, the police said.
B3.
REGION  MAN SUSPECTED IN SERIAL DEATHS  In the last two years, five prostitutes have been found strangled in Bridgeport, Conn.
On Saturday, a man confessed to killing one prostitute that morning and trying to kill another.
The police say that he may have been involved in some of the earlier killings.
B6 A CHEERLEADER FOR GOVERNMENT In Connecticut, a state that has recently been fertile ground for insurgent candidates attacking the political system, John B. Larson's campaign for governor is preaching a novel message: Government works.
B6.
NEW ART FORM, WITH TRACTORS AS BRUSHES Norman Greig is a practitioner of a new art form, crop art.
He is one of 14 farmers in Dutchess County, N.Y., who have created large images and sculptures on their farms.
B6.
MALL POSTPONES PLAN TO BAN BUSES A Connecticut shopping mall that wanted to discourage teen-agers from congregating there on weekends has temporarily dropped plans to bar buses from stopping on mall property on Friday and Saturday nights.
B7.
REPUBLICANS WINCE OVER DONATION A New Jersey lobbyist who wanted to go to an expensive political fund-raising reception got his client to pay the $5,000 contribution.
But when a reporter told the Republican recipients who the donors were, they immediately said that the $5,000 would be returned: The contributors were owners of adult bookstores.
B9.
I'D LIKE TO TEACH THE WORLD . . .
Rutgers University announced a $10 million deal giving the Coca-Cola Company exclusive rights to sell to about 48,000 students on its three campuses over the next decade.
B9.


Opening Date Of Bomb Trial Is Postponed Till December
Acting over the objections of 11 of the defendants, a Federal judge yesterday postponed for more than two months the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 12 other men accused of conspiring to wage a war of urban terrorism against the United States.
Judge Michael B. Mukasey, who is presiding in the case, set a new trial date of Dec. 5 to give time to newly appointed lawyers to prepare their cases for the defense.


Rosa Parks, Zeitgeist Warrior
One of the television reports said something about Rosa Parks becoming a victim of the times.
The subject was the attack on the 81-year-old heroine of the civil rights movement by a burglar on Tuesday night.
Luckily, Mrs.
Parks was not seriously injured, but the conjunction of the Parks name and "the times" was evocative.
Mrs.
Parks knows about tough times and about being forced into a victim's situation.
Those were exactly her circumstances in 1955 when she got on a bus in Montgomery, Ala.
Her refusal to take a seat in the back has now hardened into legend, but even as she was venerated Mrs.
Parks was not always fully appreciated.


SEAGRAM CO. LTD. (VO,N)
Citing stronger North American beverage sales and profits from a stake in Du Pont, the Seagram Company announced yesterday that second-quarter net income rose 32 percent, to $224 million, or 60 cents a share, from $170 million, or 46 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
But Seagram, the Montreal-based maker of liquors, wines and juices, said overall sales were flat in the quarter, rising only 2 percent, to $1.448 billion.
The results reflected a 1.6 percent decline in global spirit and wine revenues, analysts said.
Sales at the Tropicana Products unit, however, increased 18 percent.
North American spirits sales rose 25 percent.


Family Resorts
To The Home Section:
I read with interest "The New Oxymoron: Family Vacation" by Cathy R. Tempelsman (Parent &amp; Child, July 21).
Like her, I too was skeptical of such resorts until I tried one -- in fact, the one mentioned that used to cater to singles.
Let's face it, a "vacation" with a toddler in a "charming inn" or after "two plane rides" to the Caribbean is the real oxymoron.


PARTNERSHIP BUYS CONTROL OF STRAWBERRIES INC.
Castle Harlan Inc., the New York merchant bank, said yesterday that its investment partnership, Castle Harlan Partners II, had acquired a majority interest in Strawberries Inc., the music retailer, from Live Entertainment Inc. of Los Angeles.
The transaction was valued at about $40 million, including the assumption of certain obligations.
Ivan Lipton, president and chief executive of Strawberries, and a group of senior managers are participating in the acquisition, as is Jefferson Capital Group, a Richmond investment firm.
Strawberries, based in Milford, Mass., operates 150 stores in 11 states in the Northeast under the names Strawberries and Waxie Maxie's.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  I.R.A.
DECLARES CEASE-FIRE  After waging a 25-year campaign, the Irish Republican Army declared that it was ready to abandon warfare in favor of peace talks on the future of Northern Ireland and ordered its fighters to lay down their arms.
A1


Ex-Giant Offers Bit Of Advice To Brown
In between some of the nice things the former Giants safety Greg Jackson was saying today about quarterback Dave Brown, he had a piece of advice.
"He looks a lot tougher," said Jackson, a Giants third-round pick in 1989 who is now in the Eagles' starting secondary, "but you make sure you tell Dave that when he scrambles and starts to run the ball, he better run out of bounds. You don't last long in the league by staying inbounds."


Corrections
An article yesterday about a series of deaths in New York City that the police believe are linked to a potent brand of heroin incorrectly described the bag in which the heroin, known as China Cat, is sold.
As the accompanying picture showed, it is decorated with four rows of stars, not two.


Fears of New Violence Temper Joy in the U.S.
Optimism tempered by the memory of dashed hopes and the bitter lessons of centuries of violence characterized reaction yesterday in the United States and Ireland to the announcement of a cease-fire by the Irish Republic Army in its long campaign to force British troops from Northern Ireland.
From political figures to Irish-Americans active in the campaign to expel British troops from Northern Ireland to ordinary people, emotions ranged from the excited to the ecstatic.
But extended comments were invariably tinged by concern that yet another moment that held the prospect of peace would fade into the reality of renewed violence.


Small But Bright
IT'S a classic home-repair frustration: you are in a semi-dark location, have tools in each hand but no one to aim the flashlight.
Or you have a helper who can't aim straight.
End the agony.
The 360-degree, fully rotating handle of the Hi-Gain 500 lantern assumes any angle or position desired: hang it from a hook, stand it on the floor, set it flat on the ground.


Some Cuban Boat People Take Direct Route Into Guantanamo
Cubans are rafting directly into the United States Naval Station at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and risking their lives to enter the base overland through a mine field, Senator Bob Graham of Florida said today after a visit to the base.
Every day for the past week, about 50 Cubans have entered the base by boat, Brig.
Gen.
Michael J. Williams, commander of the refugee operation at Guantanamo, told Mr.
Graham.


Jets Won't Leave Rookie Twisting in Buffalo Wind
The wind swirls in Buffalo, where Steve Tasker, perhaps the best coverage player of the decade, bowls over punt returners, who stagger under twisting, floating footballs.
So Aaron Glenn, the Jets' No. 1 draft pick and college football's top punt returner last year, will have to worry only about Jim Kelly, Andre Reed and Don Beebe as he plays left cornerback.
The Jets do not want to ruin Glenn's confidence and ask him to return punts when the Jets open the season Sunday against the Bills.


Legislators In U.S. Differ Over Haiti
A day after the Clinton Administration issued its strongest threat to date of a military invasion of Haiti, two leading members of Congress expressed sharply divided views on using force to restore democracy there.
"I think we're right at the point of invasion," said Representative Lee H. Hamilton, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
"I don't think you can send two high-ranking officials to the Caribbean making the kinds of comments that they made yesterday without following through."


Chang Wins Long Duel With Washington
It was going to be a long night.
Michael Chang, face to face again with MaliVai Washington, knew that much.
"Mal's just not going to get tired out there," he said.


Charges Dropped on Coleman
Assault charges against New Jersey Nets forward DERRICK COLEMAN were dismissed yesterday after prosecutors told a Manhattan judge that they could not prove their case.
Coleman, 27, had been charged with two counts of third-degree assault and one count of second-degree harassment for allegedly beating up three teen-agers outside a Manhattan bar.
"I had no fear of the truth about the incident, but I was very concerned that the truth might not come out," Coleman said.
"I was not involved in the altercation and my only concern was that the evidence be properly developed to prove my innocence. I am happy that the process has worked and that I have been totally exonerated of any criminal charges."


The Bills Aren't in Mourning
People get it wrong when they think of the Buffalo Bills and their Super Bowl history.
"There is this impression that I and my team walk around in constant mourning," Coach Marv Levy said from Orchard Park, N.Y.
"What we're thinking about is the Jets and the division race."


Along the Andersonstown Road, Relief and Armed Patrols
Christine Williams did not turn around when the armored patrol car slowed at the curb behind her and the two helmeted British soldiers inside warily eyed the evening strollers along the Andersonstown Road.
"You know, I've been looking over my shoulder for a long time," said Mrs.
Williams, 43, as the soldiers, rifles pressed to their soldiers, continued slowly up the road past the rundown video stores and curry shops and newsstands.
"But tonight, for maybe the first time in 25 years, I actually feel relaxed out here."


Seoul Women Protest Offer By Japanese On War Sex
South Korean women hurled eggs and shouted slogans in front of the Japanese Embassy today, angrily rejecting as inadequate a $1 billion Japanese plan to finance cultural and student exchanges as atonement for forcing up to 200,000 women to have sex with Japanese soldiers during World War II.
Many of the women, who were often forced at gunpoint from their homes into huge brothels, came from South Korea, and some of the survivors have staged protests at the Japanese Embassy here every Wednesday for months to demand compensation and a direct apology.


Fresh Ideas for a New Semester
WHEN children head back to class -- grade school or college -- they usually clamor for fresh supplies, rejecting what served them perfectly well just a few months ago.
Last year's backpack looks shabby.
The old-fashioned encyclopedia seems suddenly obsolete beside a CD-ROM version.
But the basics, refreshingly, have not changed -- much.
Though they now come in bold colors, fresh pencils with sharpened points are de rigueur for students of any age.
ELAINE LOUIE


Baseball Is Dominated By Big Cities Now
To the Editor:
Echoing concerns expressed by certain major league baseball team owners in connection with the baseball strike, Michael M. Weinstein worries in "Posturing Over Baseball's Pie" (Editorial Notebook, Aug. 28) about disparities in income among the teams.
He concludes that "Eventually -- though it has not happened yet -- championship rings will cluster in big cities."
He is wrong to say that big-city dominance has yet to happen.
From 1921 through 1964, the New York Yankees won the American League pennant 29 times and the World Series 20 times.
From 1949 through 1953, when the Yankees won five consecutive World Series, their National League opponents were from New York City on four occasions, and New York teams were the winners in the National League in the following three seasons to boot.


Small Celestial Powerhouse May Shed Light on Quasars
Quasars -- compact celestial powerhouses that can shine as brightly as 1,000 galaxies -- generally lie at enormous distances from Earth's home galaxy, the Milky Way.
But to the astonishment of astronomers, it appears that something like a miniature quasar has turned up in our own galactic backyard.
Astronomers using the Very Large Array, or V.L.A., of radio telescopes scattered across a desert near Socorro, N.M., have discovered a small but violently powerful quasar-like object only 40,000 light-years away -- close enough, perhaps, to measure features that are too distant to detect in the much larger and more powerful quasars that lie billions of light-years away.


New York Needs a Strong, Independent Watchdog for the Police; Slighting New Cadets
To the Editor:
On Aug. 24, I read of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to postpone the next Police Academy class.
That evening I heard him at a town meeting say city officials care very much about the people of New York.
Some 800 successful police candidates have undergone a long and thorough recruitment process, only to discover, just five days before their starting date as police cadets, that they have to stand by -- with no compensation -- until the Mayor releases funds that had been allotted for their training.
Many had good jobs that they left to join the department, and they now face at least two months of financial insecurity through no fault of their own.


Protests of Housing Plan Lead to HUD Inquiry, and Debate
When a nonprofit agency named Community Access wanted to buy a building earlier this summer in the elegant Gramercy Park neighborhood of Manhattan to create housing for the mentally ill, the community balked.
Arguing that there were already scores of social-service programs in the area, residents held meetings, signed petitions, made phone calls -- the usual.
But the usual is not what finally happened to the opponents.
After the seller of the property, a California bank, changed its mind and withdrew from the sale, Community Access filed a complaint with the Federal Government.
And three residents who had opposed the project became the subject of a Federal investigation for possibly breaking Federal antidiscrimination housing laws.


Reporter's Notebook; The Presidential Pursuit Of Golfdom's Elusive 80
"Oh, no!" the President exclaimed, after hooking another drive and sending his golf ball bouncing toward a footpath at the edge of the fairway.
"This isn't what I had in mind," he said after he caught up to the ball, which lay in scrubby grass surrounded by a cluster of small trees.


In Mystical Innisfree
THERE is a 200-acre public garden here that unfolds like a journey.
You do not come away with a geometric plan in your head of terraces and perennial beds and a great lawn sweeping down to the lake.
Rather, you remember wind in the pine trees, the sound of water trickling over rocks, and the satisfying spacing of three large rocks -- the Dragon, the Turtle and the Owl -- that sit with a certain humorous, animistic force on a point of land that juts into the 40-acre lake.
It is a place of experiences -- of silent conversations with rocks and trees, of sunlight falling through the mist of a fountain in the woods that shoots water 60 feet up into the trees, of sitting, in the chilly air, on a slab of granite still warm from the sun.


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc.(FLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Shakespeare's Men Become Women
For her staging of "The Tempest," presented free by the Kings County Shakespeare Company at 8 nightly through Sunday in the Prospect Park Band Shell in Brooklyn, Deborah Wright Houston, the director, turns King Alonso, Sebastian, Trinculo and Ariel into women; as Miranda she casts a blind actress and as Gonzalo a mute actor who delivers his speeches by signing; and she fills the stage with half a dozen "spirits" who, although silent, seem to take control of the action.
If the program did not mention that Maria Hansen is sightless, the audience might not notice.
But the odd effect of the signing by Gonzalo (Matthew Hutton), with someone else translating his lines into speech, is to vastly inflate the role of this old wise man.
That Naples has a Queen, not a King, hardly matters; and turning the drunken Stephano's sidekick into Trincula is inspired.
Vicki Hirsch is very funny in this role.


Duty Free International (DFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


N.H.L. Players Won't Be Locked Out of Camps
National Hockey League officials told member clubs yesterday that there would be no lockout of players from training camps, which begin next week.
Brian Burke and Jeffrey Pash, both senior vice presidents of the league, made the announcement in a late-afternoon conference call with team public relations directors.
Gary Bettman, commissioner of the league, sent the same message by telephone to Bob Goodenow, executive vice president of the N.H.L.
Players Association.


After 49 Years, Russian Troops Bid Bittersweet Goodbye to Germany


Corrections
An article on Monday about the Congressional race in the 19th District in New York State referred incorrectly to Norman Podhoretz.
He is the editor in chief of Commentary magazine, not a publisher.


No Headline
"This is a tragedy for everybody on both sides. That boy is 11 years old. He don't know no better. The gangs tell him what to do and he does it. He's just a child, a child that killed a child." -- IDA FALLS, an aunt of a 14-year-oldx slaying victim in Chicago.  [ A1:6. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.88
4.67
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.54
4.57
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.84
4.88
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.17
7.19
5.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.45
7.46
6.08
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.27
8.29
7.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.36
5.57
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
Maybe it's a first, but no matter.
An 87-page book of photographs called "The Seasons Observed" (Harry N. Abrams, $24.95) is to go on sale at cosmetics counters later this month, as well as in bookstores.
An exhibition of the photographs will open on Sept. 14 at the Holly Solomon Gallery in SoHo.
The gallery will also sell the pictures.
The photographs are the work of EVELYN H. LAUDER, so there's no need to explain the cosmetics connection, or the whys and wherefores.
Mrs.
Lauder, the senior corporate vice president of Estee Lauder, is donating her royalties to the Breast Cancer Research Foundation, and many department stores are following suit with from half to all of their profits.


Rifleman Kills an NBC Stagehand in Rockefeller Center
As horrified office workers watched from their windows and people on the street scattered for safety, a man with an assault rifle attempted to enter a television studio in midtown Manhattan yesterday and fired at a stagehand who emerged from a stage door, the police said.
The stagehand, who worked for the NBC News morning program "Today" in Rockefeller Center, died several hours later after undergoing surgery at Bellevue Hospital Center.
He was identified as Campbell Theron Montgomery, 33, who lived two blocks away and was assigned to the night shift at the studio where the "Today" program originates.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MEDTRONIC INC., Minneapolis, a leading maker of cardiac pacemakers, said its board had approved a 2-for-1 stock split, payable on Sept. 30 to shareholders of record on Sept. 15.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Time Warner is negotiating to buy the NBC network and some of its cable services for about $2.5 billion in stock and cash.
In another potential network deal, Walt Disney has apparently contacted CBS about buying that company.  [ Page A1. ]
John W. Kluge will merge four companies to form a company that will focus on Eastern Europe.  [ D1. ]


Louis E. Stahl, Executive and Philanthropist, 80
Louis E. Stahl, a retired food company executive who was a supporter of charitable and not-for-profit organizations in Massachusetts, died on Monday at Salem Hospital in Salem, Mass.
He was 80 and lived in Swampscott, Mass.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Lesley Stahl, a co-editor of the CBS News program "60 Minutes."


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT CLINTON, HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON and their daughter, CHELSEA, now vacationing on Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts, are expected at a barbecue tonight to be given by PAUL BEIRNE, a money manager with Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company in New York, and THOMAS LEE, a leveraged-buyout specialist, who entertained the Clintons at a similar event last year.


A Departure At Earle Palmer
Linda J. Srere, the chairwoman at the New York office of Earle Palmer Brown, is leaving as expected after almost two years to join Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising in New York.
Y.&amp; R. said yesterday that Ms.
Srere, 39, would become an executive vice president with responsibilities in business development.
She begins there on Sept. 12.
Trade publications had reported that Ms.
Srere, who also served as president at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss in New York, was being recruited by Y.&amp; R. Her departure from Earle Palmer Brown, New York comes after the recent departures of the three other top executives there as well as of several executives from other offices of the agency.


From a Palette of Plants, With Tractors as Brushes
Norman Greig stood in a field on his 500-acre farm here in the middle of an unfinished work of art -- a growing maze of sorghum grass with pathways cut for people to walk through and, perhaps, get lost.
Although the grass is only three feet high at the moment, it will be eight feet tall when the growing season ends in October.
It will then be a finished work of art tall enough to hide anyone who enters the maze.


Navy Cannot Discharge Gay Officer, Court Rules
A Federal appeals court ruled today that the Navy could not discharge a homosexual flight instructor merely because he said he is gay.
The ruling directly challenges the military's old policy regarding homosexuals and casts legal doubts on the Clinton Administration's new regulations.
The ruling, by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit here, upheld in part an earlier decision by a Federal judge in Los Angeles.
That ruling said that "a military service cannot discharge a service member solely because of a statement of sexual orientation devoid of a concrete, expressed desire to act on his homosexual propensity."


Sadness and Anger After a Legend Is Mugged
Her face bruised and her lip swollen, Rosa Parks, the mother of the civil rights movement, seemed more sad than angry today as she quietly described being robbed and beaten in her bedroom here on Tuesday night.
"I regret very much that some of our people are in such a mental state that they would hurt and rob an older person," Mrs.
Parks said as she sat in living room of her modest, rented home, five blocks from the boulevard named in her honor.
"In these times, none of us seem to be safe from this type of treatment and violation by a sick-minded person."


Ralphs Grocery reports earnings for Qtr to July 17


These Runners Were All Business
They set aside their shirts, ties, skirts and briefcases and replaced their wingtips and pumps with running shoes.
In damp Central Park yesterday, 9,643 employees from a diverse range of about 500 companies ran the Chemical Bank Corporate Challenge, a 3.5- mile circuitous route from the West Drive near Columbus Circle to Center Park Drive near 61st Street.


Pathmark Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


When Mom or Dad Is Seriously Ill
FIRST, Doreen Kray's two children witnessed her massive heart attack and heard the grim prognosis that she would probably die.
Then they endured five roller-coaster months while their mother clung precariously to life in the hospital, lurching from one medical crisis to the next.
But now, a year and a new heart later, Mrs.
Kray is thriving at home in Bedford, Ohio.
So are her children, now 11 and 13, with the help of Kathleen McCue, a social worker, who helps children whose parents are seriously ill.


Making Films Before Fame Knocks
They mortgage their houses to finance their films.
Checks bounce.
Credit cards quickly reach their limits.
Martin Scorsese recalls once having to deny a film crew member an extra helping of spinach because it cost 35 cents.
Whit Stillman went without sleep for two weeks while shooting "Metropolitan."
"You always feel like it's a disaster," R. J. Cutler, producer of "The War Room," says.


Collins &amp; Aikman Corp.(CKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Giuliani Gives Rookie Officers a Vote of Confidence


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Big Bloomer for Spring
Q.
Last spring, I saw a tall, purple, flowering bulb called fritillaria that I'd love to plant myself.
Does it need anything special, and where might I buy it? -- Ricardo Alvarez, Worcester, Mass.


Forest City Enterprises(FCEA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Health Insurers Deserve Blame for Crisis
To the Editor:
The least savory aspect of the proposed health care reform initiatives is the prominence assigned to the five major private, for-profit health care insurers and their tag-along lesser colleagues gathered in the Health Insurers Association of America.
This is the very crew whose business practices in pursuit of their bottom line have helped precipitate the crisis the reforms are intended to correct.
They have turned the basic principle of insurance on its head, and that is the wide sharing of risk so as to dilute excessive risk.
Instead, under the rubric "medical underwriting," they have divided and subdivided the insured population into groups and categories, often denying coverage to those with existing conditions who need it most or raising premiums into the stratosphere.


Plan to Bar Buses at Mall Is Put on Hold
A shopping mall that wanted to discourage teen-agers from congregating there on weekends has temporarily dropped plans to bar buses from stopping on mall property on Friday and Saturday nights.
The plan was to take effect this weekend.
The mall, the Trumbull Shopping Park, has agreed to allow the bus runs to continue while the Greater Bridgeport Transit District seeks a temporary injunction in Federal court, officials of the transit district said.


Shalala Praises Bipartisan Health Plan as Worth Serious Attention
With Congress in recess, the search for a compromise health care bill is focusing on a proposal devised by a bipartisan group of 20 senators, and a senior Administration official said today that the proposal deserved serious attention.
The official, Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, said she was reasonably pleased with the plan after hearing extensive discussion of it at a conference of health policy experts in Jackson Hole, Wyo., over the weekend.


Kluge Deal Combines 4 Concerns
The billionaire John W. Kluge said yesterday that he would run a new global company formed by a merger of four enterprises.
The company's new mission would include selling films to Eastern European countries and former Soviet republics.
The new company, Metromedia International Group Inc., will be formed by combining two companies in which Mr.
Kluge holds controlling stakes -- Orion Pictures and Metromedia International Telecommunications -- with the Actava Group, the diversified company formerly known as Fuqua Industries, and MCEG Sterling Inc., a film production and distribution company.


Haiti Releases Donated Fuel for Relief Services
After a month of delays, the military-appointed Haitian Government released some 500,000 gallons of fuel today that had been donated by other nations to run charity food centers, hospitals and other relief services.
The fuel, most of it given by the United States, will immediately be trucked out in 55-gallon drums to relief agencies all over the country.
The fuel is both diesel and gasoline.


For Football Union, A Cap Is No Big Deal
More than 750 striking major league baseball players missed their first paychecks yesterday.
But apparently they are not going without as much as the average Joe thinks they are.
Or so the National Football League Players Association seems to imply.
Under fire from a rank-and-file that blames a new salary cap for the release of many veterans and the slashing of existing player contracts, the N.F.L.P.A. has taken to debunking what it calls myths about baseball salaries.


New York Needs a Strong, Independent Watchdog for the Police
To the Editor:
About 20 years ago, Maurice Nadjari, the special state prosecutor, put fear into the hearts of corrupt police officers.
More important, he terrified corrupt officials and judges.
As a police officer in the early 1970's, after the Knapp Commission report, I clearly remember the powerful influence Mr.
Nadjari exerted on public officials at all levels, and on the Police Department in particular.


How Adams Proved Again He Is Major Force for Peace
Only a month ago Gerry Adams, the Irish Republican Army's chief political leader, seemed on the verge of blocking further progress toward peace in Northern Ireland.
As president of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, he presided over a party conference that rejected important elements of the peace proposal made in December by Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and Albert Reynolds of Ireland.


Birthday Boy and His Older Sister Set Stage for Festivities
While Andrei Medvedev was celebrating his 20th birthday with an impressive victory on Court 16 yesterday morning, his older sister, Natalya Medvedeva, was busy working on a celebration of her own one court over.
Medvedev, who reached the quarterfinals in his United States Open debut a year ago, wasted no time in his opening round this year, dispatching Gilbert Schaller, 6-3, 6-4, 6-0, in 1 hour 29 minutes.


Pros Uniting for a Charity
Point guard MARK JACKSON was not surprised to see his former team, the Knicks, struggle against his newest team, the Indiana Pacers, last season before winning the Eastern Conference championship in seven games.


Reeves Looks for a Playoff Spot But Makes No Grand Promises
He is realistic, practical and blunt, which is why Coach Dan Reeves said today that Giants fans shouldn't make airline reservations for Miami.
Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami is, of course, the site of Super Bowl XXIX, and in his weekly news conference Reeves basically said it was unrealistic to expect the team to make it there.
This is an unusual situation, since coaches rarely admit such thoughts publicly.
Usually when asked such questions they instantly go into coachspeak, quoting General George Patton and saying they will fight hard all season and see what happens.


A Midlife Crisis at Kroll Associates
For years, Kroll Associates was Wall Street's private eye, specializing in digging up dirt in heated takeover battles.
When merger mania cooled, Kroll kept its grip on the top rung by snaring such high-profile assignments as a request by the Kuwaiti Government to search for Saddam Hussein's hidden riches and revamping security at the World Trade Center after the 1993 terrorist bombing.
Along the way, Kroll redefined itself and its industry by offering crisis management advice to corporations, negotiating kidnapping cases in Brazil and uncovering computer criminals in Tokyo.


Eagles' New Threat: Salary-Cut End Run
Randall Cunningham kept playing down the incident, this salary clearance rack thrust upon the Philadelphia Eagles by management so close to the start of the regular season.
"What I'm really concerned about is the Giants' defense," he said today.


Burger King, shifting its pitch yet again, mounts a populist campaign to return to fast-food basics.
BURGER KING would certainly agree with Ralph Waldo Emerson about consistency being the hobgoblin of little minds.
After all, having had 18 advertising themes and 7 agencies in 20 years, a consistent sales pitch has obviously not been a high priority.
But yesterday, executives of Burger King and Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, agency No. 7, said as they introduced a populist-oriented campaign called "Get your burger's worth," theme No. 18, that they had found a message that deserved maintaining -- for now, anyway.


White With Dash
WHITE china may be the classic choice for the table, but there is no reason it has to be character-free as well.
The Shell Dishes line of dinnerware by Hakusan Studios has an elegant arsenal of subtle molded effects: delicate lines, incised flower silhouettes, low-relief checks, radiant slashes and a slender crescent of raised dots.
The line was designed by Mori, a ceramic artist, and made in the ceramics center at Arita, Japan.
Mugs ($25), salad plates ($15), soup bowls ($25) and dinner plates ($40), are at Sara, 952 Lexington Avenue (between 69th and 70th streets); (212) 772-3243.


Following the Star Of a Winsome Idiot
Winston Groom says he doesn't mind what they did to his novel "Forrest Gump." He envisioned John Goodman in the title role, since Forrest, his dim-witted, kind-hearted hero, stands 6 feet 6 inches tall and weighs 240 pounds.
He also concedes that the film "took the rough edges off the character," earthy and exuberantly profane in the book, and that several layers of sentiment were brushed on, like sticky varnish.
But that's O.K., too.
Actually, Mr.
Groom has only one tiny complaint, and that's directed at the hundreds of thousands of readers who are picking up his 1986 novel for the first time.
"Where were you eight years ago?" he asked over a drink at the Rainbow Room in Manhattan on Tuesday.
"It's the same damn book."


Giant Food Inc.(GFS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 13


Japanese Programs At the Guggenheims
Works and Process, a series that presents excerpts from new or developing performance works followed by discussions with the artists, is offering two programs this month in conjunction with the exhibition "Japanese Art After 1945: Scream Against the Sky" at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo.
The first, on Tuesday at the Guggenheim on Fifth Avenue at 88th Street, is a performance by Hoichi Okamoto, a puppeteer, who will perform excerpts from two plays based on traditional Japanese folk tales, using life-sized puppets and masks.
The second, on Sept. 16 at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo (575 Broadway, at Prince Street), is to be a solo work by Min Tanaka, a Butoh dancer.


Bank Nova Scotia reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Piece for the Modernist Child
CELEBRATED for the plywood seating and corrugated wooden screens that put their work into museum collections from coast to coast, Ray and Charles Eames, the modernists from Venice, Calif., made items for children, too.
The couple's 1953 "Hang-It-All" wall-mounted coat rack was created with their grandchildren in mind.
Its white steel frame bristled with boldly painted maple spheres in colors like magenta, pink and purple.
The rack has been reproduced by the Herman Miller for the Home Collection; (800) 646-4400.
It is $124 and available at the Museum of Modern Art Design Store and ABC Carpet and Home.


Sol A. Shenk, 83, Merchandiser Who Built a 700-Store Empire
Sol A. Shenk, who built a single surplus outlet in Columbus, Ohio, into the Consolidated Stores Corporation, an empire with more than 700 stores and annual sales of $1.1 billion, died yesterday in Columbus, his hometown.
He was 83.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Brady Churches, the company's president.


Accused Killer of Prostitute Is Suspect in Other Slayings
In the last two years, five prostitutes have been found slain in out-of-the-way spots in this gritty industrial city.
All were strangled, some were beaten and one was burned beyond recognition.
In February, the authorities set up a task force of state and local detectives to solve those slayings and seven more that had occurred since the mid-1980's here and in other Connecticut cities.


Litton Industries Inc.(LIT,N) reports earnings for Year to July 31


Market Place; Toy Maker Gets Lesson In Run-Ups
David A. Segal has gotten some insight into the way the stock market works during the last few weeks.
"I get these calls," he said, telling what happened after his company, the SFM Corporation, reported surprisingly strong earnings and saw its stock soar.
"The guy says he is a broker who just bought 3,000 or 4,000 shares for his clients.


Massimino Won't Fight Pact
The Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach, ROLLIE MASSIMINO, said that he would not take legal action if the university decides not to honor a secret contract that was supposed to pay him an additional $375,000 a year.
Massimino also said he had no intention of resigning.


Robert Bennett, 75; Aided in Liberation of Paris
Robert F. Bennett, who in World War II was among a small group of New Yorkers who joined the first units of the Free French Forces as they liberated Paris, died at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Manhattan on Aug. 19.
He died just days before he was to deliver Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's greetings to Paris on the 50th anniversary of its liberation.
He was 75 and lived in Manhattan.
He suffered a brief illness, said his son, Robert S. Bennett.


New Rwandan Government Welcomed to U.N.
With considerable relief, Rwanda's new delegate to the United Nations has taken his seat on the Security Council after two months of questions over who should represent Rwanda.
The delegate, Bakuramutsa Manzi, said after his first meeting with the other 14 members on Tuesday that he was "very moved by everyone's overtures of friendship."


Model Adoption Law Promotes Baby Market
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 24 article on the model adoption law proposed by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws omits several major concerns.
Although the proposal would provide uniformity in adoption laws, it would do so at the cost of failing to protect children.
It ignores the interests of the hundreds of thousands of children in the foster care system who need permanent homes, focusing instead on too-hasty adoptions of healthy newborns.
Under the proposal, children are treated as commodities.
Fathers who want to parent are demeaned and treated as obstacles to adoption.
The proposal encourages advertising for babies as if they were used refrigerators.
It permits paying a baby broker to match a would-be parent with a vulnerable mother.
A person who wants to adopt could move a young mother hundreds of miles from home without her parents' knowledge, pay her expenses during pregnancy and then pressure her to sign a consent to adoption seconds after giving birth.


Same Tent, Same Joy, Every Year
As always at the Centre County Grange Encampment and Fair, everyone on D Street was invited to Sunday supper at the Webers' -- second tent from the end.
It was oven-baked chicken, as always, followed by the obligatory stroll over to the grandstand for vesper services and music by four Methodist ministers, the New Life Quartet.
No vespers, no chicken.
That's the deal at the Webers.
Last year, the ministers themselves showed up to sing for their supper -- the Doxology, naturally.
Since then, Thelma Weber says, the spot of fairground where five generations of her family have communed under green canvas has seemed blessed.


Ex-Wall St. Journal Editor Said to Get Top Time Inc. Job
Norman Pearlstine, former executive editor of The Wall Street Journal, has been selected as editor in chief of Time Inc., a top executive of Time Warner Inc. said yesterday.
The executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Gerald M. Levin, chief executive of Time Warner, and Jason McManus, the current editor in chief, had indicated informally to Time Inc.'s executives in recent days that the search for Mr.
McManus's successor was over.


Calendar: Mirror Show, Craft Workshops, Tours
Artistic Reflections  Parrish Art Museum, 25 Job's Lane, off Main Street, Southampton, L.I.; (516) 283-2118.
A show of mirrors by 69 artists opens Sunday and continues through Sept. 18.
The mirrors, hand-held, freestanding or hanging, include polished surfaces of glass, steel or mylar and range in size from 3 by 6 inches to 1 by 69 inches.
They are made from materials like blown glass, painted and carved wood, steel, glass, plexiglass and bronze.
Some are embellished and decorated; many are part of sculptures, boxes or art objects.


Russian Troops Bid 'Wiedersehen' to Germany
Forty-nine years after Soviet troops fought their way into Berlin to deal the death blow to the Nazi dictatorship, Russia officially ended its military presence in Germany today.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia presided over the daylong series of events, which also included speeches and the laying of memorial wreaths.
They repeatedly thanked and congratulated each other, but their comments suggested some of the tensions that remain in their countries' long and tortuous relationship.


Baseball Talks Break Off With No Hope in Sight
The owners' negotiators took three and a half hours yesterday to tell Federal mediators they had nothing new to talk about.
The players' labor representatives said the same thing in 15 minutes.
The result: No further talks are scheduled in the season-shattering baseball strike that today completes its third week.
The mediators met with both sides separately, then departed without saying anything publicly.
But their silence shouted volumes about the state of the negotiations.
Call the talks recessed, adjourned, on hiatus, broken off or collapsed; the meaning is the same: No foreseeable hope exists that any part of the remainder of the season or the post-season can be salvaged.


Model Adoption Law Promotes Baby Market; A Positive Contribution
To the Editor:
You say that the model adoption law approved by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws was developed "after five years of anonymous and arcane labor" (news article, Aug. 24).
The process was open to anyone who wanted to be involved.
There is no excuse for anyone who is involved in adoption not to know of its development.
Its progression was covered in virtually every adoption newsletter.
Those of us who read and commented on every draft, which was available for the asking, can tell you the thoughtfulness that went into the final product.
Is it a perfect document?
Of course not.
No one could be completely happy with a document that, by necessity, must have some compromise.
But on balance, the proposed law is a positive contribution to adoption and the protection of children in need of parents.


Cuba Reported to Encourage Convicts to Join the Refugees
Fearing a repetition of an unwelcome aspect of the 1980 Mariel boatlift, Clinton Administration officials said today they had evidence that the Cuban Government had released several dozen prisoners and encouraged them to join the flood of Cuban refugees.
State Department officials said they would seek an explanation from Cuban diplomats in talks Thursday in New York about what they described as "indications" that the Cuban Government had granted two- or three-day furloughs to the prisoners and urged them to set out to sea.


For Date, Tennis Brings Riches but Not a High Profile
The best tennis player in the history of Japan has endorsement riches beyond her dreams, a contingent of reporters to follow her around and the same complaint as any American tennis player.
"The stories about tennis are this big," said Kimiko Date, her thumb and index fingers a couple of inches apart.
Then, spreading her hands wide, she added, "The stories on baseball and sumo wrestling are this big."


Essay; Shredding Foster's Files
The Whitewater House chief of staff, Leon Panetta, wrote The Washington Post this week to complain about its reporter's account of a pattern of Clintonite deceit.
"Factual mistakes or overreaching by the press occur in our time-pressured environment all the time," wrote Mr.
Panetta, my fellow Old Nixon Hand.
"Recall the front-page suggestions in some newspapers of Whitewater document shredding that never occurred."


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Aug. 18 about choosing a home security system misidentified the group headed by Dennis Martin, an expert in community crime prevention.
It is the National Association of Chiefs of Police.


MEDIA GIANTS SAID TO BE NEGOTIATING FOR TV NETWORKS
In moves that could lead to a change of ownership for one and perhaps even two of the three major television networks, Time Warner Inc. is negotiating to buy the NBC Network and the Walt Disney Company has apparently contacted CBS Inc. about buying that company.
Time Warner, which already has extensive holdings in cable television, has held talks in recent weeks with the General Electric Company about buying its NBC Network subsidiary and some of NBC's cable services for about $2.5 billion in stock and cash, according to several people familiar with the negotiations.
To hear its critics, NBC has never been a good fit for General Electric, which acquired the network in 1985 and has seen it slip to third place from first place in the prime-time ratings since then.


Marino Back on Track From Injury, According to Him
Dan Marino, stung by recent news media criticism of his play, vowed today that with the regular season on hand, "It's a whole different deal."
"I'm gonna turn it loose, because it's the real deal on Sunday," he said.


For Cubans Trying to Leave Legally, 'Lamentations'
Just beyond the green-glass offices of the American mission here, a few hundred yards from the seas dotted with the rafts of fleeing Cubans, scores of people gather each morning on a small patch of gravel and cement known as the Park of Lamentations.
Sitting in the shade of almond trees, they have become a steady reminder of how difficult it is for Cubans to travel to the United States by legal means.
They are all waiting to see about visas, and under the current procedures, they may keep on waiting for months or even years.


Worker at Golf Club Finds Body in Brush
A grounds worker at the Garden City Golf Club found a dismembered body this morning in some brush in a wooded area near a heavily used parking lot, the police said.
Sgt.
William Cocks, a Nassau County homicide detective, said that the body had apparently been "hastily dumped from a vehicle" along a narrow dirt road sometime in the past three to five days.


Claim Filed in Death Of Staten Island Man
The mothers of two of Ernest Sayon's children have filed a claim with the New York City Comptroller's office holding the city and unnamed police officers responsible for his death, a spokeswoman for the office said yesterday.
Mr.
Sayon, 22, of Staten Island, died in April while in police custody.
The claim, filed last month, was legally required before a wrongful death lawsuit could be filed.


Citibank Credit-Card Account in Review
Citibank North America, a unit of Citicorp in New York, has placed its credit-card account in review, with billings estimated at $60 million.
David Kiley, a spokesman for Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS, which has handled the account since 1980, confirmed a report of the review yesterday in the fax edition of Advertising Age.
He said that Lowe had been notified of the review and would participate, adding, "We're very proud of the work we've done for Citibank and we expect to be their agency for many years." Lowe's Citibank campaign uses themes like "Not just Visa. Citibank Visa."


Rabbi Reflects on Holiday Sermons; In White Plains, Striving to Make Messages Echo the Season
As the High Holy Days bear down on them, with the obligation to deliver as many as four sermons to the largest crowds they will face all year, some rabbis start stitching together their talks in the sultry days of July.
But Gordon Tucker, the new leader of Temple Israel here, can't seem to rouse himself that early.
"I've got to feel the season," he said.
"I've got to be hearing the shofar during the Hebrew month of Elul. I've got to feel those premature chilly fall breezes that you start getting at the end of August. These are the Days of Awe after all, and the closer they get the more they get into you, or should be. I always felt I wanted a certain urgency to it because Rosh ha-Shanah is an urgent holiday."


Dow Ebbs by 3.88 in Unusually Heavy Trading
The stock market edged slightly lower yesterday in unusually heavy trading.
A surge in Philip Morris stock failed to spark a broader rally in other component stocks of the Dow Jones industrial average or in the wider market.
The Dow fell 3.88 points, to 3,913.42, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 declined 0.58 point, to 475.49.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index dropped 0.84 point, to 765.62.


Hope Reborn in Northern Ireland
Hardly had the Irish Republican Army promised a "complete cessation" yesterday of its 25-year guerrilla war in Northern Ireland than doubts began crowding in.
Well and good, said Prime Minister John Major of Britain, but why not a "permanent" cessation?
In the British-ruled province itself, Protestant doubters were quick to recall that in 1972 and 1975 the I.R.A. also proclaimed a cease-fire, which within months literally went up in smoke.
Who in any case really can control individual gunmen and death squads on all sides who have turned Belfast into a sectarian battlefield?
True enough, other bitter quarrels have yielded to compromise elsewhere.
Yet, skeptics pointed out, neither side in this bloody struggle can offer a leader with the towering influence of a Nelson Mandela or an F. W. de Klerk -- the kind of influence required to make agreements stick.


Smoke? No, Eat Less Fat: Billboard Changes a Tune
In a head-spinning switch, a prominent billboard in Times Square that spent five years promoting cigarettes is being reborn as a central element in a crusade to encourage healthful habits among consumers.
The blocklong sign on Broadway between 44th and 45th Streets, from which a giant cartoon camel peered to pitch Camel cigarettes, will be introduced today in its new incarnation.
The billboard has been rented through Oct. 31 by Phil Sokolof, an industrialist turned health advocate, to promote a campaign aimed at persuading shoppers to read the new nutrition labels on packaged foods.


Parma Journal; Proud Palaces of Italian Cuisine Await Pizza Hut
They were never exactly to pizza what Gucci was to loafers.
But after opening restaurants in 88 countries, Pizza Hut was certainly as well known.
Now the Wichita-based pizza giant has signed an agreement to open a shop in the land where -- in a misty, earlier age -- some anonymous chef struck on the idea of combining a thin circle of dough with tomatoes and mozzarella cheese to create the pizza.
It was a profitable idea.
Throughout Italy, so-called "pizza money" has been used to finance major developments.


Police Comb Neighborhood For Source of Fatal Heroin
Searching for the supplier of a deadly blend of heroin that may have killed as many as 14 people in the last week, the police have saturated the Lower East Side of Manhattan with undercover agents and surveillance teams.
Since Monday, when the rash of overdoses was discovered, the police have arrested a number of street-corner heroin dealers in an effort to find the distributor who packaged the potent brand, known as China Cat.


When Children Kill Children: Boy, 11, Is Wanted in Chicago
Someone stepped out of the shadows between two storefront churches on the city's far South Side the other night and started shooting wildly at a knot of teen-agers playing football.
When the gunfire stopped, a 14-year-old girl lay dead, killed by a bullet apparently meant for someone else.
At first, the shooting appeared to be another senseless, though increasingly common, story of an innocent slaughtered in the street.


Despite Opener at Michigan, Henning Is Glad to Be Back
Dan Henning, back in college football for the first time in 20 years and glad of it, takes Boston College to Ann Arbor, Mich., to play Michigan on Saturday and he feels comfortable about that, too.
"I'm excited about this," the 52-year-old Henning said today.
"It's what I've done all my life. First games, whether they've been last year, two years ago or 10 years ago, they are always exciting. But that will wash fast after the first couple of plays. You slip quickly into the routine, what you've prepared for."


Philip Morris Votes to Lift Its Dividend
The board of the Philip Morris Companies voted yesterday to increase the company's dividend by 19.6 percent and to authorize a new three-year, $6 billion share repurchase program.
The dividend increase raises the quarterly payout for the world's largest producer of consumer packaged goods to 82.5 cents a share, from 69 cents a share, or $3.30 a share at an annualized rate.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp.(MNDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Action Is Good; Personality Is Better
As the crowd filed from the elevated subway line to the National Tennis Center yesterday morning, a voice above the din lamented the fact that it was downright hard these days to know who any of the players were.
It is a widely shared complaint.


I.R.A. DECLARES CEASE-FIRE, SEEING 'NEW OPPORTUNITY' TO NEGOTIATE IRISH PEACE
After waging a 25-year campaign of bloodshed and terror, the Irish Republican Army declared Wednesday that it was ready to abandon warfare in favor of peace talks on the future of Northern Ireland, and at midnight its fighters lay down their arms.
In a five-paragraph communique declaring the unconditional cease-fire, the secret I.R.A. leadership described itself at "an historic crossroads."


Sore Ankle No Problem For Sampras
He taped it, tapped it, touched it, and then, with his first match in six weeks finally looming on his empty engagement calendar, Pete Sampras forgot all about his sore and celebrated ankle and got down to the risky business of defending his United States Open championship.
This self-labeled gimp strolled onto the Stadium Court with no limp, no wooden crutch, no brandishing of bandages.
All he carried was his bagful of graphite racquets and the little metal tuning fork that keeps their strings tuned to the proper pitch for aces and accolades.
All he had in his mind, which he keeps uncluttered most of the time and always empties at match time, was a mental picture of the serves, volleys and groundstrokes he was going to use to make his reunion with tennis a happy one.


Fateful Blow to Gambia
To the Editor:
It is regrettable that the West has shown little interest in the military takeover of power in Gambia (news article, Aug. 28), which boasts a long democratic tradition in West Africa and had a responsible, accountable and legitimate Government.
The tardiness of the West's response has dashed the hopes of millions of Africans struggling in Nigeria, Kenya, Zaire, Sierra Leone and the rest of Africa to bring the global democratic revolution to their continent.


Texas Instruments Loses in Japanese Ruling
Shares of Texas Instruments tumbled yesterday in the wake of a Japanese ruling that cast doubt on the company's ability to collect royalties from a basic patent for computer chips.
But most industry analysts said they could not yet quantify the impact of the decision on Texas Instruments, and they were divided as to whether it would hurt the revenues of the company after its current licensing contracts expire in 1995.


Sports of The Times; Can College Football Save Itself?
THE burgers are ready for the grills.
The bands will soon march upfield on campuses from coast to coast, their emotional fanfare proclaiming the arrival of the new football season.
And another generation of proud players -- strapped up, fired up, stoked with passion produced by weeks of hidden effort -- will create collisions that are sure to fascinate us until next year.
For three frantic hours on a Saturday afternoon, we all study them, we analyze, we criticize, but we have no idea who they are in those other 165 hours until the next kickoff and who they become all those years beyond the final gun.
As much as we might try, any of us, we just don't know these people.
That is one conclusion that arrives early on in Ken Denlinger's ambitious new book "For the Glory," an intimate study of Penn State football players from the recruiting by Joe Paterno's coaching staff in 1988 through the end of their careers.
As National Collegiate Athletic Association members and prominent university officials prepare for the January convention with the predetermined theme "student-athlete welfare, access and equity," they may now go about their work with the help of an essential resource.


Federated-Macy Filings Offer Preview of Union
Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company jointly filed statements in United States Bankruptcy Court in New York late yesterday that provided a broad blueprint for the structure of what would be the nation's largest department store company.
The filings project conservative earnings growth, dramatic cost savings and significant debt reduction, as well as ambitious plans for store renovation and expansion.
The filings offered some detailed sales projections for the next five years, as well as information about what Macy creditors would receive and the settlement of about $4.7 billion in estimated claims against Macy.


Radiant Tiles
CRAVE a backsplash of tarot-card tiles hand-painted in Spain?
What about tiles depicting the zodiac instead, or heavenly bodies, polychrome teacups, a map of Britain and Ireland or the first manned balloon flight in 1783?


Little Change in Prices Of Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities were nearly unchanged as two Commerce Department reports issued yesterday gave more fresh evidence that the economy is losing momentum.
The Fed has raised short-term rates five times this year in an attempt to keep the economy from growing too fast and stymy inflation..
The index of leading indicators, which is intended to forecast the direction of growth over the next six months, stalled in July, while factory orders posted the sharpest drop in nearly two and a half years.


Ivan Lyons, Novelist And Publisher, 59
Ivan Lyons, who wrote the novel "Someone Is Killing the Great Chefs of Europe" with his wife, Nan, died on Aug. 18 at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 59 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a widespread infection, said his wife.


U.S. to Order Higher Bank Reserves
Taking the first big steps to discourage banks from speculating in derivatives, Federal regulators said today that they were planning to require some banks to hold more capital to cover possible losses on such investments.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, part of the Treasury Department, announced that it would issue the proposed new rules on minimum capital standards Friday.
And the Federal Reserve System, which also regulates many banks, quietly proposed a virtually identical set of regulations last week for a public comment period that will also end on Oct. 21.


Ben Chavis Wasn't The Problem
If the N.A.A.C.P. thinks it has solved its problems by dismissing Benjamin Chavis as executive director, it is avoiding a couple of tough lessons.
First, it has lost touch with many African-Americans, especially the working-class and the permanently poor.
Second, it has strayed way too far from its radical roots.
The N.A.A.C.P., like most civil rights groups, made racism its focus in combating the forces of inequality that strangled opportunities for blacks at the beginning of this century.
Its specialty of attack was painstakingly shaped in our nation's courtrooms.
Its piece de resistance -- the legal brief -- was fashioned by scholars and advocates like Charles Houston and Thurgood Marshall, who raised the defense of black interests to high, dramatic art.
The results were sometimes revolutionary.


Michael Peters, a Choreographer Of 'Dreamgirls,' Is Dead at 46
Michael Peters, the Tony Award-winning choreographer and director, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 46.
The cause was AIDS, said his publicity agent, Simon Halls.


What the U.N. Document Says on Abortion
These are key sections of the draft document of the United Nations population conference cited by the Vatican as calling for the right to abortion:
Reproductive health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well being and not merely the absence of disease and infirmity, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and to its functions and processes.
Reproductive health therefore implies that people are able to have a satisfying and safe sex life and that they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when and how often to do so.
Implicit in this last condition are the right of men and women to be informed and to have access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable methods of fertility regulation of their choice, and the right of access to appropriate health care services that will enable women to go safely through pregnancy and childbirth and provide couples with the best chance of having a healthy infant. . . .


Runner Fails Second Test
The British runner DIANE MODAHL, when she was tested in June, had four times more testosterone in her blood than the Canadian sprinter BEN JOHNSON had when he tested positive to steroids in 1988.
The International Amateur Athletic Federation announced yesterday that Modahl's second drug test was positive with a testosterone ratio of 42 to 1.
Johnson had 10 to 1.
A normal ratio of testosterone to epitestosterone, which is used as the official measure, is 1 to 1 and anything up to 6 to 1 is legal. (AP)


Bridge
On Sept. 9, 34 of New York's leading players, including four former world champions, will gather at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street, for a charity game to aid the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
Those wishing to play with one of the experts, or simply to take part, should call Joan Dziekanski at (212) 486-9477.
The game is in memory of Jim Becker, who died in April.
He was the proprietor of the Beverly, believed to be the world's busiest club, for a quarter of a century, and that position is now held by Mrs.
Dziekanski.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common  *
Lam Research Corp., Fremont, Calif., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a proposed offering of 2.5 million shares through Smith Barney.


In Hartford, an Insider, and Proud of It
In a state that has recently been fertile ground for insurgent candidates attacking the political system, John B. Larson's campaign for governor is preaching a novel message: Government works.
In conversations with voters, Mr.
Larson, the Democratic president pro tem of the State Senate, rattles off his legislative accomplishments to counter complaints that government is a quagmire.
His commercials focus on his efforts to pass laws to immunize children, provide family medical leaves and ban assault weapons.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(FMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 13


Romantic Lighting
"IN the land of lighting, there's a lot of Euro-style chrome and Williamsburg brass but precious little between," said Kenneth Smith, a principal of Arkitektura in SoHo.
His bright idea: romantic table lamps with a surreal mien.
In mahogany, plaster or silver leaf, the lamps include five by Geoffrey Beene, the fashion designer.
His round-shouldered "Projector" is below.
Mr.
Smith's "Spiral" is at bottom.
From $350 to $550, at Arkitektura, 96 Greene Street (between Spring and Prince streets); (212) 334-5570.


Reports Imply Somewhat Faster Inflation
The barrage of late-summer statistics pointing to slackened economic growth now exhibits a pattern that could imply somewhat faster inflation as well, according to various Government and private-sector reports published today.
While not yet setting off alarms, the price pressures seem to support the persistent credit-tightening by the Federal Reserve this year in its effort to prevent inflation from accelerating.


On Husbands and Fathers
To The Home Section:  As a social worker and a married, stay-at-home father of two young children, I believe I have a unique perspective on fatherhood ("When Dads Participate, Families Benefit," Parent &amp; Child, Aug. 18).
I have had countless opportunities to interact with New York City mothers.
When they realize that I don't merely "have the day off," they usually compliment me, then criticize their own husbands for their lack of involvement in child rearing.


A Film Maker Defies Biographers
Jean Renoir Projections of Paradise By Ronald Bergan Illustrated. 378 pages.
The Overlook Press. $23.95
"I would rather sell peanuts in Mexico than make films at Fox," Jean Renoir wrote, in an uncharacteristically griping mood, to his friend the screenwriter Dudley Nichols.
When this great French director arrived in Hollywood at the start of World War II, he was not prepared for the way studios would cramp his brilliant, graceful style.
Darryl F. Zanuck, the head of 20th Century Fox, actually took over the editing of Renoir's first American film, "Swamp Water," a story of love and injustice in the Georgia bogs.
Yet Renoir did more than survive in Hollywood.
He adopted the whole country, if not its methods of film making, and died at home in Beverly Hills in 1979, at the age of 84.
The paradox of the auteur in Hollywood is just a piece of Renoir's huge, eventful life.
He was born 100 years ago, on Sept. 15, 1894, and his career spans the history of movie-making itself.
His work ranged from silent films to Technicolor classics (Anna Magnani in "The Golden Coach") to television.


Lancaster Colony Corp.(LANC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vatican Says Gore Is Misrepresenting Population Talks
Six days before the United Nations population conference in Cairo, the Vatican made an unusual, personal attack today on Vice President Al Gore, accusing him of misrepresenting the gathering's intentions on abortion.
The accusations were a setback for the Clinton Administration's effort to lower the level of discord with the Vatican over the conference.
They also signaled the Vatican's continued readiness to confront the United States over central moral issues.


Lindsay Anderson, Director And Iconoclast, Dies at 71
Lindsay Anderson, the British film and theater director whose distaste for conformity and class-conscious English tradition informed such anarchic films as 'If . . .
" and "O Lucky Man!," died on Tuesday in the Dordogne region of France, where he was vacationing. He was 71 and lived in London.
The cause was a heart attack, said a friend, Mike Kaplan, a producer.


Norrell Corp.(NORL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ruling Prevents Removal Of Warehouse Sculpture
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that under the 1990 Visual Artists' Rights Act, Helmsley-Spear Inc. cannot remove a work of sculpture from the lobby of a Queens warehouse it owns as long as any one of the three artists who created the work is alive.
The decision, handed down by Judge David N. Edelstein in Federal District Court in Manhattan, is the first test of the Federal statute, which went into effect in June 1991.
The case pitted three sculptors -- John J. Veronis, John Swing and John Carter, all in their early 30's -- against Helmsley-Spear, the owner of the former Macy's warehouse at 47-44 31st Street in Long Island City.
In December 1991, the artists were commissioned by the building's leaseholder to create an installation in the lobby, and over the course of two years, using recycled materials and discarded objects, they set about constructing a brightly colored multimedia installation with an ecological theme.
Threat to Dismantle
When the leaseholder went bankrupt and Helmsley-Spear resumed management of the building in April 1994, representatives of the real-estate company ordered the artists off the premises and said it would dismantle the sculpture, which has never been completed.


AT HOME WITH: Paul Gibson; It's Called Summer, Dad
So far, for Carla Gibson, the tension hasn't been terrible, considering that her husband is losing $1,600 a day and that his boyhood dream of pitching in a World Series for the hometown team may be vanishing.
It's true, as the saying goes, that she married Paul Gibson, the New York Yankees pitcher, for better or for worse, but not necessarily for lunch.
And breakfast.
And dinner.
But that's how it's been since the baseball strike hit on Aug. 12.


Once Again, Judge Decides Against the Simpson Team
In yet another setback to the lawyers defending O. J. Simpson against murder charges, the judge in the case today rejected their request for the police personnel files of a detective whom they have accused of racial animosity.
The detective, Mark Fuhrman, was one of the first investigators at the scene where Mr.
Simpson's former wife and her friend were slashed to death on the night of June 12.
News reports have quoted unidentified members of the defense team as saying Detective Fuhrman may have falsely implicated Mr.
Simpson by planting a bloody glove, matching one that had been recovered from the murder scene, at his estate the next morning.


Groups Square Off Over Issue of Barring Books at Schools
As children prepare for another academic year, a growing number of adults are squaring off over the issue of what kinds of books and course materials should be allowed in public schools.
A group that for 12 years has monitored efforts to remove certain books from schools says the practice is increasing, continuing a conservative trend to impose religious agendas on secular schools.
But several conservative groups contend that they have been unfairly attacked and that they are only encouraging parental involvement in public schools.


CEASE-FIRE IN NORTHERN IRELAND: THE LONG VIEW End of 'The Troubles'?; Trying to Exchange Old Hatreds for Peace On a Battlefield With Little Middle Ground
The cease-fire announced today by the Irish Republican Army is widely seen as the most hopeful step toward peace in Northern Ireland since what the Irish call "the troubles" began 25 years ago.
But that does not mean that peace will be easily achieved.
Without wanting to detract from the historic moment of the occasion, analysts and diplomats point out that numerous hurdles remain before Sinn Fein, the political arm of the I.R.A., can actually sit down at the negotiating table with representatives of the British Government.


The Science Upgrade Proves Steep
In May, New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, announced an ambitious plan to upgrade the science and math requirements for high school graduation.
Now the plan is threatened by budget cuts, inadequate materials and pessimism among principals and teachers.
Despite hurdles, Mr.
Cortines must keep pushing forward -- for the sake of students and the city.
One of the legacies of former Chancellor Joseph Fernandez was a requirement that city high school students take three years of math and, beginning in 1995, three years of science.
That requirement, however, was diminished by allowing it to be fulfilled with "non-academic" courses like consumer math, which was basically applied arithmetic.


Families Getting Shelter, but No Kitchens
Struggling to find shelter for the more than 150 homeless families who are sleeping in New York City offices each night, the city will again begin placing homeless families in hotel rooms without kitchens today because its existing shelters are full.
Court orders and state rules require the city to place homeless families in shelters immediately after they apply for help, but the city often fails to do so.


Naohiro Amaya, 68; Helped Industry in Japan
Naohiro Amaya, a major architect of the industrial policy that has contributed to Japan's dramatic economic growth, died here on Tuesday, one day before his 69th birthday.
The cause was lung cancer, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said.


Young &amp; Rubicam Keeps Postal Work
The United States Postal Service said yesterday that Young &amp; Rubicam New York would continue as the agency on its account, after an eight-month review.
The decision means that Y.&amp; R. will retain an account it has had for nearly 20 years, with billings estimated at $70 million to $90 million.
The Postal Service, which reviews its account every five years, said Y.&amp; R. had been awarded a one-year contract with four one-year renewal options.


Political Gift Embarrasses Republicans In New Jersey
It started off innocently enough.
A lobbyist who wanted to go to an expensive political fund-raiser got his client to pay the $5,000 contribution.
The client is called the Coalition for the Preservation of the First Amendment.
The lobbyist, John Torok, said he attended the reception for the Assembly Republican majority in June at the Princeton Marriott, even though he had just had eye surgery, could not see and had to be guided by a friend.
Getting into the private reception where being seen is as important as seeing required the large contribution, he said.


United Counties Bancorporation
Shares of United Counties Bancorporation, a bank holding company in Cranford, N.J., with 37 branches in central New Jersey, surged 45 percent yesterday after it agreed to be acquired by Meridian Bancorp of Reading, Pa., in a $376 million stock swap.


At 33, 'Solid Guy' Osborne to Return as a Ranger Again
The Rangers, seldom shy about hiring hockey players past the age of 30, are on the verge of signing Mark Osborne, a 33-year-old free agent who last played with Toronto.
Coach Colin Campbell accidentally revealed the deal during a sports luncheon at the Rockefeller Center Club yesterday afternoon.


You Can't Get There From Here


Samuel Aaron Hale; Family Physician, 83
Dr.
Samuel Aaron Hale, a family physician practicing in the Bronx for more than 40 years, died on Aug. 13 in St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 83 and lived on the Upper West Side in Manhattan.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Getaway Car Hits Bicycle, Killing a Boy
A car chase through the Hollis section of Queens, with robbers in one car exchanging gunfire with a store owner in another, ended yesterday after the robbers' car struck and killed a teen-ager riding his bicycle, the police said.
The robbers' car then collided with another car, pinning the driver inside until the police could free him.
The two suspects tried to escape on foot, said Detective Mary Ann Mullin, a police spokeswoman.
One was caught; the other got away.


Dust Off New York's Buses
Over the past decade, the Metropolitan Transit Authority has orchestrated some dramatic turnarounds.
Its two commuter rail lines, Metro North and the Long Island Rail Road, which had dismal service in the early 80's, are now excellent.
Even the subways are substantially better than they were a decade ago (although they still have a long way to go).
As quality has picked up, so has the number of riders.
There is one glaring exception to all this success: ridership on city buses is down almost 50 percent over the last 30 years.
Much of the decline has come in the last decade, which saw a 6 percent increase in commuter rail and subway ridership.
The total demise of the bus system is within sight.


INSIDE
Repeat of Mariel Boatlift?
Clinton Administration officials say that they have evidence that Havana has released several dozen prisoners and encouraged them to join the flood of Cuban refugees.
Page A6.
Ruling on Gay Navy Men
A Federal appeals court ruled that the Navy cannot discharge a flight instructor merely because he said that he is gay.
Page A16.
Trying to Trace Deadly Drug
Seeking the supplier of a deadly blend of herion that may have killed as many as 14 people, the police saturated the Lower East Side of Manhattan with undercover agents.
Page B3.
Rockefeller Center Shooting
As tourists and workers scattered, a man with an assault rifle shot and killed a stagehand outside the "Today" show studio.
Page B1.


For Those Hoping to Run in '96, New York's the Place to Be in '94
By the time New York's gubernatorial race is decided on Nov. 8, President Clinton will have campaigned more in the state for Gov.
Mario Cuomo than he did for himself in the 1992 general election.
On the Republican side, meanwhile, a number of prospective 1996 Presidential candidates, led by Senator Bob Dole, are eagerly assailing Mr.
Cuomo and raising money for his opponents.


Pilots With a Management Attitude
Unionized pilots at major airlines have long carried the nickname "flying vice presidents," not only for their high salaries but also for their interest in improving how the company is run.
Their determination to gain some control over the company helped lead to the employee buyout of United Airlines this summer, among other deals.
But lately pilots have been increasingly working alongside the airline executives with whom they had long sparred from across a negotiating table.
In the process, they have gone another step toward redefining the image of organized labor as more cooperative and less confrontational.


Rollbacks An Issue For Union In Talks
Negotiators for the National Hockey League and its Players Association met for four hours yesterday at the league headquarters in Manhattan and bargained over terms of a new collective bargaining agreement.
No settlement was announced but when the meeting ended, Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the union, expressed displeasure over rollbacks of benefits imposed by Commissioner Gary Bettman.


Pentagon Estimates It Will Cost $427 Million to Invade Haiti
Pentagon experts have estimated that an invasion of Haiti would cost $427 million on top of nearly $200 million already spent rescuing Haitians who have fled the country by boat and building camps for them, Defense Department officials said today.
One senior Pentagon official said the Defense Department assumes the first three weeks of an American-led invasion would cost $55 million to cover transporting equipment and personnel, food and water, logistics and combat pay for an initial force of 12,000 soldiers.


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; Inside Story
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Suppose it rains.
It won't, of course.
The sun will shine and the breezes at the beach will be balmy, but just in case, the Winter Garden atrium at the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan may be New York's best bad-weather playground, especially for children under 5.


First an Underdog, Then a Favorite, Reneberg Responds to the Pressure
Richey Reneberg said he played the best match of his life on Monday night in defeating seventh-seeded Boris Becker under the glare of the Stadium Court in the first round of the United States Open.
Yesterday afternoon, Reneberg was in a fishbowl of a different sort, feeling more pressure while playing a less challenging opponent in Jordi Burillo of Spain on the Grandstand Court.
This time, Reneberg switched tactics and needed just 1 hour 44 minutes to win, 6-3, 7-5, 6-3, and advance past the second round in the singles draw for the first time in his eight Open appearances.


Police Say Murder Suspect Thinks TV Networks Spied on Him
The North Carolina man who shot and killed an NBC stagehand with an assault rifle on a crowded sidewalk in Rockefeller Center on Wednesday told investigators that he had come to New York to wreak vengeance on the major television networks for what he called decades of spying and persecution, from taps on his telephones to zappings by mysterious rays.
As authorities traced the suspect's background and recent movements -- his ownership of yarn-and-dye and motorcycle sales firms, his minor police record, his purchase of the weapon and a car and his journey from the South -- investigators portrayed a man driven by paranoia to carry out a murderous plan with step-by-step deliberation.


Chinese Hit by Tank Is Denied Place in Games
A Chinese athlete whose legs were crushed by an army tank during the 1989 military crackdown around Tiananmen Square has reportedly been prevented from competing in China's Special Olympics for the disabled.
A spokesman for the Chinese national sports commission and the Far East and South Pacific Disabled Games would not comment today on reports that Fang Zheng, whose legs were amputated after he was run over, had been ejected from the games, which started today.


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; Good, Clean Fun
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
The name conjures up images of a run-of-the-mill amusement park, with lots of blinking lights, buzzers, bells and crowds.
And, to be sure, there is that.
But Playland, which overlooks Long Island Sound in Rye, N.Y., is an Art Deco jewel, built by Westchester County when Calvin Coolidge was President to create "an unequaled seaside public park to provide clean, wholesome recreation."


A Discovery of the Self Amid a Vanishing People
Daisy Bates in the Desert A Woman's Life Among the Aborigines By Julia Blackburn Illustrated. 232 pages.
Pantheon Books. $22.
Julia Blackburn's last book, a magical and marvelously eccentric volume called "The Emperor's Last Island" (1992), was not just a portrait of Napoleon's last days in exile on St.
Helena; it was also an elegy to "an emperor and an island in a distant time that has been and gone long ago."


Converging Interests
There is a basic reason that one, and possibly two, of the broadcast television networks may be close to being sold to companies that operate Hollywood studios: For both buyers and sellers, the time is right, and may never be more so.
The broadcast business, once considered shaky, has made a strong financial comeback in the last year.
And the owners of the two networks in question, NBC and CBS, have indicated a desire to relinquish control.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.70
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.53
4.54
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.78
4.84
3.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.16
7.17
5.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.45
7.45
6.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.27
8.27
6.96
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.36
5.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Accounts
*
United States Mint, Washington, to the RTC Group, Washington, to handle marketing for its new Civil War battlefield commemorative coins.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million. *
CMP Publications, Manhasset, L.I., to Dweck &amp; Campbell, New York, to handle advertising for Home PC magazine.
Billings were not disclosed.


Agassi Survives a Challenge
Under the spotlights that illuminated the Stadium Court late last night, Andre Agassi cut a formidable figure with his wild hair, brash black socks and tough-guy stubble.
But just when he thought he'd pummeled Guy Forget out of contention in straight sets, the white-clothed Frenchman fought back and gave Agassi a witching hour scare.
Agassi, on the mend professionally and personally with the old, bold magic back in his playmaking and his companion Brooke Shields lending support from the sidelines, ultimately subdued Forget, 6-3, 7-5, 6-7 (5-7), 6-2.
The victory advanced the 20th-ranked Las Vegan, unseeded at the United States Open for the first time since 1987, to a third-round meeting against 12th-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa.


Still a U.S. Invasion. Still Wrong.
The State Department is asking Americans to believe something ridiculous.
That is the proposition that an agreement this week by four Lilliputian Caribbean armies to take part in a U.S.-led invasion force signifies regional support for an armed strike against Haiti's military regime.
Appending 266 soldiers from Barbados, Belize, Jamaica and Trinidad to an American army of at least 12,000 cannot hide the fact that an invasion, if it comes, would be a foolish and unnecessary act driven solely by the Clinton Administration.


Twins Pitcher Charged With Drunken Driving
Minnesota Twins pitcher PAT MAHOMES was charged yesterday with driving while intoxicated, two other alcohol-related counts and careless driving.


Margaret O. Strahl, Psychiatrist, 77, Dies
Dr.
Margaret Olds Strahl, a retired New York psychiatrist and analyst known for her research on the clinical treatment of schizophrenia, died on Monday at the William Hill Health Care Center in Easton, Md.
She was 77.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, her family said.


Holiday on Monday
Labor Day will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.


Day 1 of I.R.A.'s Cease-Fire: Hopes Tinged by Skepticism
The day after the Irish Republican Army declared an unconditional cease-fire, people in the town where the troubles began 25 years ago emerged into the sun today and wondered if this is what peace feels like.
In a way, it was hard to tell.
Like any other warm day in September, streets were bursting with shoppers, and schools were back in session.


COMPANY NEWS: The Snack-Food Frontier; Chinese to Get a Taste Of Cheese-Less Cheetos
At last, Cheetos, the snack, has come to China, the country.
The catch?
They don't taste like Cheetos.
The maker of Cheetos, Pepsico, announced a $1 million joint venture yesterday to produce the little crispy-tasting cheese puffs in Guangdong province, where the per-capita income is among the highest in China.
It marks the first time a major snack-food brand will be produced in China for Chinese tastes, Pepsico said.


Johannesburg Journal; Dazzled by Rich South Africa, Migrants Pour In
All night, every night, the Mozambican boys grill fatty sausages on little braziers, loitering outside nightclubs among the prostitutes and drug dealers, hoping the police will overlook them and dreading a beating from their employer if their cash comes up short.
At sunup they straggle home, six flights up a dark stairwell reeking of human sewage to a derelict apartment where they joke and roughhouse for a while.
Then they flop, 10 of them side by side, and pull grimy blankets over their heads.


Hero in Parks Case Is Held
A man who captured the person charged with assaulting Rosa Parks, the mother of the civil rights movement, was himself behind bars today, arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation on bank robbery charges as he left a television interview.


Food Vendors Protest in Midtown


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; Recircling the Globe
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
If you're a Unisphere, the world is a lonely place.
You're one of a kind.
Your youth is gone.
And to tell the truth, you were never very popular in the first place.
When the World's Fair packed up and left Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens, it left you behind to stew in a pool of stagnant water, like a soda can from the Pepsi Pavilion.


Sounds Around Town
Nancy LaMott
Nancy LaMott, the Chestnut Room at Tavern on the Green, Central Park at West 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
Wholesome but not sugary, deep but never arty, Ms.
LaMott is a model of heartfelt restraint in a cabaret field that sometimes seems awash in pretensions.
Her voice is clear and beautiful, her delivery unadorned and true to the line of song.
Her performances of two ballads from "Merrily We Roll Along" -- "Good Thing Going" and "Not a Day Goes By," welded to tell the story of a relationship -- are definitive.
Show times are 9 and 11 P.M today and tomorrow; 8:30 and 10:30 P.M. on Sunday.
There is a $23.50 music charge today and tomorrow and $17.50 on Sunday; there are no minimums on all days.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Bob Dorough Trio
Bob Dorough Trio, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
Among other accomplishments, Mr.
Dorough wrote the words for that classic sly putdown of people who would be cool, "I'm Hip," with music by Dave Frishberg.
Mr.
Dorough, a singer, songwriter and be-bop pianist whose Arkansas drawl suggests Hoagy Carmichael by way of Dr.
John, is to perform with the bassist Bill Takas, a longtime musical partner with whom he has refined a sophisticated give-and-take relationship, and the guitarist Steve Berger.
In addition to original material, Mr.
Dorough is to perform songs by everyone from Carmichael to Randy Newman.
Show times are 9 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $15 cover charge and a $15 minimum.
S.
H.
Folk-Pop Quartet
Christine Lavin, Megon McDonough, Sally Fingerette and Debi Smith, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
This quartet of folk-pop singers and songwriters, who call themselves Four Bitchin' Babes, was put together by Ms.
Lavin, the comic singer and songwriter whose best topical songs have real bite.
Along with horseplay and sharply edged banter about the battle between the sexes, the women sing mostly original material.
A typical show creates a composite portrait of grown-up women who are working musicians and like men, but who also know the score.
There are shows at 7:30 and 10:30 tonight and tomorrow night.
Tickets are $17.50.
S.
H.


Treasury Securities Hold Firm
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed yesterday after they bounced back from early losses prompted by Government reports suggesting that the economy may not have slowed as much as other data have showed.
A weaker dollar discouraged buying.
In the tug of war between those who think the economy is slowing and those who think it is not slowing fast enough, the market yesterday reflected the views of traders who think the economy is slowing, but just barely.


INSIDE
Israel and Morocco Seek Ties
Israel and Morocco took the first formal step toward diplomatic relations, making Morocco the only Arab country other than Egypt to establish official ties with Israel.
Page A6.
Heroin Toll Is Lowered
The authorities lowered from 14 to 8 the number of deaths the police believe are related to highly concentrated heroin sold in Manhattan.
Page B3.
Boy, 13, Held in Fatal Arson
A 13-year-old boy has been charged with murder in the firebombing of a Bronx grocery store that killed four people, the police said, and other suspects are being sought.
Page B3.


METRO DIGEST
FEDERAL INQUIRY UNDER WAY IN NEWARK
Federal law-enforcement officials said that they had begun a sweeping investigation into the Newark city government's dealings with private companies during the last five years.
Officials said they had obtained subpoenas for the Newark City Council's records since 1989 as part of the inquiry into whether politicians accepted bribes and favors in return for granting contracts, tax abatements and zoning changes.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  WOMAN, 3 CHILDREN FOUND DEAD IN HARLEM
The bodies of a woman and three children were found in a West Harlem apartment where they were apparently killed last week, the police said.
The bodies, found stacked in a bathtub, were so badly decomposed that the police could not immediately determine how they had died, said Chief Joseph Leake of the New York City housing police.
B3.


For Children
Suffolk County Vanderbilt Museum 180 Little Neck Road Centerport, L.I. (516) 854-5555 Recommended for all ages
Children might be impressed by the scale of William K. Vanderbilt 2d's 43-acre, Spanish-style summer home, but what really sticks with them are the male and female shrunken heads.


Texas Rockabilly, but by Way of the Garage
The Reverend Horton Heat, a Dallas trio that performed on Tuesday night at Limelight, plays rockabilly, but not exactly in the tradition of Carl Perkins and Elvis Presley.
Its music is rooted in the garage bands that the rockabilly boom spawned, the no-hit rebels who played rock standards with a ragged edge, a new set of lyrics and an exaggerated sense of fun.
The rockabilly underground never disappeared after the 1950's.
It weathered psychedelic and punk-rock, incorporating elements of both into its sound.
The Reverend Horton Heat is the genre's best known newcomer, most likely because it hired alternative-rock personalities like Gibby Haynes of the Butthole Surfers and Al Jourgensen of Ministry to produce its records.
It opened its set with "Baddest of the Bad" from its new album, "Liquor in the Front" (Interscope), paving the way for a battery of hyperbolic party anthems about alcohol, drugs and sex.


Women's Advocates Flocking to Cairo, Eager for Gains
Its boulevards swept and repaired, its downtown streets cleared of loiterers, its airport staffed with cheerful young greeters armed with the power to bypass Egypt's notorious customs and immigration bureaucracies, Cairo is ready for the United Nations Conference on Population and Development.
More than 20,000 people are expected for the nine-day meeting, which opens Monday.
Among them are official delegates from more than 170 countries and members of nongovernmental groups coming to lobby for their causes and to meet in their own forum.


Four Persian Carpets That Feet Never Touch, At the Met Museum
Carpets are a perfect furniture.
One can sleep or socialize or meditate on them.
They can be rolled or folded for easy transport, and admired on the wall or underfoot.
They define a home wherever they are spread, and the house from which they are missing is inhospitably cold.
So, at least, thought many ancient cultures, including that of Persia.
It was from Persia that some of the world's finest rugs came, and none were more luxurious than those produced under the Safavid dynasty in the 16th century, a magical moment for Islamic art, when lavishness and suavity were in precise alignment.


Sounds Around Town
Ruth Brown
Ruth Brown, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
When Ruth Brown was in her 20's, she was the major asset of Atlantic Records: her hits, like "(Mama) He Treats Your Daughter Mean" and "5-10-15 Hours," virtually bankrolled the fledgling company in the 1950's.
Since then, her voice has gone from coy girlishness to sultry maturity; she sings blues and rhythm-and-blues songs with earthy poise.
Shows tonight through Sunday night are at 9:30 and 11:30; there is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum.
JON PARELES Thomas Chapin Quartet
Thomas Chapin Quartet, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
Thomas Chapin's compositions often take off from muscular vamps; he likes to create patterns, set them in motion and then knock them apart with his own scurrying, free-ranging alto-saxophone and flute solos.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 10:30 and midnight.
There is a $10 cover and a $10 minimum.
J.
P.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MCCORMICK &amp; CO., Sparks, Md., has bought the dessert business of Traders Pty.
Ltd., Sydney, Australia, for an undisclosed amount.


When de Gaulle Walked Through Fire
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 26 news article on the liberation of Paris on Aug. 25, 1944, did not mention the attempt to assassinate Gen.
Charles de Gaulle, to which I was an eyewitness.


Stocks Down For 2d Day; Dow Off 11.98
For the second consecutive day, the stock market pulled back from recent gains and closed down on leading indexes -- especially the Nasdaq composite index, which has a large number of high-technology stocks that were hurt by a troubled outlook for the computer business.
Bond prices were steady, and the dollar fell.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 11.98 points, to 3,901.44, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index fell 2.32 points, to 473.17.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index fell a steep 6.67 points, to 758.95.


Avis to Install Hand Controls in More Cars
Avis, the nation's second-largest automobile rental company, has agreed to install more hand controls for the disabled in its cars, the Justice Department announced today.
Attorney General Janet Reno said the agreement was part of a broad effort to improve compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, which requires companies serving the public to allow access to disabled people.


For British, Move Toward Peace in Northern Ireland Is Still a War of Words
The British Government has found itself locked in a war of words, or rather a war over a single word, over how to respond to the Irish Republican Army's cease-fire, which took hold in Northern Ireland early today.
The word is "permanent." For eight months the Government of Prime Minister John Major has insisted that Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political arm, must renounce violence once and for all in order to enter into exploratory talks about peace.


Lendl's Bad Back Is an Opponent He Can't Fight
There are some days when Ivan Lendl, his obsession with competition undiminished even at 34, feels like the same world-beater who toughed his way to eight consecutive United States Open finals and won three of them.
Those are the good days, the ones when he can't wait to leap out of bed and start walloping tennis balls and opponents.
Then there are the other days, like yesterday, when leaping out of bed was out of the question and playing a second-round match at the Open was just plain impossible.
Bad backs aren't partisan, not even when the athlete they victimize happens to be the only man in the history of his sport to battle his way into 19 Grand Slam finals and wield the No. 1 ranking for a record 270 weeks.
Bad backs are often more troublesome than tragic, but this particular bad back seems to be having a terminal impact on Lendl's tennis career.


CITY OF NEWARK BECOMES SUBJECT OF FRAUD INQUIRY
Federal law-enforcement officials said today that they had begun a sweeping investigation into virtually all of the Newark city government's dealings with private companies over the last five years.
Officials said they had obtained subpoenas for all of the Newark City Council's records since 1989 as part of the inquiry into whether local politicians accepted bribes and other favors in return for granting contracts, tax abatements and zoning changes.


P.B.A. Endorses Cuomo
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo came to this Catskill resort community today to accept the endorsement of the New York City Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, the state's largest law-enforcement union, at its annual convention.
Brushing aside Mr.
Cuomo's opposition to the death penalty -- a punishment the P.B.A. supports -- the union president, Phil Caruso, commended the Governor for backing a proposed ban on military-style assault weapons and for sponsoring legislation that he said had improved the lives of police officers.


Monitoring Of Wachtler Is a Concern
Sol Wachtler's temporary new life sleeping in a Brooklyn halfway house and working at a Long Island real estate company has run into some problems.
After an abbreviated first day at his job on Wednesday, Mr.
Wachtler, formerly Chief Judge of New York State, was called back to the halfway house by Bureau of Prison officials apparently concerned about whether he was adequately monitored.
All employed inmates in halfway houses are monitored by unscheduled phone calls or visits to the employer by Bureau of Prisons officials.


CHRONICLE
Traditionally, on the day before Labor Day, a group of about 40 friends gathers to sing "Happy Birthday" to JEAN DALRYMPLE, the producer, director, actress and author, who will be 92 on Sunday.
They have been at it for almost half a century, said BETSY VON FURSTENBERG, an actress who joined the Dalrymple Birthday Club in 1951.
Among the other members are TAMMY GRIMES, LUCILLE LORTEL, LEE ROY REAMS, RITA GAM, RADIE HARRIS and SYLVIA MILES.
"I wouldn't dream of missing Jean's party," Ms.
Miles said.
"We've been backgammon pals since we were kids."


Summer's Last Hurrah
LABOR DAY pulls in two directions.
The unmistakable whiff of cooler weather -- yes, it's out there, even if the thermometer lies and reads 90 -- is a preview of coming attractions, a teaser for full-tilt fall, when leaves die but New York City comes to life.
At the same time, shorter days and longer shadows cast a melancholy spell, and put the mind in an elegiac mood.
Either way, the summer-ending three-day weekend demands a response.
Who can blame America for scrambling to snatch the last morsel of pleasure from the season's closing jaws?
This is it.
The party is over.
Summer is gone.
We shall not see its like again, at least not for nine long months.


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; A Whiff of 4-H
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Getting to the Goshen Fair is easy if your children are showing their heifers.
You arrive before the fair opens tomorrow and you leave when it ends Monday.
For the rest of us, who wish only to mark summer's end by dropping in on a fair, the lines of cars on Routes 63 and 4, the only roads to Goshen, Conn., can seem endless.
My family has learned to mimic the farmers and arrive early in the morning.


Executive Changes
CHEMICAL BANK MICHIGAN, Clare, Mich., named Dennis J. LaFleur president and chief executive.
He had been president and chief executive of another affiliate bank of Chemical Financial Corp., Chemical Bank South in Marshall, Mich..
EASEL CORP., Burlington, Mass., named John McDonough president and chief executive.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.S.
AND CUBA SEEK END TO CRISIS  U.S. and Cuban negotiators met for six hours amid indications that Havana was seriously weighing Administration proposals to resolve the refugee crisis.
Nearly 1,500 Cubans were picked up by the Coast Guard in the waters off Cuba.
A1  Havana denied that it has released criminals to join the refugees.
A12


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Central Fidelity Banks Inc., Richmond, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $500 million of securities.


Arizona Iced Tea Maker Seeks Agency
Ferolito Vultaggio &amp; Sons said yesterday that it had contacted eight shops about becoming the first agency to handle the account of its Arizona line of iced teas and other beverages.
"We've decided that we think we need an agency," said Francie Patton, a spokeswoman for Ferolito Vultaggio, which is based in Brooklyn.
The company has used an in-house operation until now to market its Arizona beverages, which include iced teas, lemonades and punch drinks.


Haiti Agrees to Let 1,000 Refugees Go to U.S.
The military-backed government has agreed to allow the departure of more than 1,000 Haitians who have been granted political asylum in the United States, American Embassy officials said today.
The first 91 left on Wednesday after being trapped in Haiti for more than a month.
The 91 refugees made it safely across the border on a bus into the Dominican Republic, the first political refugees to leave the country since the United Nations sanctioned an American-led invasion of Haiti.


Funds for M.T.A. Logo Should Go for Services
To the Editor:
First the Metropolitan Transportation Authority pays private consultants $450,000 to design a new logo (news article, Aug. 28).


Village Bohemians From Another Era
GREENWICH VILLAGE'S reputation as an outpost of the unconventional is nothing new, as "Beals's Bohemians," a charming show of photographs by Jessie Tarbox Beals at the Museum of the City of New York, demonstrates.
Included are more than 50 images of the colorful characters and locations that in the early years of the century gave the area the name "Greenwich Thrillage" and cemented its fame as a haven for nonconformists of all sorts.
Among the local celebrities captured by Beals's camera was Bobby Edwards, a Harvard-educated magazine editor known as the "Village troubadour," who roamed the streets at night, strumming a homemade ukulele and singing for his supper.
Mary Alletta Crump, who ran the Crumperie, a tearoom on West Fourth Street that logically enough specialized in crumpets, also favored the ukulele: to entertain her patrons, she played hers while singing spirituals.


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; On the Nissequogue
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Far from the well-heeled crowds flocking to the East End for its seashore and softball each weekend, quiet treasures lie along the Nissequogue River on the North Shore, where Long Island hides some of its dearest secrets.


Restaurants
In his recently published book, "My Own Country," Dr.
Abraham Verghese is told by a traveling salesman how to find a good Indian restaurant in any American city: count the number of Patels in the phone book.
If there are more than 10, there will surely be an Indian restaurant and all one need do is call a Patel and ask where it is.
There are 57 Patels in the Manhattan phone book, and these days I suspect they are recommending Shaan to their fellow countrymen.
In the daytime, many of the generous, curved banquettes are invariably occupied by Indian businessmen eating with what looks like serious pleasure, and every time I have been at the restaurant in the evening there has been at least one large Indian family celebrating while the children fell softly asleep at the table.
The sounds from these parties float gently across the spacious dining room, which is large enough to embrace a bit of raucousness without getting loud.
Riding on the laughter comes the aroma of ginger and mint, onions and turmeric, chilies and coriander, a savory invitation to dinner.
To those of us struggling with the seven-page menu, it can be maddening.
It is tempting to say, "Just bring me what they're eating."


Jury Awards $7.1 Million In Sex Case
A former secretary at the world's largest law firm who said she had been sexually harassed by a partner there was awarded $7.1 million in punitive damages today, a staggering judgment that is sure to send a chill through legal and business cicrles.
The judgment against the law firm of Baker &amp; McKenzie, the legal giant based in Chicago, and one of its former partners, Martin R. Greenstein, is believed to be the largest ever in a sexual harassment case.
It is also almost twice that sought by the plaintiff, Rena Weeks, 40, who worked at the firm for less than two months.


Unsure Reaction to News of Network Talks
With Time Warner Inc. and the General Electric Company still declining to comment on their discussions to sell all or part of the NBC television network to Time Warner, Wall Street was uncertain how to react yesterday.
One of the few certainties, analysts said, is that Time Warner has a strategic need for such a deal to protect the television programming revenue it receives from its Warner Brothers unit.
Network programming represented perhaps $100 million of Time Warner's $1.4 billion of operating profits last year.


State Trooper Found Guilty In Fabrication of Evidence
A New York State police investigator who once served on an elite unit investigating evidence tampering was found guilty tonight of faking a fingerprint in a 1991 Rockland County carjacking case.
The investigator, Edward Pilus, 44, of Troop F in Middletown, is the first state trooper to be convicted by a jury in the two-year-old evidence tampering scandal that has tarnished the image of the state police and led to new safeguards against evidence tampering.
Three other troopers have pleaded guilty to faking evidence in more than two dozen cases.


What Is Reality? What Does It Matter?
"Red Beads" opens in a nondescript Chinese restaurant with Formica tables and a loud lunchtime crowd, a scene that feels so familiar and ordinary it could be set on Mott Street instead of somewhere in Beijing.
But this small, arty film quickly moves from the banal to the eerie.
A young man sitting alone in the restaurant looks out a window.
The next thing we know, he is at work as an orderly in the psychiatric section of a hospital.
He sneakily reads the chart of a beautiful young woman and becomes intrigued by her.
Eventually they become lovers, or so he imagines.
Maybe she imagines it, too.
As the man moves from the bright daylight of the restaurant to the claustrophobic, hauntingly photographed hospital, this shrewd film follows a similar pattern.
Soon it becomes impossible to distinguish reality from the dreams and daydreams that seem so lifelike.


West Bank Schools Open Under Palestinian Control
After taking control of education in the West Bank this week, the Palestinian Authority opened its schools today, inaugurating the first school year under Palestinian administration.
Flags were hoisted and the Palestinian national anthem was sung in some West Bank schools, but in Ramallah, the opening today was generally businesslike.
Pupils were assigned to classrooms, textbooks were distributed, and teachers met their classes, much as in previous years.


Giants Feeling the Clamp of Salary-Cap Vise
As the salary cap takes a stranglehold on the National Football League, choking its victims one by one, Giants players have been unable to escape its crunch.
Phil Simms was the first victim and then linebacker Carlton Bailey was approached earlier this week to take a pay cut.
The next potential victim who might be asked to cut his paycheck in half is tight end Derek Brown.
Brown has struggled since coming out of Notre Dame as one of the most highly touted tight ends in years.
The Giants drafted him in the first round and he was to be their tight end of the future.
Things, however, haven't turned out that way.


Crime Bill Bans the Clip Used in Rifle
The Chinese assault rifle the police said was used in the killing of a stagehand on Wednesday can no longer be imported into the United States, and its 30-round ammunition clip, which is still sold in this country, would be banned under the crime bill passed last month.
The police identified the weapon as a Chinese version of the AK-47 semiautomatic rifle.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Weibring's 65 Sets Pace  D. A. Weibring bogeyed the first hole but shot a six-under-par 65 yesterday and held a one-stroke lead over four golfers after the first round of the Greater Milwaukee Open, being played for the first time at Brown Deer Park Golf Course.
Weibring recovered with seven birdies, one on a 20-foot putt.
David Toms, Lon Hinkle, Michael Allen and Olin Browne had 66's at the Milwaukee County course, where the tournament is making its debut after 21 years at Tuckaway Country Club in Franklin. (AP) DIVING  Chinese Dominate  China's Olympic champion, Fu Mingxia, had easily the best set of dives and two Americans, Mary Ellen Clark and Eileen Richetelli, were next best as diving preliminaries started the world swimming championships yesterday in Rome.
Clark woke from a sluggish start to take second place in the highboard preliminaries and Richetelli took third among the 12 qualifiers.
Fu totaled 339.12 points from her six dives.
China was also first in the men's 1-meter springboard preliminary round. (AP)


Youth Programs Fight Crime and Save Lives; Not Scatological
To the Editor:
"A Punishing Passage" (editorial, Aug. 27) is right on the mark in reprimanding "the porcine buffoonery" of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and the National Rifle Association-financed "obstructionism" of the huckster Charlton Heston, for their opposition to the crime bill.
But it was inaccurate to label Senator Frank Lautenberg's response to the New York Senator as "scatological."


North Korea Invites Carter To Mediate
Kim Jong Il, the reclusive Communist leader who is expected to succeed his father as absolute ruler of North Korea, has sent a letter to former President Jimmy Carter inviting him to Pyongyang to mediate the dispute with the United States over the North's nuclear ambitions, American officials said today.
The reports on the invitation are part of a slow broadening of contacts with North Korea, as the United States leads efforts to halt Pyongyang's suspected nuclear weapons program and North Korea seeks to end its isolation with economic assistance and broader diplomatic recognition.
As part of that process, the Clinton Administration announced today that, as expected, it would begin technical discussions with North Korea on Sept. 10 to fill out some of the details of an agreement reached between the two countries last month in Geneva.


PC Outlook Hurts Technology Issues
Technology stocks, which had rallied in recent weeks, dropped today amid fears of a slowdown in personal computer sales.
The selloff began Wednesday after Bruce Lupatkin, an analyst with Hambrecht &amp; Quist, lowered his earnings estimates for the Compaq Computer Corporation.


Show Time for Rupert and the Boys
T.J.I.F.
Thank Jerry it's Friday.
After a grinding year of assault, ambiguity, murder, games with subtitles and Loss of Innocence, Part IV, it is finally crunch time.
In two days, the boys will be back.
The big boys, the real men, will be smacking the salary caps off each other for love, money and Rupert Murdoch.
Be glad the National Football League regular season begins on Sunday; how would you feel if those guys were unemployed, bored, roaming your mall?
Why are we thanking Jerry for this?
Why not one of the more traditional deities, Vince Lombardi, Joe Namath, Roone Arledge?
They're strictly pantheon now.
Jerry Jones became head god (nose god?) when he booted Coach Jimmy Johnson off the Dallas Cowboys and bought himself the bootlegger's boy, Barry Switzer.


Youth Programs Fight Crime and Save Lives
To the Editor:
It is discouraging that the argument preceding the passage of the crime bill focused so much on calling preventive educational and recreational programs "pork." This argument shifts the focus to whether these programs act as political paybacks for some local districts, rather than whether they work to prevent crime, as well as teach beneficial behaviors and activities.


Woman and 3 Children Found Killed in Harlem
The bodies of a woman and three children were found yesterday afternoon in a West Harlem apartment where they were apparently killed last week, the police said.
The bodies, found stacked in a bathtub, were so badly decomposed that the police could not immediately determine how they had died, said Chief Joseph Leake of the New York City housing police.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE TWO GENTLEMAN OF VERONA," Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrance at 81st Street and Central Park West.
Shakespeare's comedy, directed by Adrian Hall; with Joel del la Fuente and Malcolm Gets.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today through Sunday at 8 P.M.
Free; tickets available beginning at 1 P.M. on the day of the performance.
Information: (212) 861-7277.
"HENRI CARTIER-BRESSON: HOMAGE," International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street.
A three-part exhibition featuring a film about the photographer, a collection of new lithographs and 40 of his most famous images.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for students and the elderly; $1 for children.
Information: (212) 860-1777.
"MUKY'S NEW YORK: PHOTOGRAPHER TO THE POSTWAR RENAISSANCE," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
A retrospective of film production and publicity shots by the noted photographer Menyhert Munkacsi (known professionally as Muky).
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today, noon to 4 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students and children.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
Closing Next Weekend
"STEVE ALLEN: A RETROSPECTIVE," Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
Screenings of Steve Allen's television work.
Call for complete schedule.
Through Sept. 11.
Museum hours: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.; Thursdays, noon to 8 P.M.; Fridays, noon to 9 P.M.
Closed Mondays.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly; $3 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 621-6800.
"THE TRADITION OF THE NEW: POSTWAR MASTERPIECES FROM THE GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM," Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Fifth Avenue at 88th Street.
Through Sept. 11.
Hours: Sundays through Wednesdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Closed Thursdays.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
"EDWARD HOPPER AND JACK PIERSON: AMERICAN DREAMING," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Through Sept. 11.
Hours: Wednesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursdays, 1 to 8 P.M.; Fridays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $7; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


2 Connecticut Inns: The Guests Pipe Up
THE journal lay on the night stand beside the canopied, four-poster bed in a room my wife and I stayed in recently.
The journal was opened about midway to a half-written page.
This was in the Old Lyme Inn, a white, blue-shuttered, renovated 19th-century home near the seductive shoreline of the Connecticut River, which empties into the nearby Long Island Sound.
The journal looked like someone's diary left over from the previous stay.
A pen lay beside it.
I wondered if I should just close the book discreetly and give it to the proprietor.
But curiosity, naturally, got the better of me.
I always start with honorable intentions, but. . . .


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; Down the Shore
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
If New Year's Eve is amateur night, Labor Day weekend is for the pros.
And where do the pros around here go to celebrate?
New Jersey.


On Stage, and Off
Mega-Prices and Sunday Shows
Anyone who left town for the summer is probably still under the impression that the top ticket price for Broadway musicals is $65.
It was announced long ago, of course, that the two mega-musicals due this fall, "Sunset Boulevard" and "Show Boat," would raise the top Broadway fare to $70 and $75, respectively.
But shortly after the Tony Awards in June, the producers of "Grease!," Fran and Barry Weissler, raised the top weekend price to $67.50.
Then "Kiss of the Spider Woman" raised its top weekend price to $70, and to $67.50 during the week.
Ten days ago, the top price of "Crazy for You" went up to $67.50 for all performances, except Wednesday matinees.


Market Place; Body Shop's Green Image Is Attacked
The Body Shop International P.L.C., the retail cosmetics chain that has expanded rapidly from Britain into American malls, has carefully crafted its image by pledging sensitivity to the environment, promising not to test its products on animals and seeking to be a progressive force in the communities where it operates.
The success of the Body Shop, its 1993 annual report intoned, "proves that profits and principles can go hand in hand and that business can be a force for social change."


Detailing an Obsession


Ground Broken for Huge Queens Development


Confession Admissible in Carjacking Trial
The confession of a Bronx man accused of killing one teen-ager and wounding another during a carjacking can be used at his trial, a Rockland County judge ruled today.
The judge, William K. Nelson, found that the statements by the suspect, Edward L. Summers, 23, after his arrest on Jan. 3 were spontaneous and voluntary.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Why is NBC -- and possibly CBS -- close to being sold to a Hollywood studio?
There is one basic answer: for both buyers and sellers, the time is right, and may never be more so.
The broadcast business has made a strong financial comeback, and the two studios have powerful incentives to protect their lucrative positions as suppliers of network programming.
News Analysis.  [ Page A1. ]  Wall Street was uncertain how to react to talk of network deals after NBC's parent and Time Warner declined to comment.  [ D16. ]


Yes, They're Still Eating Dogs in China; Market in Guangzhou
To the Editor:
May-lee Chai says in her Aug. 26 letter that during her two-year stay in China she never saw anybody eat dog except a group of tacky Americans.
Obviously she has never visited the main market of Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong Province.


Boy, 13, Is Charged With Murder in Bronx Firebombing
A 13-year-old boy has been charged with murder in the firebombing of a Bronx grocery store last week that killed four people, the police said yesterday.
The police said they were searching for three other people in connection with the firebombing and that they have not determined a motive in the Aug. 22 incident at the store on Boston Road in Morrisania.


Confession Ruled Admissible In Rifkin's 2d Murder Trial
Joel Rifkin's hand-written confession to killing 17 women is admissible as evidence in his second murder trial, in Suffolk County, a judge ruled today.
The judge, John J.J.
Jones Jr. of Suffolk County Court, found that Mr.
Rifkin's constitutional right to be represented by a lawyer after his arrest more than a year ago had "not been violated in any way."


Israel and Morocco Take Fledgling Step Toward Diplomatic Relations
Israel and Morocco took the first formal step toward diplomatic relations today, making the kingdom in northern Africa the only Arab country other than Egypt to establish official ties with the Jewish state.
Although Israel and neighboring Jordan agreed with fanfare in late July to end their technical state of war, and have since behaved in public like old and dear friends, they have yet to sign a peace treaty and have no official links.


'Shana Tova' From Arafat
Israelis received greetings today for the approaching Jewish New Year from a most unlikely source: Yasir Arafat.
The leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, meeting in Gaza with Israel's Housing Minister, sent his best to all Israelis, starting with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres.


Tourism Enriches an Island Resort, But Hilton Head Blacks Feel Left Out
One day when he was a small boy and this was an undeveloped dream world of salt marsh, beach front and pine forest where all the inhabitants were black, Gene Wiley saw something he had never seen before -- a white man.
"I mean no disrespect, but I couldn't figure it out -- a nose like Bob Hope, hair that the wind blew all over his face like it didn't have no strength in it," recalls Mr.
Wiley, who is 68.
"We felt sorry for the guy; we felt like he was the victim of a plague or something. Then one day my father took me to Savannah and the whole damn town was white, and I knew this plague had taken the whole town and pretty soon it would be on Hilton Head Island, too."


Jets Make Pitch for Sanders But It Doesn't Look Good
The Jets have had preliminary talks with the free agent Deion Sanders about coming to New York, but it looks as if the cornerback might be out of the team's price range.
General Manager Dick Steinberg said he had what he termed exploratory talks with Sanders's agent, Eugene Parker, this week, but Steinberg would have to waive a substantial number of players to make room for Sanders under the salary cap to satisfy the cornerback's salary demands.


Cuba Denies It Released Convicts as Refugees
The Cuban Government today denied American accusations that it had deliberately released criminals from prison so they might join the thousands of Cubans who have fled the island for the United States since last month.
Cuban officials did not question that furloughed prisoners might have joined the refugees who have seized on a new permissiveness by the Cuban Government.


Old Miser Bringing Up the Cute Girl Is (a) Marner (b) Martin?
It's safe to surmise that nobody but Steve Martin thinks Mr.
Martin needed to appear in a lighthearted, contemporary screen version of "Silas Marner," casting himself in the role of George Eliot's lonely miser.
But Mr.
Martin was doubtless searching for another "Roxanne" and a role with a poignancy to match Cyrano's.
So he has adapted this tale in contemporary terms, to the point where a horse in the 1861 version is now a Mercedes-Benz.
"A Simple Twist of Fate" borrows the not-so-simple twists of a novel that has been the bane of many a high school English class, and that even its author was known to denigrate.
"Indeed, I should not have believed that anyone would have been interested in it but myself (since Wordsworth is dead)," she once wrote to her publisher.
But what interests Mr.
Martin is the redemptive love experienced by Silas Marner, a k a Michael McCann, once he stops caring about money and lets an orphaned little girl into his life.


Long Baseball Timeout Gives Edge to Players
To the Editor:
When employers such as baseball owners are confronted by a union such as the players' union, resolution of their disputes is not subject to the market forces of supply and demand, but to their ability to tolerate a long shutdown.
Here the players have an overwhelming advantage because the cost to them is the loss of after-tax income, subject anyway to the highest tax rates.


At the Bar; Nevada limits the right of inmates to sue their attorneys, a decision that troubles even lawyers.
The malpractice case against him was a mere buzzing fly, said James E. Smith, a criminal defense lawyer in Las Vegas, Nev.
So rather than contact his insurance company and watch his rates rise, he asked a friend to handle it.
His instincts were correct: the local district judge swatted away the suit.
It had been filed by a prisoner for whom Mr.
Smith had brokered a plea of one drug count, down from four, but who blamed the lawyer when he got a stiff sentence anyway.


Home Video
Director From Outer Space
On Wednesday, Rhino Home Video, a division of Rhino Records and a distributor known for its catchy releases, issued another title that doesn't exactly float down the mainstream.
"Ed Wood: Look Back in Angora" is a salute to the director and cross-dresser whose famous and supremely awful "Plan 9 From Outer Space" is judged by some critics to be the worst movie ever made (Wood probably wouldn't have argued).


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Extended working agreements with Nashville of the American Association; Birmingham of the Southern League; Prince William of the Carolina League; and South Bend of the Midwest League through 1996.
Agreed to a working agreement with Bristol, Va., of the Appalachian League on a two-year contract to compete in the three-month Advanced Rookie League, beginning in June 1995.


No Headline
"For the first time in years I feel like I can walk on the streets without worrying about getting shot. I'm just glad I lived long enough to see this day." RITA DOHERTY, a 71-year-old resident of Northern Ireland.  [ A1:5. ]


Corrections
An item in SportsPeople yesterday about the dismissal of assault charges against Derrick Coleman of the New Jersey Nets referred incorrectly to the ownership of Rebar, the Manhattan bar outside which the incident occurred.
Coleman's teammate, Jayson Williams, is not a co-owner.


Moore's Hand Is Tied In Jets' Season Opener
With his left hand wrapped in a cast that goes halfway up his elbow, with fingers protruding but thumb locked in place, what good is Rob Moore on the football field?
For Moore, the question is even more of a burden knowing that he is the key receiver on the Jets, who open the season Sunday in Buffalo against the Bills, the perennial American Football Conference champions.


Thomas Chastain, 73, Author Of Best-Selling Mystery Novels
Thomas Chastain, a best-selling mystery writer and a former head of the Mystery Writers of America, died yesterday in Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 73 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said Priscilla Ridgway, the executive director of the Mystery Writers of America.
Mr.
Chastain was the organization's president in 1989 and on its board for more than a decade.


Harry Rosenblatt, 101, Survivor Of World War I Jewish Legion
Harry Rosenblatt, one of the last survivors of the Jewish Legion of World War I, which fought with the British against the Turks in Palestine, died Wednesday at Victory Memorial Hospital in Brooklyn.
A Brooklyn resident, he was 101 years old.
The cause was heart and kidney failure, his family said.
Other veterans of the expeditionary force survive in Israel, but, according to the family, Mr.
Rosenblatt was believed to be the only survivor in the United States.


Sports of The Times; Pam Shriver Takes Last Look Around
SHE was wearing a Baltimore Orioles shirt, the home whites, no name or number on it.
When somebody asked the symbolism in her choice of wardrobe following probably her last singles appearance in the Stadium, Pam Shriver said, "It was the only shirt I had in my locker." Then she laughed.
It's a good way to mask the feelings.
She's having a bad week.
She owns a tiny piece of the Orioles, and she's protesting the baseball strike -- "the whole scene, I won't pick sides." In a quiet conversation, she brought up the frozen faces of Richard Ravitch and Donald Fehr, the two negotiators, and she gave a dainty shudder.
"Not an ounce of personality in either of them," she said.


Holiday Weekend Events
Here is a sampling of activities planned in the New York metropolitan region for the Labor Day weekend: NEW YORK CITY
Tomorrow
WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBIT, sidewalks in the vicinity of Washington Square Park, Greenwich Village.
More than 300 artists and artisans are to exhibit their work.
Tomorrow through Sunday and Sept. 10 and 11, noon to sundown.
HISTORIC GREENWICH VILLAGE, Big Onion Walking Tours.
A walking tour through the area with an emphasis on its history as a home to writers, artists and radicals; stops include Washington Square Park, the Stonewall Inn, and places associated with Henry James, Edith Wharton, Edgar Allan Poe and other writers. 1 P.M.
Fee: $9; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
NORTHERN CENTRAL PARK TOUR, Urban Explorations.
A walk through the northern section of the park. 2 P.M.
Fee: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (718) 721-5254.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND WALKING TOUR, Adventure on a Shoestring.
A tour past such sites as Blackwell House, the Octagon Building and the Chapel of the Good Shepherd. 3:30 P.M.
Fee: $5, plus $2.80 round-trip tramway fare.
Meeting place and reservations: (212) 265-2663.
CHILDREN'S CARNIVAL, part of the West Indian Carnival Parade, behind Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Children ages 1 to 16 are to appear in costumes, many of which they have helped to make. 1 to 4 P.M.
A procession to the museum on nearby streets begins at 10 A.M. at St.
John's Place and Kingston Avenue.
On Sunday, also from 1 to 4 P.M., children take part in a dance competition; prizes include cash and trophies.
Free admission, both days.
Information: (718) 773-4052 or (718) 774-8807.
ROAM AROUND RIDDLE , Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
The answer to a riddle is found on a self-guided tour of the grounds; maps and clues are available at the reception desk from 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M.
Grounds are open 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students and the elderly and children 6 and older; under 6, free.
Information: (718) 549-3200.
Sunday
RADICAL GREENWICH VILLAGE, Radical Walking Tours.
A three-hour walking tour exploring the leftist political history of the West Village, with stops at the Morton Street apartment of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and a Grove Street site of the Draft Riots of 1863.
Meets at 1 P.M. in Sheridan Square, at Seventh Avenue and Christopher Street.
Fee: $6.
Information: (718) 492-0069.
WALKING TOUR AND JAZZ CONCERT, Upper East Side.
A free walking tour past some little-known historic sites, including the Grolier Club, the Doll Hospital and the Society of Illustrators.
The tour begins at 1:45 P.M. at the Abigail Adams Museum, 421 East 61st Street; a jazz concert is to follow at 4:30 P.M. at the Pavilion, 60th Street and the waterfront, reachable from the East River Esplanade and the ramp at 60th Street and York Avenue.
Information: (212) 517-0564.
STREET FAIR, Broadway, from 66th to 72d Street. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Broadway Mall Association.
LABOR DAY WEEKEND FESTIVAL, 30th Avenue, between 29th and 41st Streets, Astoria, Queens.
Crafts, food, rides and entertainment. 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Rain date: Sept. 11.
Free admission.
Information: (212) 995-9412.
Monday
IMMIGRANT LABORS, IMMIGRANT TRIUMPHS, Big Onion Walking Tours.
A walking tour of the Lower East Side with an emphasis on the contributions of immigrants to the labor movement. 1 P.M.
Fee: $9; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
GREAT CHELSEA LABOR DAY FEST, Eighth Avenue, from 14th to 23d Street.
Crafts, food and entertainment from more than 300 vendors. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., rain or shine.
Sponsored by the Chelsea Reform Democratic Club.
Information: (212) 995-9412.
"WEST SIDE STORY," Bryant Park, Avenue of the Americas and 40th Street.
A free screening of the 1961 film with Richard Beymer and Natalie Wood. 8:45 P.M.
Last film in the Second Bryant Park Summer Film Festival.
Spectators should take seating.
Rain date and other information: (212) 512-5700.
ACCORDION CONCERT, Snug Harbor Cultural Center, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, S.I.
A free outdoor performance by the 23-member New Zealand Accordion Orchestra. 3 P.M.
Information: (718) 448-2500.
HUDSON VALLEY
Today
SLEEPY HOLLOW CRUISE, Tarrytown, N.Y.
A daylong event combining a cruise up the Hudson River from Manhattan or New Jersey with visits to the Historic Hudson Valley sites of Sunnyside, the Washington Irving estate, and Philipsburg Manor, an 18th-century Dutch Colonial working farm.
Departures from Port Imperial, Weehawken, N.J.: 9:30 and 11 A.M. today; tomorrow through Monday at 9:30 A.M. and 1 P.M.
The boat is to stop 15 minutes later at the New York Waterway Midtown Terminal, 38th Street and 12th Avenue.
Buses are to meet the boats for the ride to Philipsburg Manor and Sunnyside.
Tickets: $35; $17.50 for children 6 to 12; free for children under 6.
Information: (800) 533-3779.
Tomorrow
WOODSTOCK-NEW PALTZ ARTS AND CRAFTS FAIR, Ulster County Fairgrounds, Libertyville Road, New Paltz, N.Y.
Crafts by more than 300 artists from around the country, as well as crafts demonstrations and entertainment; also arts workshops for children.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Monday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5.50; $4.50 for the elderly; $3.50 for children 4 to 12.
Information: (914) 679-8087 or (914) 246-3414.
19th-CIVIL WAR WEEKEND, Museum Village, Museum Village Road, Route 17, Monroe, N.Y.
Civil War re-enactments, with more than 700 actors; also lectures and other events illustrating life in the mid-19th century.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., tomorrow and Sunday.
Admission: $8; $6 for the elderly; $5 for ages 6 to 15; free for children under 6.
Information: (914) 782-8247.
MOUNTAIN EAGLE INDIAN FESTIVAL, Hunter Mountain, Hunter, N.Y.
Members of more than 35 North American tribes are to give dance and crafts demonstrations.
Hours: 9 A.M. to 9 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday; 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday.
Tickets: $9; $3 for ages 5 to 12 years; free for those 5 and under.
Information: (518) 263-3800.
Sunday
"WESTCHESTER BLUEGRASS MINIFEST," Muscoot Farm, Route 100, Somers, N.Y.
A free, four-hour outdoor festival with performances by Tony Trischka and Skyline, the New York Bluegrass Authority, the Tri-County Ramblers and Ninety-Nine Years.
Take seating and a picnic lunch.
Begins at noon.
Information: (914) 232-7118.
BRAZILIAN MUSIC AND DANCE, Yonkers Recreational Pier, Main Street at the Hudson River.
A performance by the Silvana Madga Viva Brazil Dance Company. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 377-6441.
HUDSON VALLEY SALSA FESTIVAL, Breezy Hill Orchard and Cider Mill, 200 Center Road, Staatsburg, N.Y., off Exit 19 of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway.
A homemade salsa contest, cooking demonstrations and an art exhibition. 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; free for children under 12.
Information and directions: (914) 266-5967.
NEW JERSEY
Tomorrow
"GRAND ENCAMPMENT," Waterloo Village, Stanhope, N.J.
Demonstrations of a Civil War encampment with military drills and period cooking, and exhibitions of civilian life during the period.
The village is to feature demonstrations of 18th- and 19th-century crafts and house tours. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Admission: $8; $7 for the elderly; $6 for ages 6 to 15; free for those under 6.
Information: (201) 347-0900.
Sunday
LABOR DAY PARADE, beginning at the American Labor Museum, Haledon, N.J.
A two-mile parade with bands, floats and antique cars, ending at the Great Falls in Paterson. 1:30 P.M.
Information: (201) 595-7953.
OLD-FASHIONED LABOR DAY PICNIC, Museum of Early Trades and Crafts, Main Street and Green Village Road, Madison, N.J.
A 19th-century picnic, with games, music and contests. 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Donations accepted.
Information: (201) 377-2982.
LAUNDRY DAY, Allaire Village, Route 524, Allaire State Park, Allaire, N.J.
Free demonstrations of 19th-century laundry and housecleaning techniques.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Parking fee, $3.
Information: (908) 938-2253.
Monday
PARLOR GAMES AND OUTDOOR AMUSEMENTS, Allaire Village, Route 524, Allaire State Park, Allaire, N.J.
Free 19th-century sports and games that visitors can take part in, including town ball, an early form of baseball.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Parking fee, $3.
Information: (908) 938-2253.
MUSIC AND FIREWORKS AT POINT PLEASANT BEACH, Jenkinson's North at the Inlet, Ocean Avenue and Broadway, Point Pleasant Beach, N.J.
A performance by the Orchestra of St.
Peter by the Sea and soloists, with a fireworks display. 7:30 P.M.
Donations accepted.
Information: (908) 899-4541.
LONG ISLAND
Today
HAMPTON CLASSIC HORSE SHOW, Show Grounds, Snake Hollow Road, Bridgehampton, L.I.
Today through Sunday, 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; free for those under 6.
Tomorrow is Kid's Day, with free admission for children under 13.
Information: (516) 537-3177.
REGGAE SUMMERFEST AT WESTBURY MUSIC FAIR, 960 Brush Hollow Road, Westbury, L.I.
A show to feature Freddie McGregor, Judy Mowatt, Tony Rebel, Michael Rose and the Sane Band. 9 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (516) 334-0800.
Tomorrow
ARTS AND CRAFTS FAIR, Boardwalk at Riverside Boulevard, Long Beach, L.I.
Sponsored by the Historical and Preservation Society. 9 A.M to 7 P.M.
Also Sunday.
Information: (516) 432-8628.
JOHNNY CASH, Planting Fields Arboretum State Historic Park, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
A performance by the country singer. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $35.
Information: (516) 922-0061.
WHALE WATCH, Okeanos Ocean Research Foundation, Viking Dock, Montauk Harbor, Edgemere Avenue, off Route 27, L.I.
Daily at 10:30 A.M. through Labor Day; Tuesday through Sept. 9, at 10 A.M.
Tickets: $30; $15 for those 12 and under.
Reservations: (516) 728-4522.
LABOR DAY CRAFTS FAIR, St.
James General Store, Moriches Road, St.
James, L.I.
Tomorrow through Monday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Crafts, demonstrations and entertainment at a historic store, built in 1857.
Information: (516) 862-8333.
Sunday
FRANKIE VALLI AND THE FOUR SEASONS AND THE FOUR TOPS, Westbury Music Fair, 960 Brush Hollow Road, Westbury, L.I.
An oldies rock-and-roll show, 7 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $27.50.
Information: (516) 334-0800.
SHINNECOCK POWWOW, Shinnecock Reservation, Old Montauk Highway, Southampton, L.I. 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Also Monday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.
American Indian dance and music, crafts and food.
Admission: $6; $4 for the elderly and ages 5 to 12.
Rain or shine.
Information: (516) 287-2460.
Monday
17th GREAT BONAC FOOT RACE, a 10-kilometer run for adults and children through East Hampton.
Begins at 9 A.M. at Ashawagh Hall, Springs Fireplace Road.
Fee: $15; $10 for children and the elderly.
Proceeds are to benefit a scholarship fund.
Information: (516) 324-4572.
CONNECTICUT
Today
AUTOMOBILE RACING, Lime Rock Park, Route 112, Lakeville, Conn.
Practice session, today from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; art exhibition and "swap meet," with vendors who specialize in automobile memorabilia, from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Tomorrow: qualifying races from 2 to 5:30 P.M.; Sunday: automobile shows; Monday: racing from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: Today, $5; tomorrow, $15; Sunday, $10; Monday, $25; free for children under 12 at all times.
Information: (203) 435-0896.
Tomorrow
ANNUAL PRUDENCE CRANDALL DAY, Prudence Crandall Museum, junction of Routes 14 and 169, Canterbury, Conn.
A daylong celebration in honor of a 19th-century educator, with games for adults and children, entertainment, colonial craft demonstrations and food.
Admission: $2; $1 for the elderly and ages 5 and under.
Information: (203) 546-9916.
Monday
LABOR DAY PARADE AND BOOK SALE, Newton, Conn.
The parade is to march down Main Street, beginning at 10 A.M.
Thousands of books are to be on sale on the lawn of the Cyrenius H. Booth Library, 25 Main Street, from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Information: (203) 426-4533.


MCI Severs Negotiations With Nextel
The MCI Communications Corporation formally ended a proposed $1.3 billion deal with Nextel Communications Inc., the company on which it had based its plans for building a nationwide wireless telephone network.
Citing intractable disagreements with Motorola Inc., a major shareholder in Nextel that had veto power over a deal, MCI said today that it had definitively broken off all talks.


A Forum For 60's-Style Jamming
When the Lollapalooza Festival was here at Jones Beach last month, seven bands played on the festival's main stage during an afternoon and evening of alternative rock.
But the seven bands that performed with the third annual Horde tour this afternoon and evening needed two stages to fit all their music into a day.
Whereas the bulk of Lollapalooza's bands were weaned on the fast, tight punk rock of the 1970's, most of the groups playing today were schooled in the classic rock of the 1960's, where stretching songs into long, psychedelic jams was encouraged.
Consequently, only four groups were able to play on the main stage during the eight-hour Horde festivities.
The other three played on a small second stage outside the amphitheater.


CHRONICLE
Hanging in the Blue Room of the White House is a portrait of President John Tyler that speaks to two current occupants.
"I like it because of the composition and the emotion," HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON said of the 1859 painting by George P. A. Healy.
"And, of course, my husband likes it because Tyler is crumpling the newspapers."
PRESIDENT CLINTON'S favorite White House painting, which hangs in the Oval Office, is Childe Hassam's "The Avenue in the Rain," the First Lady said in an interview in the September issue of Artnews magazine.
He is also fond of Claude Monet's "Morning on the Seine."


Rebuilding Nature in New Jersey


Agreement To Cut Costs At T.W.A.
Trans World Airlines said yesterday that it had agreed with two of its big unions, the pilots and machinists, on changes in work rules that would enable the carrier to cut costs and help it save money for the lean winter months.
T.W.A. said a tentative agreement with the Master Executive Council of the Air Line Pilots Association reached yesterday would save the airline about $30 million a year.


Fujitsu Challenges Patent
Fujitsu Ltd. has asked the Japanese Patent Office to declare invalid the patent that Texas Instruments holds in Japan for the invention of the integrated circuit, a Fujitsu spokeswoman said today.
Fujitsu's request was filed late in June but came to light today in the aftermath of a ruling by the Tokyo District Court that the Japanese electronics company had not infringed the Texas Instruments patent.


Cardiovascular Imaging Systems
Shares of Cardiovascular Imaging Systems, which develops medical technology for the diagnosis of heart disease, jumped yesterday after the announcement of a bid by the Boston Scientific Corporation to buy the company for $100 million, or $10.50 a share.
The bid was disclosed after the market closed on Wednesday.


Holtz Chooses Powlus
Notre Dame Coach LOU HOLTZ ended a weeklong waiting game, and perhaps a calculated diversion last night, when he said that sophomore RON POWLUS would start at quarterback in the season opener against Northwestern at Soldier Field in Chicago tomorrow night.
"Powlus will start," Holtz said after the team's last practice session.
"I also want him to finish."


Horses Back at Belmont With Breeders' in Mind
After 40 days of rainy weather, short fields and turmoil in the executive suite at Saratoga, the thoroughbreds return to Long Island today for 40 days of racing that will turn Belmont Park into the superhighway leading to the Breeders' Cup.
The season opens at 1 o'clock this afternoon, with nine live races every day except on Mondays, the weekly dark day.
However, there will be racing this Monday because of the Labor Day holiday program, and the track will be closed instead on Tuesday.
The season will run through Sunday, Oct. 16, and then will switch to Aqueduct two days later for the winter.


Something Is Attacking Male Fetus Sex Organs
No, "Assault on the Male" has nothing to do with the Bobbitt family.
The culprit in this BBC documentary is a man-made cause of such manly concerns as declining sperm counts, undescended testicles and signs of feminization that bode ill for human reproduction.
It's a tale of scientific detection as researchers in the United States, Britain and Denmark track down chemicals spewed forth over the years that have found their way into fetuses, where they mimic the female sex hormone estrogen. (You can tell the Americans from the Britons on the program by their pronunciations: they say EES-tro-gen; we say ESS-tro-gen. But fortunately no one calls the whole thing off.)


Kariya Ends Holdout
PAUL KARIYA, the fourth pick in the 1993 entry draft, ended a 14-month holdout yesterday by signing with the Anaheim Mighty Ducks.
Terms were not disclosed. (AP)


On My Mind; Pudgy On Crime
Everybody in America is tough on crime.
Parents, teachers, cops, judges, rich people, poor people, ditch diggers, brain surgeons -- just ask them.
So, listen: How come there is so much crime in America?
How is it that we no longer possess our basic civil liberty from which all others flow -- freedom to walk our streets without fear?


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; World on the Windows
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
When I was a little boy growing up in the orange twilights of the Golden Gate, my mother told me the story of the little boy who wanted to know why everybody across the bay had gold windows.
Their own, he said, crying, were just glass.
One sunset, when they were across the bay, his mother showed him that the windows over there were plain old glass.
"Now look at our house," she said.
He turned and, lo and behold, his bedroom window was made of gold.





Backed by Panama Leader, U.S. Readies Camps
As American troops based here prepared for an influx of Cuban refugees, a former supporter of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega who now says he wants friendly relations with Washington was sworn in today as President.
President Ernesto Perez Balladares, a 48-year-old economist and businessman, took office this afternoon vowing that his foreign policy would be one of tolerance and healing.
"We are friends of everyone and enemies of no one," he said during a 75-minute inaugural speech.


An Old, Dull Photo, a Mystery of History
If one photograph is worth 10,000 words, this article is about 9,550 words short.
But not even a million well-chosens could solve the mystery behind the fuzzy-around-the-edges image that some historians maintain is the oldest photograph of a New York City street scene.
It is a 4 1/2-by-5 1/2-inch daguerreotype showing what is now Park Row, probably between Pearl and Worth Streets near City Hall.
Taken from an upper-story window in the days when lower Manhattan was more sky than scraper, it has that 19th-century look, with dusty streets and horse-drawn carriages plodding along.
But is it the oldest photograph, or isn't it?


With Church Preaching in Vain, Brazilians Embrace Birth Control
At a health clinic for working-class women here, the gynecologist initially thought the question was a joke.
How often do women make religious objections when birth control techniques are discussed?
"Well, I do remember a case last year," finally answered Jose Antonio Aviles, a gynecologist who treats about 80 women a week.
"I think she was a Jehovah's Witness."


Suspension for a Remark Is Excessive
To the Editor:
The suspension by New York State's Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, of Thomas Neidl, chief of his office's criminal prosecutions bureau, for having made disparaging remarks about homosexuals and lesbians (news article, Aug. 26) inappropriately infringes upon Mr.
Neidl's First Amendment rights.


A Shouter Of the Blues From Chicago
Clubs don't usually get a second chance in New York, but Chicago Blues reopened on Wednesday night at 73 Eighth Avenue, at 14th Street, the same location it occupied from October 1991 through the spring of 1992, before the club Zanzibar moved in.
As before, it aims to be a transplanted Chicago club, with three sets a night by the same performers who regularly perform on the Midwest's blues circuit.
Where New York clubs often hook up a headliner with a house band, Chicago Blues imports entire working groups.
The difference should please purists and anyone else who appreciates the relaxed precision of a seasoned band.
Big Time Sara, who is to appear through tomorrow night, benefited from the booking policy.
She is a blues shouter who plays a tough, lusty woman, in the mold of Koko Taylor and Etta James.
Like Ms.
Taylor, she uses a raspy tone for emphasis, and often sings material originally written for men; like Ms.
James, she delights in shaking a rump of considerable girth.
When she invited a man from the audience on stage to sing along, she vowed, "I'm going to harass you."


White House Health Planner Blames 'Fear Mongers' in Loss
Ira C. Magaziner, the Administration's chief health care planner, yesterday blamed "fear-mongering" and dishonest advertisements by special interest groups for the difficulties encountered by national health insurance legislation on Capitol Hill.
But he said the battle was not over yet, for health care legislation would be first on the agenda when Congress returned in September.
"As was proven with passage of the Crime bill," he said, "special interests do not always succeed in undermining the interest of the American people."


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; The Unvexed Beach
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
End the summer by going to the beach -- not an original idea, I know, but make it so by going not when everyone else does it, at high noon, but at the magical moment of dawn, when the gray, hazy light suffuses the sand with a hesitant glow, and the slip of the sun emerging over the horizon becomes a sight of pure magic.
Just to stand there and stare is enough, though few times are better for walking or running or just sitting, looking toward Portugal.
To me there is always a bit of a surprise when I arrive to discover that the surf has been pounding away, oblivious to the hour; part of me must think that it ought to have closed down with the night and should be starting up again now along with the sun.


Ship Aborts Cruise After 400 Contract an Intestinal Illness
A Royal Caribbean ship cut its four-day cruise a day short and returned to port here this morning after more than 400 of the nearly 2,350 people aboard became ill with an unidentified intestinal ailment that caused vomiting, headaches and diarrhea.
One elderly passenger died, but Federal health officials who boarded the ship, called the Viking Serenade, today said they did not know whether the illness was related to the death.


11 Stowaways Found on Ship In Container
Eleven stowaways endured four days locked in an oven-hot shipping container with little food or water and no bedding, apparently dreaming that their voyage from the Caribbean to the United States would bring good jobs.
But it appears that all they will get for their agony is a quick trip home to the Dominican Republic.
The 11 were discovered this morning when a deckhand aboard the Carolina at the Elizabeth Marine Terminal heard them yelling and pounding on the sides of the container, which was stacked about 40 feet above the deck.
Firefighters, ambulance technicians and seamen let the stowaways -- 10 men and a woman -- out of the container before dawn today.


Howard Gets Ready To Do a Turnaround
One of the first things Terry Robiskie did when he was hired as Redskins receivers coach was to dig up tape of wideout Desmond Howard.
Robiskie put together a highlight reel of Howard's last two seasons at Michigan.
It showed Howard, the Heisman Trophy winner, making diving touchdown receptions, leaping over defenders, stretching flat out over the middle for balls and plenty of end zone celebrations.
Robiskie also put together another highlight film -- much shorter --of Howard's pro career.
No diving, no stretching, no embarrassing of defenders and no celebrations.
Then, Robiskie invited Howard to take a seat inside the room.
As the film flickered in the dark, Robiskie asked Howard where he thought that Michigan Heisman Trophy winner had gone.


Selig May Take a Part In Strike Talks
Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner, hinted yesterday that he may soon directly enter the negotiations with the players in an effort to end the three-week-old strike.
As he lamented the stalled state of the talks in a telephone interview, Selig was asked if he thought it was time for him to meet with Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader.


Victim's Readiness to Help May Have Cost His Life
Theron Montgomery was a big man.
He stood at least 6 feet 3 inches and weighed more than 200 pounds.
And yesterday people said he was as good as he was big.
"A teddy bear," his mother said.


Times Raising Weekday Price
The newsstand price of The New York Times on weekdays will be raised to 60 cents from 50 cents within the New York metropolitan area, the newspaper announced yesterday.
The change in price, which will not affect the price of home delivery or of the Sunday newspaper, takes effect Sept. 12, said Nancy Nielsen, a spokeswoman for The Times.


Seagram, Ameritech and Countrywide all end reviews, choosing new agencies.
THREE reviews on accounts with combined billings of more than $70 million all ended yesterday, perhaps reflecting mutually shared desires to clear off desks before the long Labor Day weekend.
Coincidentally, all three -- for Seagram, Ameritech and Countrywide Funding, the nation's largest mortgage lender -- ended with agency changes.


The Spoken Word
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.
Today: "From Pottery to Porcelain: Chinese Ceramics Through the Ages," by Linda Rosenfeld Shulsky, 11 A.M.; "A Closer Look: 'Portrait of a Cardinal, probably Don Fernando Nino de Guevara,' by El Greco," by Ines Powell, 12:30 P.M.; "America, the Promised Land: 19th Century," by Marvin Schwartz, 3 P.M; "Divine Heroes: Vishnu and His Avatars," by Rochelle Kessler, 6 P.M.; "Baroque Painting in Naples," by Frederick Ilchman, 7 P.M.
Tomorrow: "Spatial Dynamics in Painting: Renaissance Through the 18th Century," by Pearl Ehrlich, 11 A.M.; "Understanding African Art: Learning and Initiation," by Alisa LaGamma, 7 P.M.
Sunday: "Rural Life in American Art," by Jytte Willumstad, 11 A.M.
Free with museum admission: $7; $3.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Edward Hopper and Jack Pierson: American Dreaming," tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Ideas and Objects: Selected Drawings and Sculptures From the Permanent Collection," tomorrow at 3:30 P.M.; "From the Collection: Photography, Sculpture and Painting," Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Joseph Stella," Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
All lectures by Margaret Sundell.
Free with museum admission: $7; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Artur Balsam, a Pianist Known For Chamber Work, Dies at 88
Artur Balsam, a pianist best known as a chamber player and as an elegant accompanist for violinists and cellists, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said Dan Berlinghoff, a friend and student of the pianist.


Trying to Cast Light On 3 Troubled Souls
They may speak with crabbed Down East accents, but the characters who inhabit "The Keepers," Barbara Lebow's tale of stormy family relationships in a Maine lighthouse in the 1850's, are by no means stereotypically laconic New Englanders.
Show them a glimpse of the ocean, which is about all there is to look at in a lighthouse, and they'll spiral into flights of poetic description that seem to turn the stage of the Bouwerie Lane Theater a very ripe shade of purple.
The grizzled but spry Nathaniel Brockett (Craig Smith), the lighthouse keeper and a former sea captain, tends to address the Atlantic directly, as if it were a capricious acquaintance of long standing.
"Rumblin' and roilin' you are, like a choir singin'," he intones.


Yankees Trade A Reliever And Get One
Three hours after Paul Gibson received the news from General Manager Gene Michael yesterday that he had been traded from the Yankees to Milwaukee for a player to be determined later, the pitcher was still confused.
Gibson's dream of playing in the World Series for the Yankees had been placed in peril by the players' strike and now it was obliterated by the trade.
Explaining that they needed another right-handed reliever, the Yanks unloaded the left-handed Gibson and then acquired Scott Bankhead from Boston for an undisclosed amount of money and a player to be named later.
Both minor trades were made about an hour before Wednesday's midnight deadline, but Michael said that the three teams agreed to delay the announcements until yesterday.


Awe-Struck U.S. Executives Survey the China Market
John E. Bryson, chairman of the Southern California Edison Company, looked at the power-industry requirements of this country and was staggered by the scale of building that must occur in order to sustain China's extraordinary economic expansion.
"This is the largest power market in the world," says Mr.
Bryson, one of 24 American chief executives who accompanied Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown to China over the last week.
Mr.
Bryson visited China for the first time, though his company's Mission Energy unit is negotiating power-plant deals in three southern Chinese provinces.


Diner's Journal
Novel Sushi
In the end, it was the lemon hand roll that seduced me.


When de Gaulle Walked Through Fire; Who Liberated Paris?
To the Editor:
If your reporter had read "A Soldier's Story," by Gen.
Omar N. Bradley, he'd know that it was the United States Fourth Infantry Division that was ordered into Paris.


Back on the Boardwalk; Rolling Chairs Re-Emerging As Cabs for the Casino Crowd
Cloistered in a crumbling garage below the boardwalk, Larry Belfer is the keeper of the rolling chairs.
As wooden planks creak overhead, Mr.
Belfer sits among dozens of the three-wheeled wicker vehicles that are as indigenous to Atlantic City as saltwater taffy.
He dispatches the chairs to operators who spend summers pushing tourists around the boardwalk, continuing a tradition that has endured for more than a century.


Police Officer Arrested in Bronx On Charge of Taking Drug Bribes
A New York City police officer was arrested in the Bronx yesterday for seeking and accepting bribes from a drug dealer.
Senior police officials said he acted alone and was not a part of any corruption ring.
The officer, Gregory Brea, was seen taking bribes from a cocaine dealer in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx, where he was a patrol officer walking a regular beat, on three separate occasions, the officials said.


Bush Son Misfires on Hunt For Publicity in Texas Race
Today was the first day of the dove hunting season in Texas, and both Gov.
Ann W. Richards and George W. Bush, her Republican opponent, were out at the crack of dawn, hunting for birds -- and news coverage.
But the obligatory macho political rite in Texas turned into an embarrassment for Mr.
Bush when he pointed a borrowed 20-gauge shotgun at the sky in rural Hockley, Tex., fired -- and killed the wrong kind of bird.


Account Running Dry For Baseball Network
Major league players have a $175 million fund from licensing royalties to tide them over during their strike.
The 28 teams have a credit line.


Sounds Around Town
On the Edge
Tony Conrad, Elliott Sharp and Jim O'Rourke, the Cooler, 416 West 14th Street, West Village, (212) 229-0785.
This strong bill brings together three generations of avant-garde musicians.
Mr.
Conrad, best known for his work in the 1960's with the Minimalist composer La Monte Young, rarely performs nowadays.
But his few recent concerts, where he stands silhouetted behind a screen and plays long, overtone-filled drones on the violin while a small, homemade mechanical contraption bows a second violin, have been loud, intense and beautiful.
Mr.
Sharp is a multi-instrumentalist who has been performing in New York City for 15 years, improvising with and composing for scores of musicians and creating dense musical textures out of a double-necked guitar and a sound sampler.
Mr.
O'Rourke, who also plays in the abstract rock band Gastr del Sol, is among the youngest brains in the avant-garde, working with field recordings and processing his guitar playing not to make music but to create a landscape of sound.
The show is tomorrow night at 8; admission is $6.
NEIL STRAUSS Fiji Mariners
The Fiji Mariners, Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, West Village, (212) 966-4225.
This year, Col.
Bruce Hampton left his backing band of five years, the Aquarium Rescue Unit.
This eccentric 47-year-old singer and stringed-instrument player said his doctors had told him to take it easy.
But it appears that he has decided not to follow their advice.
His latest band, the Fiji Mariners, a trio with Dan Matrazzo on keyboards and Derek Trucks on guitar, is to make its New York debut tonight and continues Colonel Hampton's lifelong experiment in bluegrass, jazz and rock fusion.
The show is tonight at 9:30; admission is $8.
N.
S.


Officials Lower Death Total Attributed to Powerful Heroin
Authorities yesterday lowered from 14 to 8 the number of deaths in the last week that the police believe are related to highly concentrated heroin being sold on the streets of Manhattan.
They said the change did not alleviate their concern about the dangers of the powerful blend, and that their effort to locate its source was continuing.


Yes, They're Still Eating Dogs in China
To the Editor:
May-lee Chai's angry letter ("Dog's Place in History," Aug. 26), insisting that dog is not a treat to eat in Chinese society, is a bit too defensive.
My own experience suggests that China is not necessarily a dog's world.
In Hong Kong, for example, while it has become fashionable to keep dogs as pets, the taste for dogs often runs deeper.


Federal Inquiry Is Sought
The family of the transit police officer wounded by a New York City police officer in a subway firefight last week has asked for a Federal investigation of the shooting, asserting that the local investigation has been tainted by political concerns.
Brian O'Dwyer, the lawyer representing Officer Desmond Robinson and his family, also charged that he and his investigators had been prevented from taking a sworn statement from Officer Robinson's partner, David Thompson.
He said he suspected city police officials or the union for the transit officers was behind the alleged obstruction.


Lawyers' Repute Has Faded, but Desire to Be One Hasn't
Adam Bonin has read all the horror stories about lawyers -- how hard they work, how little respect they get, how thankless their profession has become.
Yet from the first time he saw "L.A. Law," Mr.
Bonin says, he knew he wanted to be a lawyer.
"That show made law look so cool," said Mr.
Bonin, a 21-year-old Philadelphian recently accepted by the University of Chicago Law School.
"I like being on the spot and being in the spotlight, and that means law or politics."


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; Brazilian and Bluegrass
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Children and adults can share the delight of eye-popping costumes, jovial tunes and unfettered virtuosity at two free music festivals this weekend in Manhattan.
On Sunday, the Brazilian-American Cultural Center will present its 10th annual Brazil Day street fair, featuring a carnival band from Bahia.
On Monday, the South Street Seaport offers a triple bill of fast-fingered bluegrass bands.


U.S. AND CUBA TALK AT U.N. ON SOLVING THE REFUGEE CRISIS
United States and Cuban negotiators met for six hours today in their first face-to-face talks in nine months amid indications that Cuba was seriously weighing Clinton Administration proposals to resolve the crisis created by thousands of refugees setting sail for Florida.
The talks, which Administration officials said went well, were held as another hundreds of Cubans continued to be picked up by the United States Coast Guard in the waters off Cuba.
As of 10 P.M., 1,792 Cubans had been picked up, bringing the total to more than 20,000 since early August.


Is This New York's Earliest Picture?


A Holy Day And a Parade In Crown Hts.
More than a million Caribbean revelers and thousands of Hasidic Jews are expected to mix on the streets of Crown Heights on Monday for two very different kinds of celebrations, and community leaders have their fingers crossed that peace will prevail in this often racially roiled neighborhood.
This year for the first time, the 27th annual West Indian-American Day Parade, which is always held on Labor Day, coincides with Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year.


Miami Beach Journal; The Gold Coast Fights for Its Image
Men who walk the tide line on the white sand, nude-bathing beach here say they have come to look for Cuban refugees washing up on American shores.
Why they gaze inland instead of out to sea is a question that compromises the sincerity of their mission.


A Mixed August for Retailers
The nation's leading retailers reported mixed results for August yesterday, as consumers continued to demonstrate a penchant for bargain-based shopping.
Still, analysts said last month's retail sales supported the notion that consumers, who are responsible for about two-thirds of the economy, are spending enough to maintain growth at a moderate pace.


The Man From GATT
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 28 report on priorities for Democrats now that the Clinton health-care plan seems dead quotes Tom Downey as saying they should "change the subject and talk about other things on the agenda, like GATT." You identify him as a former New York Representative and a Democrat with close White House ties.
Mr.
Downey is also a lobbyist for the Alliance for GATT Now, a coalition of corporations spending millions to push the Uruguay Round through Congress.
It is not surprising that a lobbyist paid to pass the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade believes that the Democrats should be working on it.
PAMELA GILBERT  Director, Public Citizen's Congress Watch Washington, Aug. 29, 1994


K. D. Lang's Debut, In an Alaskan Chill
Not even K. D. Lang's most ardent fans will find much to like about "Salmonberries," the film in which she makes an uneasy acting debut.
Nor is there much to recommend the stilted direction of Percy Adlon, who also wrote the screenplay and conceived his film with Ms.
Lang in mind.
The likable eccentricities of Mr.
Adlon's earlier works (including "Sugarbaby," "Bagdad Cafe" and "Rosalie Goes Shopping") are no preparation for the amateurishness of this one.
"Salmonberries," which opens today at the Quad Cinema, happens to have been voted best film at the 1991 Montreal Film Festival.
But that says more about film festivals than it does about this halting, awkward effort.
Set in a dismal little Alaskan outpost, it tells the story of Kotzebue (Ms. Lang), who looks like a feral boy and works on the Alaskan pipeline.
Kotzebue doesn't say much but has clearly become fixated on Roswitha (Rosel Zech), the town's German librarian.


Summer's Last Hurrah: The Final Fling Before the Fall; Carnival Time
Here are 10 ways to celebrate the Labor Day weekend in the New York metropolitan region. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
This is one weekend I plan to put my shyness on hold, get smack-dab in the middle of Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn and let the music knock me down and drag me out.
I mean I'm gonna shake these middle-age bones and dance.
You know, as in a gutbucket party.
As in the annual West Indian-American Day Carnival Parade.


Critic's Choice; A Boy, Drugs And Chess
As a film about a 12-year-old drug dealer in the inner city, "Fresh" may sound exploitative and even familiar.
Instead, it's a devastating original, directed by Boaz Yakim with uncommon toughness and precision.
Mr.
Yakim's stylistic restraint is so unexpected that this film's isolated moments of violence stand out in sharp relief, as the quiet, deliberate boy named Fresh (Sean Nelson) tries to make sense of his world.
The chess games that figure in the story signal the startling cunning that Fresh eventually displays.
"Fresh" features fine-tuned performances by Samuel L. Jackson and Giancarlo Esposito, as father and drug dealer, who influence Fresh more profoundly than either can realize.
Not until its final moments does this film really show its hand, revealing just what has been going on behind Fresh's blank, guileless expression.


Insurance Sales and Kickbacks
Driving to a 1991 Christmas party given by the police union in Philadelphia, Michael J. Borkowski and his wife were embroiled in what he recalls as the worst fight they ever had.
The subject was the 21 hundred-dollar bills that Mr.
Borkowski, an insurance sales agent, was about to deliver to three union officials who controlled the fate of Mr.
Borkowski's insurance business with union members.


Illinois Loses Its Grip Vs. Washington State
Washington State 10, Illinois 9
Mark Fields returned a late first-half fumble 71 yards for a touchdown last night and Washington State held Illinois without a touchdown in beating the Fighting Illini, 10-9.
Illinois's first game in Chicago in 55 years and first ever at Soldier Field attracted 39,472 to the 66,950-seat stadium.
Illinois had been ranked No. 22 by The Associated Press.


Andreychuck's Deal
DAVE ANDREYCHUCK, Toronto's leading goal scorer last season, got more than millions when he signed a new deal with the Maple Leafs.
The 54-goal scorer last season secured his future with the team when he signed a five-year deal worth $11 million Wednesday.
Andreychuck, a 30-year-old wing, becomes the club's second-highest paid player behind center DOUG GILMOUR.
He will earn about $2.25 million a season, but performance bonuses could make the deal even more lucrative, The Toronto Sun reported.


The Real Truth of Poverty
Demonizing welfare mothers has become political sport, with politicians everywhere blaming them for moral decline, budget deficits and even poverty itself.
A report this week by New York's Citizens Budget Commission challenges this stereotype in useful and enlightening ways.
It shows that women on welfare make up a far smaller percentage of the poor than popular wisdom would have it.
It also confirms what previous studies have shown: Medicaid, not welfare, is the prime source of runaway spending on poverty.
Welfare mothers are routinely portrayed as slackers who make up the bulk of the poor and soak up more money every year.
The fact is that only one in four poor households in New York City is headed by a single parent; welfare payments, when adjusted for inflation, have actually declined by 30 percent since 1972.


This Candidate Isn't Quite His Daddy's Boy
The reason Jeb Bush is the front-runner in the Republican primary for governor of Florida next week may be that he is George Bush's son.
But on the campaign trail, he is more the political offspring of a conservative firebrand like Newt Gingrich, the House Republican whip, than of his split-the-difference father.
If President Bush could Ping-Pong between classic Rockefeller Republicanism and sometime conservatism, the son is a candidate who clings firmly to one side of the net.
Moving far beyond the routine anti-government rhetoric of many Republicans, his father included, John Ellis Bush, who has been known since childhood by the nickname formed by his initials, lashes out at government as a genuinely dangerous force.


Boy Sought in Teen-Ager's Death Is Latest Victim of Chicago Guns
The search for an 11-year-old murder suspect ended here today in a dank, graffiti-scarred pedestrian underpass, where the boy was found dead in a pool of blood and mud.
He had been shot at least once in the back of the head, apparently, the police said, by the same street gang that put a gun in his small hands and shoved him into the grown-up world of violence and death.


Lewis &amp; Gace Sold To Bozell, Jacobs
Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt said yesterday that it would acquire Lewis &amp; Gace, a leading health care advertising agency based in Fort Lee, N.J., and merge it with the Bozell Healthcare division in New York to form Lewis &amp; Gace Bozell Healthcare Worldwide.
Terms were not disclosed.
The new shop will have combined billings of $94 million and be based at the Lewis &amp; Gace office in Fort Lee.
Lewis &amp; Gace brings to the merger billings of $54 million from clients like Merck &amp; Company and Eli Lilly &amp; Company.
Bozell Healthcare brings billings of $40 million from clients like Glaxo, Olympus Medical Instruments, the Immunex Corporation and Biogen Inc.


Team Won't Withdraw
British track and field's governing body said yesterday that it would not withdraw its women's team from next week's World Cup, despite pressures to do so after a positive drug test against the 800-meter runner DIANE MODAHL.
The world governing body, meanwhile, warned the British that their results could be nullified if Modahl competes.
"If we were to withdraw the team at this time, that would in effect be prejudging a case which is halfway through and which cannot reach its conclusion before the World Cup," the British Athletic Federation executive chairman, PETER RADFORD, said at a news conference.


Pro Bono Accounts
* Dancing in the Streets, New York, to Borejko Leibler, New York.


Giuliani Backs Republican, Entering Comptroller Fray
Although the election is months away, the candidates for New York State Comptroller have treated the last few days as if they were the last week of October, trading charges of "extremism" and "smears" and creating one of the nastiest races of the 1994 campaign.
Yesterday, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani entered the fray, endorsing Herbert London, the Republican, and charging that the Democratic incumbent, H. Carl McCall, had used the office for political purposes.


Plop, Plop, Fizz, Fizz: Pierce Eats, Then Wins
Mary Pierce, who needed to munch a bunch of Maalox to settle an untimely, unruly stomach at match time, had never played last night's opponent, Katarina Studenikova, had never seen her before.
And somewhere in the middle of their second round match on the Stadium Court of the United States Open, the fourth-seeded Pierce began to wonder if she perhaps should have paid more attention to the tall, blonde Slovakian with a full-blown forehand that mirrors her own.
But by the time their first encounter was over, Pierce had advanced to the third round with a 6-3, 2-6, 6-4 victory and Studenikova was heading home from her first-ever Open wet-eyed and wishing the gusty night breezes had been kinder to her strokes.


Editorial Notebook; What Ails Tennis?
There is something about the U.S.
Open that makes people grouchy.
The players, though fed, housed, transported and otherwise coddled throughout the two-week tournament, and paid handsomely even for losing, complain about the raucous crowd, the cramped locker rooms and the undeniable fact that New York is not, well, Kitzbuhel.
The fans gripe about the food prices and the absence of decent seats for the rank and file.
This year, however, there is a new lament, a dirge about the "decline of the game." Suppliers of tennis gear point to a long-term slippage in racquet and ball sales, which is not hard to explain.
A lot of people who took up the game when it was fashionable in the 70's and 80's quit when they found it was not an easy thing to master.
Promoters and pundits, meanwhile, worry that the professional game has gotten boring.
This is not so easily explained.


Lord Day Law Firm to Close
Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith, one of New York's oldest law firms, said yesterday that its partners had approved the orderly dissolution of the firm, effective Sept. 30.
In a terse two-paragraph statement, the firm, which was founded in 1848, confirmed rumors that had been swirling for months.


The Right Kind of Vaccination Program
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration's abandonment of a plan for a national warehouse as part of its Vaccines for Children program provides an opportunity to refocus attention on the real barriers to childhood immunization.


Deaf Boy, 4, Loses Hand in Blast Of Firecracker in Queens Home
The left hand of a 4-year-old deaf boy, who relies on sign language to communicate, had to be amputated yesterday after it was mangled when a large firecracker that the boy was playing with exploded, the police said.
Experts who work with the deaf said the boy, Rayangelo Abadia of Far Rockaway, Queens, should be able to learn sign language using only one hand.
He was in stable condition last night at Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan.


Disqualification in Bomb Plot Case Bodes Ill
To the Editor:
Developments in the bombing conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 12 other defendants promise to infect any verdict with suspicions of injustice.


Leslie Fay's Law Firm Didn't Act Improperly
To the Editor:
"Leslie Fay's Law Firm Is Rebuked" (Business Day, Aug. 26) inaccurately describes the examiner's findings regarding the work of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges in the Leslie Fay bankruptcy case.


Ex-Mayor Of Capital Runs Hard
Once dubbed Mayor for Life, then disgraced and jailed, Marion S. Barry Jr. has been finding eager listeners for his campaign message of rehabilitation and redemption.
The latest polls show that Mr.
Barry, who was considered politically dead after his 1990 arrest on a cocaine charge, is running neck and neck with John Ray, a city council member, to become the Democratic mayoral candidate in the September 13 primary here.
Sharon Pratt Kelly, the present Mayor, is trailing far behind.
And in a city that is overwhelmingly black and Democratic, the winner of the Democratic primary has always won the mayoral election.
All three candidates are black.


Isles' Volek, Beset by Bad Back, Retires
Islanders right wing DAVID VOLEK, who scored the winning goal in overtime of Game 7 of the 1993 Patrick Division final against the Pittsburgh Penguins, retired yesterday.


China, Backing North Korea, Quits Armistice Commission
The Chinese Government stunned South Korea today by announcing that it was withdrawing its delegate from the four-decade-old military commission that oversees the armistice between North and South Korea.
On the surface, the move seemed to have limited practical importance, since the commission's once-crucial role in managing day-to-day problems at the demilitarized zone separating the two Koreas has sharply diminished.
As the number of confrontations has been reduced, so have the functions of what is known as the Military Armistice Commission, which consists of China, North Korea and the United Nations Command, dominated by the United States.


Deal Openly With Racism in Subway Shooting; Coverage Fuels Hatred
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the police shootout in a New York subway illustrates one of the more insidious faces of racism.
You contrast Officer Desmond Robinson, "who is black," with Officer Peter Del-Debbio, who is "of Italian and Puerto Rican descent." The Guardians, described as a "black officers' association," has called for the arrest and prosecution of Officer Del-Debbio because, as suggested by Sgt.
Kelvin Alexander of the Transit Guardians, "he was just killing another black man, and that is indicative of a sickness right there."


Sampras Puts In a Day's Work in 1 Hour 45 Minutes
None of this late-night baloney for Pete Sampras.
He made short work of Daniel Vacek, needing 1 hour 45 minutes to complete a routine second-round match that got him into the locker room before 10 P.M. and on the way back to his Long Island retreat not much later.
In keeping with the trend of things at the United States Open, Sampras was not made to wait for a women's match to end before taking the court, and he faced an opponent who went about his business much like Sampras, without delay.


Ares-Sereno reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Letters Show Thief Knew Value Of the Quedlinburg Treasures
An American Army lieutenant's letters home from Germany in 1945 describing his involvement in one of the greatest art thefts of the century go far to answer questions raised in the legal battle and subsequent negotiations that led to the return of the so-called Quedlinburg treasure to Germany in 1992.
"Are my packages getting home? I have sent quite a few," wrote Lieut.
Joe Tom Meador in a letter to his parents dated June 17, 1945, two months after a collection of 10 priceless medieval church treasures disappeared from a closely guarded cave on the outskirts of Quedlinburg in central Germany.
The Nazi Government had hidden them there for safekeeping during World War II.
"There are two that I want to know about for sure," he continued.
"One is a box that contains a book, the cover of the book has a statue of Christ on it. By all means, if it gets home take extra good care of it. I have an idea that the cover is pure gold and the jewels on the cover are emeralds, jade and pearls. Don't ask me where I got it! But it could possibly be very very valuable."
Lieutenant Meador's identity as the Quedlinburg thief was disclosed by The New York Times in June 1990.
Lawyers representing the Government of West Germany and the owner of the treasure, the cathedral called the Stiftskirche Domgemeinde Quedlinburg, promptly filed suit in Federal District Court in Dallas to recover the artworks.
Letters Are Uncovered
In 1992, an out-of-court settlement between German officials and Lieutenant Meador's heirs led to the exhibition of the treasures at the Dallas Museum of Art that spring before they were returned to Germany.
The next year they were exhibited before overflow crowds at the State Museum for Decorative Arts in Berlin, and last September they were finally returned to Quedlinburg.
The letters from the Quedlinburg thief to his family in Whitewright, Tex., a farm town 15 miles south of the Oklahoma border, were recently inspected by The New York Times.
They make clear that Lieutenant Meador, who studied art with his mother and taught art in the high school in New London, Tex., before entering the Army, recognized the unusual value of what he was stealing.
When Lieutenant Meador's brother and sister were trying to sell the treasures after his death, they asserted that he had found them "in the gutter" and considered them of little value.
Current professional estimates of the value of the collection range from nearly $200 million to "priceless."
The letters also demonstrate that the theft of the Quedlinburg treasures by Lieutenant Meador, who died of cancer in 1980, was not an isolated indiscretion by a war-weary soldier.
He mentions having sent home two moving picture projectors, camera lenses, other optical instruments and clothing.
Warning to Parents
Furthermore, he cautioned his parents not to show the treasures to anyone and later confessed that he had "appropriated" the artworks "from a cave in the mountains."
The treasures had been kept for a millennium in the Schatzkammer, or treasure chamber, of the Quedlinburg cathedral.
After Allied air attacks on Germany began, the treasures were moved to a cave outside of town.
Lieutenant Meador stole the treasures when his unit, the 87th Armored Field Artillery Battalion, was briefly stationed in Quedlinburg in the waning days of the fighting in Europe.
Apart from their physical beauty, the treasures have great historical importance to Germany because of their association with Heinrich I, a 10th-century Saxon ruler who united an early configuration of German-speaking states.
The most valuable item in the collection is the Samuhel Gospels, a sumptuously illustrated and illuminated ninth-century manuscript lettered with gold ink.
It contains full-page paintings of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the four Gospel scribes, which are among the earliest and best-preserved examples of early Western painting.
The other treasures include a gold, silver and ivory casket from the ninth or 10th century, a biblical manuscript dated 1513 and emblazoned with gold, silver and jewels; a liturgical ivory comb dating to the seventh or eighth century; five fancifully shaped reliquaries of cut rock crystal dating to the 10th century and a heart-shaped vessel believed to have been fashioned in the 15th century.
The Loot Declines
In a letter to his parents dated July 7, 1945, Lieutenant Meador said the second medieval manuscript he had sent home was bound in solid gold covers encrusted with nearly 80 jewels.
"Please store it most carefully for me as it is very valuable," he stated.
A week later, he wrote that he had sent home "a chest of the same type except the chest has a bunch of ivory inlay in it."
By Aug. 2, 1945, he was bemoaning the scarcity of easily available "loot."
"Now that the war is over it is harder to get things," he complained.
The next December, Lieutenant Meador was court-martialed and fined $600 for the theft of valuable silverware and gold-decorated china from the villa of the Marquise of St.
Carlos in Biarritz, France.
Although the Army investigated the theft of the Quedlinburg treasures after the war, they were not traced to Lieutenant Meador at that time.
In the out-of-court settlement in 1992, Jack Meador and Jane Meador Cook, the siblings and heirs of Lieutenant Meador, received nearly $2.75 million from the German Government for relinquishing all claim to ownership of the artworks.
The case has been investigated by the Internal Revenue Service, which, according to people close to the case who spoke on condition of anonymity, is now demanding $30 million in back taxes, interest and penalties from the Meadors.
"The I.R.S. is attempting to levy a tax and we expect to have to challenge it in tax court," Randal Mathis, the Dallas lawyer who represents the Meadors, said last week.
In a book about the case published in Germany last week, Willi A. Korte, a German investigator, says he has evidence that two of the treasures are still unlawfully in the United States and held by persons other than the heirs.
He says he has sworn statements from people in the Dallas area who have been able to describe or recognize photographs of artworks long missing from Quedlinburg.
These include a rock crystal flask in the shape of a bishop's cap and a gold reliquary in the form of a crucifix.


DROP IN NEW JOBS SIGNALS A SLOWING FOR THE ECONOMY
Employment figures released today provided the clearest evidence to date that the economy has slowed from last year's unsustainable pace, but that it retains enough strength to avoid braking too severely.
Job growth slackened in August as the unemployment rate, 6.1 percent, stood at essentially the same level for a fourth straight month, the Labor Department reported today.
The rate had fallen markedly early this year.


A Gear, a Drill, a Fan, a Cuban Raft
Never has make-do ingenuity been more evident than in the design of the hundreds of Cuban rafts that have put to sea in the recent exodus.
Tight rationing forces Cubans to cook, clean, dress and live more creatively, and this week their imagination showed itself in the Florida Straits.


Labor Day Approaches For Harvard
WHEN this year's Labor Day Parade was called off, Ted Jacobsen, the secretary of the New York City Labor Council, said one major reason was that by and large labor had won.
"We're a victim of our own success," he said, explaining why the 112-year-old parade was being canceled, to be resumed next September as an event to be held every two years.
"We've created this big middle class, and it likes an extra day's rest at the end of the summer like everyone else," Mr.
Jacobsen said in an article in The Daily News.


In the Race to Raise Funds, Pataki Pulls Ahead of Cuomo
In a month when his campaign was often on the defensive because of questions about his personal finances, Senator George E. Pataki, the leading Republican candidate for Governor, still managed to raise more money than Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
In August, two of Mr.
Pataki's campaign committees raised $664,930, compared with $449,437 raised by Mr.
Cuomo's lone committee, according to reports filed today with the state Board of Elections.
Mr.
Pataki also raised more money than Mr.
Cuomo did in July.


Edison Brothers Stores Inc.(EBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


INSIDE
Bosnian Muslims Expelled
Bosnian Serb militias are carrying out a new wave of ethnic cleansing in northern Bosnia, expelling and robbing thousands of Muslims, United Nations officials said.
Page 2.
Plan to Alter School Districts
A proposal to redraw New York City school districts increases the number of minority students in some areas and makes others whiter.
Page 21.
The Magic Number Is 7
With the strike three weeks old, baseball owners are prepared to call it a season if there is no agreement with players by next Friday.
Page 27


Swiss Army Knife vs. Chinese Clone
The burghers of this hamlet on the slopes of the Swiss Alps have been anxiously watching the progress of a lawsuit in New York, which is expected to determine later this year whether a Swiss Army knife can be cloned in China.
The legal test for the red-handled knife -- a product that is virtually a Swiss institution -- is crucial for tiny Ibach, population 3,500, an hour's drive south of Zurich.
Ibach is the headquarters of Victorinox, the Swiss knife maker that manufactures 80 percent of Swiss Army knives sold abroad.


One Stop at a Time, Sharpton Broadens Political Following
Campaigning as a revivalist as much as a politician, the Rev.
Al Sharpton is using another aggressive primary challenge of the Democratic establishment to capitalize on black voters' shock last year at David N. Dinkins's loss of City Hall to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
"Rudy says, 'Get back!' " he shouts at a street rally of Harlem Hospital Center workers on Lenox Avenue.
Instantly, they reply: "We say, 'Fight back!' "


No Headline
He was shooting with a vengeance.
It wasn't like he was shooting to run for cover, like he was shooting for someone to go down.
He wanted to kill that person he was shooting. -- OFFICER DAVID THOMPSON of the Transit Police, whose partner was shot by another officer.  [ 1:5. ]


High Officer At Met Life Gets New Job
Robert J. Crimmins, who was the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company's executive in charge of personal insurance when state regulators found that many Met Life agents were guilty of improper sales activities, has been reassigned.
Mr.
Crimmins, who joined Met Life in 1956 and was head of its personal insurance business since 1986, will remain an executive vice president and oversee the company's reorganization efforts.
The switch was announced in a memo sent to executives yesterday afternoon.


Perry Drug Stores Inc.(PDS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Seminoles Are Eager To Play Opener
An off season of turmoil ends on Saturday afternoon for Florida State's defending national champions.
For Coach Bobby Bowden, it cannot come be soon enough.
"I've never seen a team more ready to get on the field and play," said Bowden, whose Seminoles will play host to Virginia in an Atlantic Coast Conference game that is one of several contests involving major teams on the first Saturday of the season.


O'Sullivan Aiming at World Record
Tonight in Paris, Sonia O'Sullivan of Ireland is poised to top her already sensational summer and affirm her new status as the world's leading female distance runner.
In the process, she could set a world record.
O'Sullivan will attempt to set the record in the 5,000 meters in the $2.2 million I.A.A.F./Mobil Grand Prix final in Paris, the climax of the international season.
The 24-year-old O'Sullivan, who shares the lead with four other athletes in the 1994 women's point standing, could win another $100,000 by winning the track and field title.


Limiting the Plan of a Tax Audit
Llona S. Lang of Falls Church, Va., tried to put her bitter, 1988 divorce behind her.
But in 1991, she had to dig up personal and financial information in response to a notice of a tax audit from the internal Revenue Service.
"I thought I was free and in control of my life," she recalled.
"But you aren't free until the I.R.S. says so."
The I.R.S. asked her to provide documents on her income and on more than 30 items claimed as deductions for the 1989 tax year.


Broncos to Start With a Hole in the Middle
Denver Broncos middle linebacker DAVE WYMAN is expected to miss the first two games of the regular season because of torn cartilage in his right knee.
Wyman aggravated a two-week-old cartilage injury during Thursday's practice and was scheduled to undergo arthroscopic surgery.
With Wyman out, the veteran free agent GLENELL SANDERS probably will start his second National Football League game.


New Jersey Boy, 13, Is Charged With Killing 11-Year-Old Friend
A polite, helpful 11-year-old who everybody called Jake was fatally shot in his bedroom in this small rural town on Thursday, and a 13-year-old friend was charged hours later with killing him.
The boy, Jacob Tracy, who was about to begin the fifth grade, was killed with a gun, which may have been stolen, after he refused to accept an apology from a third boy, the authorities said.


Corrections
A dance review on Wednesday about "Dancing Under the Stars," a tap-dancing show on Monday at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, misidentified a lead dancer because of an incorrect listing in the program.
He was Herbin van Cayseele, not Van Porter.


Colgate May Eliminate Up to 3,000 Positions
The Colgate-Palmolive Company will reportedly undertake a $100 million restructuring soon that would eliminate up to 3,000 jobs.
Colgate-Palmolive had no response to the report, issued Thursday evening by Bloomberg Business News.
Its New York headquarters offices were closed yesterday, until Tuesday.


Virtual Mayhem and Real Profits
American McGee chases his colleague Shawn Green through the office, leaping over acid pits and dodging radioactive debris before cornering him in a cul-de-sac.
"Here, have some of THIS!" Mr.
McGee says with a cackle, as he empties his plasma rifle into Mr.
Green's neck.
"Yum, that was good," Mr.
Green fires back.
"Here's some for you!" He unloads his shotgun point-blank into Mr.
McGee's face.


Nets Complete Staff by Hiring Wetzel
The Nets yesterday hired JOHN WETZEL as an assistant to their new coach, BUTCH BEARD, completing a staff that includes PAUL SILAS and JERRY EAVES.
Wetzel comes to the Nets from the Portland Trail Blazers, with whom he spent the last six years as an assistant to the former coach, RICK ADELMAN.


Edward T. O'Toole Communications Consultant, 75
Edward T. O'Toole, a former bank vice president and a retired financial writer and communications consultant, died on Wednesday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 75.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.
A native of Brooklyn, Mr.
O'Toole worked in the public relations department of the Chase National Bank in New York, before joining The New York Times as a financial reporter in 1961.
He also was an economics correspondent in Brussels, covering the European Common Market.


Ulster Truce Could Bring A 'Dividend'
Interrupting his vacation to meet with Ireland's Deputy Prime Minister, President Clinton signaled today that he intends to reward the turn toward peace in Northern Ireland with a substantial increase in United States aid.
Neither Mr.
Clinton nor the Irish envoy, Dick Spring, made any public mention of a specific figure for aid, which would be aimed at promoting economic development both north and south of the border.
But Mr.
Clinton said he believed that the parties who called a halt to violence on Wednesday deserved a "peace dividend," and Mr.
Spring said he felt "very satisfied" that the Administration would increase its assistance.


CPI Corp.(CPY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 23


Beliefs
Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, arrives Monday evening, and with it begins a 10-day period leading up to Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, in which a rabbi may be called upon to preach three, four or even more sermons.
Of course, that places a heavy burden on rabbinic creativity, all the more so given the occasion's solemnity.
So why not take the opportunity to work in a talk about peace?
Especially if that sermon would rally support for the Israeli Government's peace policies?


U.S. and Cuba Make Progress on Refugees
United States and Cuban negotiators made progress today in talks focusing on a proposal by the Clinton Administration to vastly increase the number of Cubans who would be granted entry through legal means if Havana agreed to halt the chaotic flow of boat people, American officials said.
Meeting for eight hours on the second day of talks, the Administration gave the Cubans a formal written offer that would commit the United States to admit at least 20,000 Cubans a year through legal immigration, far more than the 2,700 who received visas over the past 12 months, the officials said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Recalled Gar Finnvold, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.


Brazil Winces at Film on Its Hero
"The Burning Season," an American made-for-television film about a Brazilian Amazon hero, was screened here on Thursday night for Brazil's film glitterati in the Beaux-Arts splendor of the Municipal Theater.
The response was less than enthusiastic.
"Chico Mendes was Brazilian," a lone, irate voice bellowed from a box seat as the lights went up.
"Where are the Brazilians in this movie?"


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Deal Openly With Racism in Subway Shooting
To the Editor:
The "friendly fire" that planted at least four bullets in an undercover transit officer, Desmond Robinson -- some reportedly fired point-blank into his back as he lay face down -- is very disturbing, sad and cause to be even more worried about racism in New York City.


N.H.L. Arranges Treatment for Probert
Chicago Blackhawks right wing BOB PROBERT was placed on indefinite inactive status yesterday by National Hockey League Commissioner GARY BETTMAN for league-supervised treatment for substance abuse.
The N.H.L. said Probert will immediately begin a rehabilitation program under the supervision of Dr.
DAVE LEWIS of the ASAP Family Treatment Program.


Dorothy B. Phillips, a Director Of Special Olympics, Dies at 83
Dorothy Buehring Phillips, a lifelong champion of the disabled and the founder and first State Director of the New York Special Olympics, died on Wednesday at Fannie Allen Hospital in Colchester, Vt.
She was 83 and lived in Albany until three months ago, when she moved to Williston, Vt.
She suffered a long illness, said a spokesman for the Special Olympics organization.


Disabled Have Right To Live Anywhere
To the Editor:
In "HUD Plays Too Rough" (editorial, Aug. 27), you presume that housing for people with disabilities is detrimental to a community when you state that neighborhoods may "legitimately fear an overconcentration" of housing for people who have mental disabilities.


Citing Safety, U.S. Bans Airlines of 9 Nations
The Federal Aviation Administration has barred airlines from nine nations from flying to the United States because of poor safety procedures.
The unusual action, announced today, is a response to safety questions from consumer groups.
Officials say they hope the economic fallout of the ban will encourage the airlines to follow safety guidelines.


No Conflict in Fund
To the Editor:
Your article on questions of conflict in the mutual fund industry and the Robertson Stephens Contrarian Fund (front page, Aug. 7) was heavy with implication, but void of facts.


METRO DIGEST
OFFICER'S PARTNER TELLS OF SHOOTING
The partner of the undercover transit officer wounded in a subway shootout last week has told investigators that the off-duty New York City police officer who mistakenly fired on the undercover officer "was shooting with a vengeance," and appeared intent on killing him.
"I would never have thought in my wildest dreams that he was a police officer," Transit Officer David Thompson said in an interview he gave to investigators.
Page 1.


Limiting the Plan of a Tax Audit
Llona S. Lang of Falls Church, Va., tried to put her bitter, 1988 divorce behind her.
But in 1991, she had to dig up personal and financial information in response to a notice of a tax audit from the internal Revenue Service.
"I thought I was free and in control of my life," she recalled.
"But you aren't free until the I.R.S. says so."
The I.R.S. asked her to provide documents on her income and on more than 30 items claimed as deductions for the 1989 tax year.


Plan to Cut Costs of Concrete Results in Higher Costs Instead
Eight years ago, New York City officials had a bright idea that they thought would save money and weaken the Mafia's power at the same time.
In 1986, the city began pouring about $3 million in subsidies into a private concrete plant in Manhattan.
By giving the owners an exclusive right at fixed prices to all municipal contracts in Manhattan, city officials hoped to lower overall construction costs and to kick the Mafia out of the concrete industry.


K. C. Jones Returns as Aide With Pistons
K.
C.
JONES, who has been a part of 12 National Basketball Association championship teams as a player and coach, has joined the Detroit Pistons as an assistant coach.
Jones, 62, was an assistant in Boston when the current Detroit head coach, DON CHANEY, played for the Celtics.
Jones joined Boston in 1958 and played nine seasons there; the Celtics won eight N.B.A. titles.


Suspect in Slaying At Studio Arraigned
The suspect in the shooting of a part-time stagehand on the sidewalk outside an NBC television studio in mid-Manhattan was arraigned early yesterday on a second-degree murder charge.
Judge Martin Hershey of Criminal Court in Manhattan ordered the suspect, William Emanuel Tager, 46, of Charlotte, N.C., examined by two court-appointed psychiatrists.
They will issue an opinion on whether he is fit to stand trial for the death of the stagehand, Campbell Theron Montgomery, 33.


Mud Where Fire Killed 14


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a pop music review yesterday about the Horde tour misidentified the site of the Lollapalooza Festival last month.
It was at Downing Stadium on Randalls Island, not at Jones Beach.


San Francisco Abandons the Deion Derby
The San Francisco 49ers pulled out of the bidding for the free agent cornerback DEION SANDERS yesterday, saying that salary cap constraints made it impossible to match or beat competing offers.
"Perhaps when the whole process started there might have been a glimmer of hope, based on what we then thought would be the market," the 49ers' president, CARMEN POLICY, said.


Hush Falls Over Open as Medvedev Loses
While the 11th-seeded Jim Courier was at least fighting in vain to stave off elimination on the Stadium Court yesterday at the United States Open, an even higher-seeded player on the men's side, No. 8 Andrei Medvedev, was going down rather quietly on the Grandstand Court.
It took just 1 hour 22 minutes for Medvedev to lose his second-round match to Karel Novacek, himself once highly seeded here, 6-3, 6-2, 6-2.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 MORE VIOLENCE IN ULSTER  A killing in Belfast was a reminder that despite the Irish Republican Army's declaration of a cease-fire, peace in Northern Ireland remains a distant possibility.  1  U.S.
CHINESE COPY  Is it still a Swiss Army knife if it is made in China?
The American distributor for Victorinox, maker of the Swiss Army knife, has sued to stop Chinese knockoffs, in a case being closely followed in Switzerland.  35  Haitians gave an assassinated priest a hero's burial.  4  Verkhoyansk Journal: Everything is relative in a Siberian summer.  2  National 6-8 EMPLOYMENT GROWTH SLOWS  Job growth slackened as the nation's unemployment rate stood unchanged in August, at 6.1 percent.
The report confirmed a slowdown in the economy.
Al Sharpton's primary challenge against Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan is that black leaders are finally embracing him.  1  Business Digest 35  Arts/Entertainment 9-15  Wartime letters tell of Quedlinburg art theft.  9  Brazilians are cool about American film on one of their heroes.  9  Australia gives 1,600 old movies to the United States.  14  Music: Schumann for piano.  14  Thee Hypnotics rock.  15  Obituaries 26  Dorothy B. Phillips, first State Director of New York Special Olympics.
John W. Wade, former dean of Vanderbilt University's law school.
Sports 27-32  Baseball: Owners prepared to cancel season.  27  Basketball: Knicks talking with Ron Harper.  31  Column: Berkow on Lennox Lewis.  27  Football: Jets eye the Bills.  27  Giants notebook 29  Tennis: Upsets continue at U.S.
Open.  27  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Notes on bipartisanship.
Fast-track the Metrocard.
No tolerance for hazing.
Letters  Russell Baker: Probably an oversight.
James Murray: Rwanda's bloody roots.
Gerald L. Shargel: One U.S. attorney too many.
Bridge 10 Chronicle 20 Crossword 8


Franklin Supply Co. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Sports of The Times; Lewis Says This Is All For McCall
WHILE Oliver McCall may be someone to take seriously, his nickname, the Atomic Bull, isn't, said Lennox Lewis.
"Everyone who steps into the ring can do damage if you're not careful," said Lewis, "but that nickname doesn't mean anything to me except he's got a bulldog style and I don't have to look for him. He'll come to me. And that will be just lovely."
A broad grin appeared inside Lewis's goatee, as his imagination wandered.
Lewis, who owns one-third of the heavyweight boxing championship, was sitting on a folding chair in the gym in the Concord Hotel here Friday morning, dark sunglasses propped on the championship nose and a black cap turned backward on his head.


Arrest in Chicago


Buying College Students a Place to Live
Two children in the same college at the same time meant student housing costs of $1,000 a month for Bob Farshler, a petroleum engineer in Corpus Christi, Tex., and his wife, Inga, a librarian
So they looked into the real estate market near their children's school, the University of Texas at Austin.
Finding prices relatively low, they put down $30,000 in March on a $90,000, two-bedroom condominium, immediately lowering their student housing costs to $700 a month, almost all of which is tax deductible.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a fatal shooting on Wednesday in Rockefeller Center misspelled the name of a co-host of the "Today" program.
He is Bryant Gumbel.


With Brazil's New Prosperity Come Arby's and Pizza Hut
On Avenida Paulista, a canyon of corporate headquarters in South America's largest city, office workers looking for lunch can choose among four McDonald's, a Pizza Hut, an Arby's and a KFC.
In the next couple of weeks, Fred DeLuca, who directs an empire of 9,400 Subway restaurants from Milford, Conn., is to open Brazil's first Subway on this street.


A Slaying Shows Ulster Peace Is Still Elusive
It was a killing like hundreds of others over the last 25 years in Northern Ireland: a group of gunmen approached a man repairing a car on a Belfast Street, shot him dead and fled.
The victim was Roman Catholic; the killers were members of the Ulster Freedom Fighters, a Protestant paramilitary group.
But for politicians and church leaders here, the bluntly sectarian killing Thursday night -- the first blood spilled since the Irish Republican Army declared its unilateral cease-fire nearly 24 hours earlier -- was less a shock than a cold-blooded reminder of how distant any real or lasting peace is in the divided province.


Supply Craft Docks With Mir Space Station After 2 Failures
With the future of Russia's manned space program resting in his nervous hands, the commander of the orbiting space station Mir docked today with a cargo ship delivering urgently needed food and supplies.
It was the third time this week the Progress spacecraft had tried to join with Mir.
If it had failed there might not have been enough fuel left on board to try again.


Bids Climb In Western Union Sale
The latest round of a bidding war for Western Union Financial Services, the world's largest money-transfer business, ended yesterday with First Financial Management turning in the highest offer, valued at $1.07 billion.
The trailing bids were submitted by Forstmann Little &amp; Company, which offered $970 million, and by the First Data Corporation, which said it would pay $660 million, plus assume pension liabilities valued at about $265 million.


Observer; Probably an Oversight
I see that somebody else has drawn up a list of New York's living human treasures and that they are to be honored soon at one of the better hotels.
My feelings are not hurt just because I am not on that list.
Indeed one of these living treasures, John Guare, is a man I count as a friend, and I shall be proud to boast of that friendship in the years to come.


Deadly Frat Pranks
In the past 10 years, 23 people have died as a result of hazing or other fraternity-related activities.
Many more are brutalized each year, and there is little sign that such practices are on the wane.
Indeed, as another wave of first-year students sets out for campuses in the next few weeks, one thing is certain.
By the time the snow flies, many of those who pledge Greek-letter fraternities and sororities will be subjected to experiences that are at best unpleasant and at worst life-threatening.
Hazing is a familiar ritual on many campuses.
Administrators and national fraternity officials know when and where it goes on and which campuses and houses are habitual scenes of brutality.
Indeed, the practice is so entrenched at many places that "Hell Week" -- when fraternity and sorority pledges are put through painful initiation rites -- is a recognized part of the social calendar.


Rex Stores Corp.(RSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in some editions of Business Day yesterday, about a settlement of Securities and Exchange Commission charges by a trader at Shearson Lehman Advisers and her husband, misstated the couple's response to the charges.
The couple, Donna and Philip Tumminia, neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing.


Haitians Bury Slain Priest As a Hero
An assassinated Haitian priest was buried as a hero today, the most visible victim so far in what his mourners call the systematic killing and oppression of the Haitian people.
With more than 2,000 people looking on, including some democracy advocates who seldom leave the relative safety of their homes, the Rev.
Jean-Marie Vincent was remembered in a funeral that stirred as much anger as sorrow.


Selig's Threat: Settle Soon, or Wait Till Next Year
If striking players and owners do not reach an agreement by Friday, the owners are prepared to cancel the rest of the baseball season and the post-season, Bud Selig told Donald Fehr yesterday as the strike completed its 22d day.
"I had a conversation with Bud," Fehr, the players' labor leader, said last night, referring to baseball's acting commissioner.
"He told me he was thinking of the 9th as a drop-dead date. I told Mr. Selig we want to try to get an agreement. It doesn't look like that is in the offing. I will worry about such things when it looks like an agreement is in sight and not before."


Evidence of Mick Jagger's Influence
As the 51-year-old Mick Jagger romps across stadium stages this summer, clones nearly half his age are strutting the same strut in clubs.
Mr.
Jagger's influence hangs heavily over contemporary British rock.
The singers in many popular new bands, including Primal Scream, the Charlatans, Oasis and Verve, have all incorporated elements of Mr.
Jagger's onstage moves and singing style into their persona.
On Thursday night at CBGB, Jim Jones of the English group Thee Hypnotics showed that he, too, was a student of the Mick Jagger school of flamboyance as he chicken-walked across the stage, pursing his lips, contorting his wispy body and drawling bluesy lyrics.
Thee Hypnotics differed from their British contemporaries, however, by also looking to the proto-heavy metal of the Stooges, a noisy late-1960's Detroit group led by Iggy Pop.
Ray Hanson and Dave Bush kept their guitars wailing through the entire set, relying on psychedelic wah-wah effects to bolster Mr.
Jones's moans.


Rodman &amp; Renshaw Capital Group Inc.(RR,N) reports earnings for Year to June 24


A Republican Candidate Shrugs Off Spoiler Tag
Pauline Kezer slipped back and forth between roles as she worked the crowd in Bushnell Park, where state office workers flock at lunchtime.
One moment she was a Republican candidate for governor, seeking votes in the party's Sept. 13 primary.
The next, she was Connecticut's Secretary of the State, encouraging people to register to vote, explaining how to do it, and sending an aide to bring registration forms from her office.
Mrs.
Kezer, who was elected Secretary of the State in 1990, has also embraced a divided role in the race for her party's nomination.
To the public, she offers herself as a good-government candidate, promising to "return political power to the people." Within her party, however, she is attacking the record of the leadership's candidate, John Rowland, a former Congressman who nearly won the 1990 race and who has held large leads in polls this year.
For that, she has been derided as the party's Tonya Harding -- a woman willing to hurt -- for the sake of her own ambitions -- the party's best chance to elect a governor in more than 20 years.


Lenders More Forgiving Of Poor Credit Records
PEOPLE with smudged credit records are finding it easier to buy a home these days as hard-pressed lenders seeking customers become more forgiving of applicants with a history of late payments, delinquencies and even bankruptcies.
Mortgages are usually graded "A" through "D" for risk.
An "A" mortgage conforms to the standards set by the major mortgage buyers in the secondary market, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
Until recently, applicants with these types of nonconforming loans usually had only one recourse: "hard-money" lenders, mortgage bankers or finance companies that require huge down payments and charged credit-card rates with several points. (A point is a fee equal to 1 percent of the loan.) These loans were also generally available only for second mortgages and refinancings.


Transit Officer Says Policeman Fired in Anger
The partner of the undercover transit officer wounded in a subway shootout last week has told investigators that the off-duty New York City police officer who mistakenly fired on the undercover officer "was shooting with a vengeance," and appeared intent on killing him.
Transit Officer David Thompson, in a 45-minute interview he gave to investigators, said Officer Peter Del-Debbio's face was full of anger as he emptied his five-shot revolver into Transit Officer Desmond Robinson, and added, "I would never have thought in my wildest dreams that he was a police officer."


U.S. Bonds Sag on Hint Of Inflation
Prices of Treasury securities slumped yesterday in a shortened trading session after a quick, early surge, as traders managed to find hints of inflationary pressures even though August's employment report was soft.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond ended the day down 16/32 of a percentage point, at 1004/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 7.49 percent, from 7.45 percent on Thursday -- back to where it was a week ago.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug. 20, about uncovered short sales on the New York and American Stock Exchanges for the month ended Aug. 15, included an erroneous figure provided by the American Stock Exchange for its total short interest in the period.
It was 107.22 million shares, not 107.27 million shares.


Players' Union Questions Teams' Roster Moves
The baseball strike, which began its fourth week yesterday, has idled 768 players.
But the union plans to challenge the status of up to 18 players and force their clubs to pay their salaries for the rest of the season.
With no sign of negotiating life on either side in the dispute, which is on the verge of wiping out the season's last four weeks, lawyers for the Players Association scrutinized a list of players they believe might have been unfairly added to major league rosters to avoid paying their salaries.
It will be an economic battle within economic warfare.


John Wade, 83, Torts Authority And Dean of Law at Vanderbilt
John W. Wade, an authority on tort law who was dean of Vanderbilt University's law school from 1952 to 1971, died on Aug. 24 at his home in Nashville, Tenn.
He was 83.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, said Elizabeth Latt, a spokeswoman for the university, which is in Nashville.


Serb Gang Expels 566 Muslims From Their Homes in Bosnia
In the largest single instance of "ethnic cleansing" in months, a gang of nationalist Serbs drove 566 Muslims from their homes Thursday night in Bijeljina, in northern Bosnia, United Nations officials here said today.
The latest expulsions, carried out by a private militia under the command of Vojkan Djurkovic, brings to more than 1,500 the number of Muslims driven from their homes in Bijeljina since the Serbs began a new wave of ethnic cleansing in mid-July.


No Cause Is Found In Family's Deaths
The mystery surrounding the death of a woman and her three children in a Manhattan housing project deepened after autopsies yesterday proved inconclusive.
The severely decomposed bodies were found on Thursday piled in a bathtub in an apartment at 1420 Amsterdam Avenue, between 129th and 130th Streets in the Manhattanville Houses.
There were no signs of gunshot or stab wounds, no indication of injury caused by blunt instruments, and no fractures, the police said.
There were no signs of a struggle, nor had anyone ransacked the five-room apartment.
The dead were tentatively identified as Fiordaliza Gonzalez, 32, and her three children: Charitza Parrilla, 12; Julissa Lopez, 9, and Franklyn Castillo, 6.


School Panel's District Plan Ignites Debate
A proposal to redraw the boundaries of New York City school districts for the first time in more than two decades would increase the percentages of minority and immigrant students in several districts in Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx, while making other districts whiter.
The authors of the plan, which was released yesterday, said they intended it to help black, Hispanic and Asian parents to elect representatives to the city's 32 community school boards and help the city to comply with the federal Voting Rights Act.
But some black and Asian school board members and other educators were critical.


Jets Look to Opener With Bills As a Historical Turning Point
Just one big victory.
That's all the Jets want as they open their first season under Coach Pete Carroll on Sunday.
And why not win on opening day against Buffalo at the Bills' home?
"The difference between this team and the Bills is that the Bills have been winning for a long time," said Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason.
"If it's got to start sometime for us, why not now?"


Big Board Stocks Slip, But Nasdaq Edges Up
The stock market, facing an unchanged unemployment rate in August, closed mixed yesterday, as traders began to shift their worries from an overheating economy to declining corporate profits in a sluggish economy.
The bond and currency markets were also a weight on stocks.
Rising bond yields siphoned more money away from stocks.
The dollar took its cue from the bond market and fell against most other leading currencies, hurting dollar-denominated assets.


Simpson Defense Attacks Theory of Single Assailant
Offering an early outline of their defense, lawyers for O. J. Simpson argue in newly released court papers that it is unlikely that one person acting alone could have killed his former wife and her friend.
"The 'single assailant' theory is highly improbable in terms of the nature of the wounds inflicted and the positions of the victims' bodies," the lawyers argued in a motion released late Thursday.
The motion asks for dismissal of the murder charges against Mr.
Simpson.


Knicks Talk With Ron Harper
The Knicks have held several discussions with Ron Harper, the free-agent guard who played last season with the Los Angeles Clippers, but do not appear close to a deal and might wait until after Sept. 12 before making a move to sign him.
That's the date of a court hearing on the validity of A. C. Green's new contract with Phoenix.
The contract was voided by the National Basketball Association because Green left the Los Angeles Lakers as a free agent and signed a contract with a "one year and out option" similar to the deal involving Chris Dudley, who left the Nets and signed as a free agent with Portland.


Chronicle
YASIR ARAFAT, the Palestinian leader, and YITZHAK RABIN, the Prime Minister of Israel, have won the Prince of Asturias Peace Prize, awarded by Spain, The Associated Press reported.


Chronicle
PEDRAG NIKOLIC, the Bosnian grandmaster, was depressed about the future of chess yesterday after being defeated by a computer.
"It is a serious danger that computers will destroy this human pastime," Mr.
Nikolic said after his defeat in a speed chess event in London, Reuters reported.
"There is no harmony in the play of computers. Brute force will overtake human creativity. You cannot make a mistake."


Man Who Was Paid To Quit Swarthmore Won't Be Returning
The student who was paid by Swarthmore College to attend Boston University after a classmate accused him of harassment has refused Swarthmore's offer of readmission.
"He has decided to withdraw from the college," Davia Temin, a Swarthmore spokeswoman, said yesterday.


Serbs, Too, Suffered 'Ethnic Cleansing'
To the Editor:
Re "Bosnia's No-Win Vote" (Op-Ed, Aug. 27) by Kemal Kurspahic, Washington correspondent for the Bosnian newspaper Oslobodjenje:


'Flexible' Plant for Fast-Changing Chrysler
The Chrysler Corporation's assembly plant here, which has undergone a $300 million retooling in the last five months, exhibits the route Chrysler has traveled in pursuit of Japanese quality and productivity -- and the distance it still must travel to close the gap.
The plant, which was opened today for the inspection of journalists and politicians, will produce the Chrysler Cirrus and Dodge Stratus compact cars that Chrysler hopes will make inroads against competitors like the Toyota Camry, the Honda Accord and the Nissan Altima.
The Cirrus, with prices starting at nearly $18,000, will go on sale this month.
The Dodge Stratus will be introduced in January.


A Skillful Feat Saves Russia Space Station
With the future of Russia's space program resting in his hands, the commander of the orbiting Russian space station Mir manually docked with a cargo ship carrying supplies needed to keep the station operating.


Bridge; U.S. junior teams will face distractions next year: from Europe, the opponents, and Bali, the site.
In the past 45 years world championships have been played in some beautiful and exciting spots: New Orleans, Rio de Janeiro, Paris, Monte Carlo, Venice, and a tiny resort in the Italian Alps called St.
Vincent, for example.
But they will all be surpassed next year, when the World Junior Team Championship is held on the exotic island of Bali, Indonesia.
Two American 25-and-under teams have already qualified, and will face strong competition from Europe.
In July, 22 countries contested the European Junior Team Championship in Arnhem, the Netherlands, and the British team took the title.
Second and third were Denmark and Poland, who also qualified for Bali.


Corrections
A chart with an article in Business Day on Wednesday about Wall Street firms entering the corporate loan business misidentified a source for its data.
The source was the Loan Pricing Corporation, not the Loan Processing Corporation.


Fire in a Homeless Warren Disrupts Subway Line
A suspicious fire in a subway cable room in Chelsea, where a homeless person had broken in and set up Stygian housekeeping, forced authorities to shut down power on the Eighth Avenue line and reroute hundreds of trains for most of the morning yesterday in a chain reaction that affected more than 250,000 riders on the West Side of Manhattan.
It was not a major blaze as fires go -- no one was killed, only two people were felled by acrid smoke and damage was confined to the room beneath Eighth Avenue near 18th Street and its latticework of cables providing electricity for third-rail power, signals, communications and station and tunnel lights.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.76
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.54
4.53
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.82
4.78
3.02
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.16
5.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.45
5.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.29
8.27
6.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.34
5.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Police Find $125,000 in Duffel Bag in Cab
Two plainclothes police officers discovered at least $125,000 in a duffel bag in the back of a livery cab in Queens yesterday afternoon, the police said.
And since the two men who had been riding in the back of the cab insisted that the cash was not theirs, the police at the 115th Precinct in Jackson Heights are waiting to see who might claim it.


New Offerings Reach the Market
Elizabeth Bramwell ran the Gabelli Growth Fund from its inception until earlier this year, when she set up her own shop.
The first of her new funds, the Bramwell Growth Fund, looks for companies with new products or markets.
It invests mainly in common stock and convertible securities.
Up to 25 percent of the fund can be invested in foreign securities, including closed-end country funds.
Additional overseas exposure comes from investments in American companies with large revenues from abroad.
The fund has a long-term orientation, meaning that investors should plan to hold shares for at least three years.


Small Crowd at Belmont Opener Sees Drama Down Stretch
Belmont Park opened its fall racing season yesterday with lots of sunshine but not lots of people and with few signs that New York racing was healing its financial and political wounds.
The opening-day feature was a sizzler won in the last stride by the filly Saxuality, who poked her nose in front of Lady Affirmed after a driving duel to the wire.
No championship was at stake because these were second-tier 3-year-old fillies without Breeders' Cup pretensions.
The winner came from a bunched field of 11 and zipped one mile on firm grass in the snappy time of 1:34.


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 7


Purepac Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Bailey's Motivation Will Be on Display
When Carlton Bailey was benched this week in favor of linebacker Corey Widmer, he could have lashed out and made the situation worse.
But he didn't and he hasn't since.
He has handled the affair with dignity.
But that doesn't mean he's going to sit back and relax.
Bailey will quite simply try to win his job back on Sunday against Philadelphia.
Bailey and Widmer will both play at the middle linebacker spot with Widmer starting.
It's uncertain how the coaches will handle the situation, but Bailey said he had been told that the two would split time evenly.
"It's supposed to be 50-50," said Bailey.


Fast-Track the Metrocard
It seemed like such a great idea: Do away with bulky tokens and replace them with a plastic card that passengers could merely swipe through an electronic slot to enter the subway.
For the first buyers of the new Metrocards, though, they also brought frustration.
Zipping through the turnstile after buying the card, some unwary commuters who hadn't read the fine print on the posters imagined token-free futures.
On the ride back, they often found out differently.
The turnstiles in most subway stations still are not equipped to accept the Metrocard.
In its early days, the card could not be used even at huge stations like Herald Square.
Disgruntled riders, thinking they had beaten the token-window delay, found themselves waiting grumpily in long lines to buy the familiar little coins.
Now 69 out of the system's 469 stations accept the card, but the M.T.A. does not plan to open more until next spring, and the entire job is expected to take until 1997.


Notes on Bipartisanship
In the era of gridlock, there is a new Labor Day vacation ritual.
Whenever members of Congress go home to face the public, they raise a mighty, nostalgic hymn to the vanished era of bipartisanship.
It goes something like this.
Back in the halcyon days of Ike and L.B.J., each side fought its corner hard and fair.
Then, when the hour was late and the need was great, a critical centrist majority would come together to vote for the "good of the country."
Congressional back-benchers have always had a natural affinity for bipartisanship.
Many a mediocre career was sustained on platitudinous rumblings about politics "stopping at the water's edge" and "putting the needs of the people above party loyalty."


School Uniforms Growing in Favor in California
Surrounded by a sea of white shirts and navy blue shorts in a local department store's new section devoted to school uniforms, 7-year-old Sean Smith dangled his feet from a shopping cart and proudly puffed out his chest to display the Tasmanian devil emblazoned on his favorite T-shirt.
"I want to wear my own clothes," he said as his mother pulled a white shirt from the rows that lay before him.
"These clothes look weird. They're ugly."


Executive Changes
EQUICREDIT CORP.
Jacksonville, Fla., named Allen F. Tuthill senior vice president for wholesale originations.
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO.
Fairfield, Conn., named Mei-Wei Cheng president and chief executive of GE China.
The executive will be based in Beijing.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GE SILICONES, Waterford, N.Y., a division of GE Plastics, which is a subsidiary of General Electric Co., said it had acquired a majority interest in Tosil, its silicones joint venture with Toshiba Corp., Tokyo, the industrial and consumer electronics concern.
Terms were not disclosed.
OREGON STEEL MILLS INC., Portland, Ore., said it would build a $180 million combination mill and close an older plant in Fontana, Calif., resulting in the loss of about 100 jobs and a charge of about $14 million.


Anglers Ignore Hudson Warnings; Most Either Don't Know of Cancer Concern or Don't Care
Tommy Jackson has heard all the warnings against eating the striped bass, white perch and eel that he pulls from the PCB-polluted waters of the Hudson River.
And yet, seven days a week, he sits on a graffiti-scrawled cement block on this city's waterfront, fishing for his dinner.
Unemployed for five years, Mr.
Jackson, a thin and weathered man of 52, said he had little patience for state guidelines recommending that he eat no more than one meal a month of most of the fish he catches.


2 Brothers Held in Slaying of a Murder Suspect, 11
Two teen-age brothers, bright but troubled, according to their grade school basketball coach, were charged today in the slaying of an 11-year-old boy who himself was being sought by the police as a suspected killer.
Before the boy was killed, the police said, the brothers helped the 11-year-old, Robert Sandifer, elude the police for three days.
They all belonged to the same gang and moved Robert from "safe houses" to abandoned buildings until he was found dead early Thursday in an underpass less than a mile from his home in the Roseland neighborhood of the Far South Side.


Deal Openly With Racism in Subway Shooting; Police Dept. Spin
To the Editor:
The Times let itself get caught up in the publicity stunt that was apparently staged in Desmond Robinson's hospital room as the transit officer lay trying to recover from multiple gunshot wounds suffered at the hands of a white police officer who saw him as a black criminal.


Chronicle
The theft of a jug filled with change from a bagel shop in New Jersey caught the attention of PRESCOTT ROBERT TISCH and brought in $10,000 for a little boy with brain cancer.
"It was a series of coincidences," Mr.
Tisch said yesterday, "and I just tied it all together."


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Eagle Helps Albus Secure Seniors Lead  Jim Albus made a 12-foot eagle putt on the final hole yesterday for a six-under-par 66 and a one-stroke lead over Tony Jacklin in the G.T.E.
Northwest Classic in Kenmore, Wash.
Albus, a former club pro on Long Island and on Staten Island, is a two-time winner this season on the Senior PGA Tour.
He set up the eagle with a 330-yard drive and a 7-iron approach on the downhill 495-yard hole.
Arnold Palmer also had an eagle on the final hole yesterday, sinking a 50-foot putt, to finish his round of 70. (AP)


Courier Comeback Turns Into a Quick Ticket Back Home
More familiar faces and story lines, rapidly diminishing items, disappeared yesterday from the United States Open.
Chief among them were Jim Courier's comeback from an eyeblink of a self-imposed exile and Conchita Martinez's chance to chase Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario to a semifinal confrontation for the championship of Spain.
From top seed at the Open in 1993 to second-round loser, Courier continued his yearlong plunge when he was eliminated by the Italian clay-court specialist Andrea Gaudenzi, 7-5, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3.


Holiday on Monday
Labor Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Holiday schedule Traffic Alert MONDAY WEST INDIAN PARADE The following streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.: Buffalo Avenue between New York Avenue and Eastern Boulevard; Rochester Avenue between New York Avenue and Eastern Boulevard; Eastern Boulevard between Utica Avenue and Grand Army Plaza.
The parade begins at 11 A.M.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Job growth slackened as the nation's unemployment rate stood unchanged in August, at 6.1 percent.
The report confirmed a slowdown in the economy.
Only 179,000 new jobs were added to the payroll -- the smallest rise since January.
At the same time, the growth in factory and other jobs was sufficient to blunt concern that the economy was slowing too much.  [ Page 1. ]


For a Change, City Hall Thunder Isn't Talk


A Throng on the U.S.S. Ashland: Cubans en Route to Guantanamo


Schumann in the Afternoon, at Federal Hall
Concertgoers at loose ends during the lull between summer festivals and the start of the regular concert season could do worse than explore some of the byways of New York's musical life.
There is, for example, a series of free concerts at Federal Hall on Wednesday afternoons, presented by the American Landmark Festivals.
This week the recitalist was Zaidee Parkinson, who devoted herself fully to works of Schumann.
The rotunda of Federal Hall is not an ideal place for a piano recital.
All hard surfaces -- stone, concrete and glass -- the room is extremely reverberant.
When the music is dense and emotionally charged, as Schumann's often is, it can be difficult picking the notes out of the resonant cloud.


HUD to End Inquiries Into Protests of Its Proposals
The Department of Housing and Urban Development said today that it would no longer investigate people who fought its proposals with letter-writing, pamphleteering or other forms of peaceful protest.
The decision came in response to complaints from people opposed to projects in Berkeley, Calif., and Manhattan.
In both cases, HUD began investigations and ordered the protesters to turn over diaries, phone messages and other personal papers.
In Berkeley, the complaints were over a HUD proposal for housing for the poor.
The Manhattan case involved a proposed home for the mentally ill.


Verkhoyansk Journal; A Siberian Icebox That Holds a Thousand People
Summer can be stressful in the coldest place on earth: It becomes impossible to walk across the Yana River, which is frozen solid nine months a year.
Houses sometimes snap in two when the ice beneath them weakens and shifts a little.
Vodka prices soar.
On the other hand it takes only three days to dig a grave.
Frostbite is rare.
It's easier to hunt wild horses, reindeer and moose.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18  WIDE-RANGING POPULATION AGENDA  The Cairo population conference, which has stirred controversy over women's rights, will deal with other complex issues such as the rate of world population growth.  1  Zimbabwe, an exception in Africa, practices population control.  16


Welcome Business, Unwelcome Change
WHEN you ask people in Mystic what they want their community to look like 20 years from now, their answers go something like this: "More toward Nantucket than Coney Island." Or, "I don't want it to become the Southeastern Connecticut Gift Shop." While these descriptions may be imprecise, they show a concern for preserving the charm as Mystic grows as a tourist attraction.
Southeastern Connecticut, and Mystic with it, is certainly in a tourism boom.
This is the region that includes Ledyard, where Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo and Casino is situated; Montville, where the Mohegan Indians plan to open a gambling casino; Norwich, which recently became home to a minor league baseball team, and New London, which is being promoted for development as a vacation destination.
And so, Mystic Marinelife Aquarium and Mystic Seaport Museum plan to expand.
If the demand for tourist information is an accurate indicator, vacationers are reacting to southeastern Connecticut's attractions.
Connecticut's Mystic &amp; More, a travel promotion bureau, has had requests for 88,733 information packets this year, up 24 percent from the 1993 total, according to the bureau's chairwoman, Rita Schmidt.


Miami Sets Record With Rout at Home
Miami 56, Georgia Southern 0
The Miami Hurricanes won by 56-0 and improved to 58-0.
Miami, ranked No. 6 by The Associated Press, routed Georgia Southern to break a National Collegiate Athletic Association record yesterday with its 58th consecutive victory at the Orange Bowl.
The Hurricanes surpassed Alabama's record of 57 victories in a row at home set from 1962 to 1982.


When Things Go Wrong, Don't Wait: Drop a Dime
THIS is New York. Who expects everything to work right?
But if you feel overwhelmed by illegal dumping, double- and triple-parking, rats, spotty garbage collection, swarms of drug dealers or any other of a host of common annoyances, here are the places to complain.


Brooklyn Nurtures A New Seventh Avenue
FOR Woza Cephas, a Brooklyn designer, working in the fashion industry on Seventh Avenue in Manhattan was like being a sponge.
"I was soaking up an enormous amount of information but was not given the opportunity to put it back out there in my own voice," he said.
So in 1991, Mr.
Cephas left Manhattan to design and sell a line of clothing in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, where he lives.
He started out with millinery and later added women's apparel.
Mr.
Cephas is not the only black designer who has left Manhattan for Brooklyn.
In the last few years, designers like Dany, Cassandra Bromfield and Brenda Bunson-Bey have decided that their best chance for advancement is in Brooklyn.
Many of these designers have long worked in the industry and have heavy behind-the-scenes experience working with fashion's big names.


Fear and Pain in Haiti
The ordeal of a Haitian family whose members suffered brutal attacks is an example of human rights abuses in Haiti.
Family members are in hiding, and with only a small number of those approved for emigration making their way out, they say their hopes of escape are fading.
Article, page 18.


SUNDAY, September 4, 1994; Camp Lemonade Stand
The season is late summer.
Billy and Sue decide to sell lemonade in front of the house.
They measure out water and sugar.
They squeeze lemons.
They make a sign all by themselves and prop it up on a crate.
Or: They go to lemonade camp.
After all, without adequate training, without studying the cost of lemons and the principles of pricing and advertising, how are these kids going to make real money?


Rousing Rally by Syracuse Upstaged at End by Sooners
You should start off by knowing that Oklahoma beat Syracuse, 30-29, tonight on Scott Blanton's 48-yard field goal with 11 seconds left.
How the game got to that point is a stunning story, with enough momentum swings and heartbreak and heroics for an entire season.
This was the opening Saturday of the football season for both colleges and for the near-capacity crowd of 48,421 in the Carrier Dome.
Oklahoma, a 7 1/2-point favorite, seemed to have the game won, then lost, before it finally won.


Prevention, Not Punishment Is Best Cure For Stock Fraud
To the Editor:
Frauds of the magnitude of that allegedly committed by Joseph Jett at Kidder, Peabody continue to plague Wall Street because the control of corporate fraud has been the province of prosecutors and regulators, whose function is largely reactive.
Their work begins after the wrongdoing has occurred.
Their job is to punish the wrongdoers and seek compensation for the victims.


Chinatown's Power Lunch
EVERY New Yorker knows a place for lunch in Chinatown: a fancy spot that gives you more plates in one meal than you could possibly use in a week at home, or maybe a basement hole-in-the-wall that serves three dishes for $2.50.
But for the powerful of Chinatown -- garment factory owners, real-estate investors and aspiring political leaders -- the choice of restaurant is often the Pacifica at the Holiday Inn Downtown, 138 Lafayette Street (between Canal and Howard streets).


U.S. OFFICIALS SEE FEW ALTERNATIVES TO HAITI INVASION
As the United States moves down its checklist of military and diplomatic preparations for a possible invasion of Haiti, top Administration officials have concluded that the Haitian junta will not be scared into leaving by tough talk and economic sanctions.
Since the spring, United States policy toward Haiti has been driven as much by the hope that preparations for military action would persuade the ruling generals to step down as by the actual need to plan an invasion to restore the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


SUNDAY, September 4, 1994; Redneck Jokes on the Rise
Question: Is it O.K. to make fun of rednecks?
Clearly, blacks, Jews, homosexuals, women, Poles, Italians, American Indians, Latinos and Chicanos are out of bounds in civilized society.
But on some computer chat forums now, redneck jokes are all the rage.
Examples, drawn from America On-Line, include: You know you're a redneck . . . when your house has a flat tire; . . . if you have more fingers than teeth; . . . if your porch falls and kills more than three dogs.
Pretty funny, if you're not a redneck and you have a dental plan.


Nancy C. Maret, George Johnson
Nancy Carol Maret, a manager of data processing services for the New York Switch Corporation in Secaucus, N.J., which runs the automatic teller machine network known as NYCE, was married yesterday to George Johnson, an editor of the Week in Review section of The New York Times.
The Rev.
Jean Dix performed the ceremony at the Shelter Island Presbyterian Church on Shelter Island, L.I.
Ms.
Maret, 34, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Maret of East Moriches, L.I.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received a master's degree in information systems engineering from Polytechnic University in Hawthorne, N.Y.


Reducing Water Usage
THE right to an abundance of domestic water at little cost is something Americans have traditionally taken for granted, like free speech.
And they revel in the opportunity.
Several studies have shown that per capita water usage in the United States is higher than almost anywhere else in the world, with New York City, incidentally, near the top of the list.


Sports of The Times; Civility Is Alive and Well at the U.S. Open
THE greatest revelation of the first week of the United States Open does not concern charisma, or lack of it, in modern tennis.
Actually, I'm getting tired about gumming over that one.
No, the greatest revelation to me in the first six days is that when the weather is pleasant, the United States Open ain't such a bad place, after all.
This may not sound like much of a revelation, but we -- cumulatively, fans, players, press -- always approach the Open as if it were some kind of hellish two weeks, to be survived, or even ducked as quickly as possible, the way some seeded players seem to do.
But I'm coming to think that the general scorn for the Open is based upon our collective memories of hot, humid weather making us all a bit crazy, plus making the garbage stink.


Hotel Safety: Out in the Open
HOTEL detectives have emerged from behind the lobby palm.
In fact, security staff members are virtually on display these days as advertisements for hotels.
In a few years, the hotel-motel industry has reversed itself, from shunning the topic of protection against crime, lest it cause guests to worry, to talking about safety openly.
"Security is a big issue in the industry," said Lisa Garb, spokeswoman for Howard Johnson's.
"If it's not the top priority in guest surveys, it's the second."


Racquets Not Required
Women in tennis raise money for the Special Olympics, Bergdorf Goodman, Aug. 29.


Reaching for the Stars in the New Military
IN the 1960's, a hard-charging, freshly minted second lieutenant wanted to go to Southeast Asia to experience combat in the Vietnam War.
In 1990 and 1991, commanders turned away many young officers who volunteered for action in the Persian Gulf region.
For generations of American warriors, there has never been much of a question: the essence of soldiering is fighting and winning.
Officers have been willing, even eager, to put themselves in harm's way, because the surest route to high rank and regard has been to lead troops into battle.
But today, in the absence of old-fashioned wars with clearly defined front lines, soldiers who have toiled largely in anonymity are coming to the fore to deal with many non-traditional missions, from combatting drug dealers to pulling riot-control duty.
People mastering these skills can be well on their way to the general or admiral rank once largely reserved for the battlefield veterans.


Vivian C. Chen, Patrick J. Biggins
Vivian Cecily Chen, the daughter of Lina and Raymond T. Chen of Plainview, L.I., was married yesterday to Patrick Joseph Biggins, a son of Maureen and John J. Biggins of Walnut Creek, Calif.
Rabbi Michael Rosen performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Garden City Hotel in Garden City, L.I.
The bride, 32, is a special projects coordinator at Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, a New York law firm.
She graduated cum laude from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Her father is a senior vice president at the American International Life Assurance Company of New York.


Retooling Critical Theory: Buddy, Can You Paradigm?
STANLEY FISH, a well-known literary critic at Duke University, once published a book called "Is There a Text in This Class?" The title came from an actual question by an actual graduate student, who wondered if a trip to the bookstore was going to be necessary.
But the instructor mistakenly took it to be a query about intellectual ground rules, specifically if the class would subscribe to the doctrine, commonly held in the loftier realms of criticism, that literary texts are artificial, subjective constructs, and in an important sense do not "exist."
When graduate students return to campuses around the country this fall, they will be enrolling in classes with texts, in both senses of the word.
After a quarter-century in which it dominated the study of literary criticism, the trend called "theory" or "poststructuralism"-- catchall terms for approaches that concerned themselves not primarily with stories and poems and novels themselves, but with elevated cogitation about such matters as the nature of discourse -- is on the ebb.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
EAST MIDTOWN  $1 million
721 Fifth Avenue (56th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,477-sq.-ft. condo in an 11-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures, East River view; common charge $1,414; taxes $12,000, listed at $1.195 million, 1 1/2 years on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


Time Out for Two: A Lakeside Reverie
"WHAT will you do up there?" my father asked with concern.
I was headed for Lake George, a place I associated with stuffed moose heads and yellowed postcards of girls in fringed leather miniskirts stepping into birch-bark canoes.
My husband, Paul, wanted to sit in an Adirondack chair in the Adirondacks.


Stratford, Bridgeport And Sikorsky Airport
Carl Thompson's letter (Aug. 21) in response to your July 31 article on safety at Sikorsky Airport adds much heat but little light.
Three basic points need to be made:
*
For more than 80 years this airport has been there.
It is no recent imposition on an unwilling Stratford.
Indeed Stratford used to own it.


E. L. Horman, Thomas Paulson
Elizabeth Lee Horman, a daughter of Dr.
Marc J. Horman of Doylestown, Pa., and the late Joy Chernicoff Horman, was married last evening to Thomas Joseph Paulson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Paulson of Greenwich, Conn.
Mayor William Neis of Doylestown performed the ceremony at Spring Mill Manor in Ivyland, Pa.
Mrs.
Paulson, 28, is also the stepdaughter of Elizabeth M. Horman.
The bride is a social worker at the New York University Medical Center.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a pulmonary and critical-care physician at Abington (Pa.) Memorial Hospital.


Compromise Prevails for Parade on Eve of Rosh Ha-Shanah
Throughout the week, the streets of Crown Heights were in a giddy frenzy as organizers of the West Indian-American Day Parade hammered away at the floats and stitched together elaborate costumes.
Construction workers were busy cementing marble tiles on the steps of the Lubavitcher headquarters at 770 Eastern Parkway.
Hasidic men and women hustled to supermarkets, making preparation to celebrate Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year.


Cheryl H. Cottrol And Paul Brown
Dr.
Cheryl Henrietta Cottrol, a psychiatrist in New York, was married yesterday to Paul Augustus Brown, an engineer and machine designer at Lors Machinery in Union, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gilbert Caldwell performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's United Methodist Church in New York.
The bride, who is also an assistant professor of psychiatry at Yale University School of Medicine in New Haven, graduated from Yale and received her medical degree from the State University's Upstate Medical Center in Syracuse.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Cottrol of New York.
Her father, now retired, was a managing editor of The Amsterdam News in New York.
Her mother, Jewel G. Cottrol, retired as an administrative assistant at the Board of Global Ministries of the United Methodist Church in New York.


What 2.5 Million Jobs?
To the Editor:
I wish Robert Reich would tell us where he gets the 2.5 million new jobs figure (Op-Ed, Aug. 31).
Are those more minimum-wage jobs like the 400,000 that President Clinton is fond of quoting?
Those of us who run businesses don't see where all these new jobs are.
What we do see is a continuous and persistent dismantling of the middle class.


Russia Warns Clinton Not to Allow Bosnia Arms
In a new sign of division over the path to peace in Bosnia, Russia has issued a strong private message to President Clinton warning him not to lift the arms embargo against the Bosnian Government, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Clinton said last month that he would press for a lifting of the embargo if the Bosnian Serbs had not accepted a peace settlement drafted by the Western allies and Russia by Oct. 15.
The embargo bars arms shipments to all sides in the conflict, but hurts the Bosnian Government most because the Bosnian Serbs are much better armed.


Shades of an Era Before Solid State
To the Editor:
After reading Hans Fantel's article "The American Audio Industry Seems to Come Full Circle"  [ Aug. 7 ] ,I passed a warehouse on Ninth Avenue at 13th Street in Manhattan.
On the south side of the building is an advertisement for a company familiar to early audiophiles.
The name Bogen is barely visible, the paint on the bricks having almost completely faded away, just like so many of the pioneers that brought high-fidelity and stereophonic sound.


Cherubs Who Dance In Germany
OTTOBEUREN, a small spa town at the western edge of Bavaria amid the bucolic sights and smells of the pastures and grain fields of the Allgau region, is the last place one would expect to find the biggest and most sumptuous Baroque church in Germany.
As one comes from Memmingen and crests the hill in the center of town there suddenly looms the green and off-white mass of the abbey, a Benedictine monastery church with two flattened onion-dome towers rising 269 feet.


U.S. Broadcasts Keep Cubans Posted in Crisis; Far From a Failure
To the Editor:
"It should be clear after 35 years to Fidel Castro and his Government that the way he has been managing the affairs of the island is a failure" -- Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff (news article, Aug. 25).
In the last 35 years, Cuba has achieved universal health care, something the United States has been unable, or unwilling, to do.
It has a higher literacy rate (near 100 percent) and a lower infant mortality rate than many places in the United States.
A larger percentage of its population graduates from college.
There is no problem of homelessness in Cuba.
Until recently, everyone received basic goods and services, although there have never been many luxuries.
Now everyone suffers the same hardships, although priority is given to the care of infants and pregnant women, the elderly and the sick.


Which Version Do You Prefer?
THE STORIES OF STEPHEN DIXON By Stephen Dixon. 642 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.


Easy-to-Pit Plums Make Tasty Seasonal Treats
WEEKS before the geese start to gather and fly off in formation, little purple freestone plums appear in the market.
Then you know summer has passed its peak.
These plums, often called prune plums or Italian prunes, available during August and much of September, bridge the gap between summer and fall.
Unlike most plums, which are best eaten raw, these are better cooked.
And they are the most convenient to use for cooking because the pits can be removed so easily.


Leslie Lucchina, Thomas MacGillivray
Dr.
Leslie Caroline Lucchina, a resident in dermatology at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, is to be married today to Dr.
Thomas Edward MacGillivray, a resident in general surgery at the hospital.
The Rev.
Gerard L. Dorgan is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary of the Annunciation Church in Danvers, Mass.
The bride, 31, graduated cum laude from the University of Vermont, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she received her medical degree.
She is a daughter of Claire P. Lucchina of Barre, Vt. and the late Dr.
George G. Lucchina.
Her father, an internist, was a United States Navy flight surgeon assigned to the Mercury program at NASA.
Her mother is a registered nurse in the Orange County school district in Vermont.


Canine vs. Ovine


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Thalia Theater on the Upper West Side incorrectly described the reason for its closing.
Fine Line Features, which had been leasing the theater, decided not to renew an option to show films there.
It did not "back out."


Black-Eyed Susans in May? (Who Wrote This Script?)
REMEMBER THAT MOMENT IN "Dr. Zhivago," long, long ago, when a seemingly endless winter of ice and snow and bitter winds is transformed into a sea of yellow daffodils?
Those were the days.
When film directors showed a little respect for the seasons.
When spring followed winter, and so on.
When they got the details right.
Like bare trees in winter.
And little green leaves in spring.
And big fat ones in summer.


Read The Fine Print
To the Editor:
Certain statements made by Paul Lazarus in your article about film production in Florida are misleading  [ "Miami, the Whatever-You-Care-to-Name It of Florida," Aug. 14 ] .
Mr.
Lazarus, a faculty member of the University of Miami, is quoted as saying, "Florida's right-to-work law allows union productions to hire non-union workers at a fraction of what they would be paid elsewhere."


Anna Delivers the Goods
LET 'EM EAT CAKE By Susan Jedren. 357 pp. New York: Pantheon Books.


The Lincoln Brigade
To the Editor:
Richard Gid Powers's review makes "The Odyssey of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade" sound well worth reading, but from close acquaintance with the Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, I question his reference to the "Old Leftists and die-hard Communists who retained control." Whatever may have been the case in the past, the present, ever-dwindling membership of the V.A.L.B. represents a variety of political viewpoints; the organization itself, none.
RING LARDNER JR.
Weston, Conn.


A in Sociology Earns An A at Belmont Park
For hunch players, just in time for going back to school, the Belmont Breeders' Cup was won yesterday by a horse named A in Sociology, a 4-year-old colt who is relentlessly earning an A in turf racing.
It was the fourth victory in seven starts on the grass this year for the colt, who is owned by Barbara Ronca and trained by Phil Johnson, and the 12th time in 17 starts that he ran in the money in the last three years.


'Sugar Babies' Hails Show Biz
EVER since "Sugar Babies" grew into a big-time hit on Broadway in 1979, producers have been cloning small-time burlesque revues with an emphasis on pranksters and punsters of the prurient kind and pulchritudinous (as opposed to sophisticated) ladies.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PSYCHOLOGICAL SUSPENSE  ACTS OF LOVE  By Emily Listfield. Viking, $21.95.


Modern Italian, in Sync With the 90's
AT Cottabella Ristorante, Italy meets California.
This Port Washington newcomer calls its food modern Italian.
Whatever the label, its light, heart-healthy fare is in sync with the 1990's.
Exciting salads dominate the appetizer roster.
Pastas often star vegetables and seafood.
Entrees are led by grilled chicken breast topped with tricolor salad, veal cutlets with asparagus, roasted peppers and sun-dried tomatoes and swordfish with a spicy mango, melon and red pepper salsa.


U.S. Aides Protest General's Meeting With Serb
A meeting last week in which a high-ranking American general drank wine and jokingly exchanged caps with the military commander of the Bosnian Serbs, who has been accused of war crimes, has led to an angry protest by officials at the State Department.
Defense Department officials said there were sharp exchanges among American officials before and after the meeting last Saturday between Lieut.
Gen.
Wesley K. Clark, director of strategic plans and policy for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Gen.
Ratko Mladic at the Bosnian Serb's regional command headquarters in the northern Bosnian city of Banja Luka.


What Makes Us Angry? How Queens Defines the 'Quality of Life'
THE "quality of life," this season's municipal mantra, means different things to different people.
A month ago, The City surveyed Manhattan, interviewing dozens of residents, merchants, police officers and district managers of community boards to seek examples of quality of life issues.
A journey through Queens reveals similar psychic desires, for order, cleanliness and a nonviolent environment.
But the decidedly unscientific survey shows some different emphases, in some cases reflecting immigration -- overcrowded houses, and auto shops turning up on residential blocks.
In addition, livery cabs triple-parked outside their bases are grating nerves.
Illegal dumping is prevalent.
East Queens, partly suburban, has beefs, but the west can list more.
Soon, The City will look at Brooklyn and The Bronx.
ASTORIA HEIGHTS, ASTORIA LONG ISLAND CITY 1.
AIRPLANE NOISE Especially heavy in bad weather when incoming-flight path over Astoria Heights is used more. 2.
NOISE Comes from heavy traffic from trucks headed to Triborough Bridge. 3.
AUTO THEFTS AND BREAK-INS A major concern.
Many residents have taken radios out of their cars. 4.
ILLEGAL DUMPING The lot under the Hell Gate Bridge, like most deserted areas, is a dumping spot. 5.
HOMELESS ENCLAVES Homeless people congregate, and live in, parks under the Triborough Bridge, making families in area uneasy.
There are sanitation problems, too. 6-7.
LIVERY CABS On Steinway Street and 23d Avenue and Broadway and 37th Street, livery cabs double-park and triple-park, tying up traffic and blocking access to sidewalks and crosswalks. 8.
GRAFFITI Buildings along the 31st Street elevated subway tracks -- from Ditmars Boulevard to Queens Plaza -- are covered with bright-colored graffiti, although a cleanup program involving youthful offenders is having an effect. 9.
PROSTITUTION Streetwalkers congregate in the area around Jackson Avenue and 23d Street. 10-12.
ILLEGAL DUMPING In July, a trailer was found with tons of rancid meat at (10) 48th Street and Barnett Avenue.
Other dumping spots include (11) Skillman Avenue from 35th to 39th Street and (12) the Queens-Midtown Expressway from 42d to 48th Street. 13.
WINDOW WASHERS A persistent problem at 31st Street and Bridge Plaza North and South, although enforcement efforts are thinning the ranks. 14.
NOISE Loiterers play loud radios at 43d Avenue and 43d Street. 15.
EYESORES At Greenpoint Avenue near Queens Boulevard merchants display their wares too far into the sidewalk.
Some residents complain about flashy signs on the street and banners hung across the avenue.
16. LIVERY CABS At Jackson Avenue and 23d Street, livery cabs double- and triple-park.
17.
CRIME Residents of the Queensbridge Houses, a project, complain of drug sales, periodic gunshots and loitering.
JACKSON HEIGHTS, WOODSIDE, SUNNYSIDE, CORONA, ELMHURST 18.
AUTO THEFTS AND BREAK-INS Quiet, tree-lined streets between Northern Boulevard and 37th Avenue are a hunting ground for thieves. 19.
CROWDING One- and two-family houses are being used by more families than the legal limit, leading to sanitation problems and increased demands on police and fire services. 20-21-22.
LIVERY CABS Livery cabs double and triple park on (20) 74th Street and Broadway; (21) 90th Street and Astoria Boulevard, and (22) 92d Street and 34th Avenue. 23.
PARKS Water fountains don't work at Travers Park, at 78th Street and 34th Avenue.
Unleashed dogs and vandalism at others. 24.
DRUGS A problem along Roosevelt Avenue between 79th and 83d Streets. 25.
PROSTITUTION Brothels above commercial establishments are prevalent along Roosevelt Avenue in the 80's and 90's. 26.
STOLEN TRASH BASKETS A big problem around Roosevelt Avenue and 61st Street where heavier pedestrian traffic over the years has meant more litter.
"Even if we put them chained to a pole they disappear," says Dolores Rosado, district manager of Community Board 2. 27.
DRUGS Street sales are a continuing problem, especially around 64th Street and Broadway. 28.
DRUGS Outdoor and indoor drug sales are prevelant.
A major outdoor spot is at 105th and 106th Streets and Northern Boulevard.
Police say livery cabs are being used to pickup and deliver drugs. 29.
ILLEGAL DUMPING Tires and other trash are regularly dumped along the Long Island Rail Road trestle from 97th Place to 104th Street. 30.
DRUGS Drugs and food stamps are sold in park at 76th Street and Broadway. 31.
HOMELESS ENCLAVES Homeless people congregate in park, and on Broadway from 74th to 76th Street. 32.
LIVERY CABS They double- and triple-park, causing congestion.
FOREST HILLS, KEW GARDENS and REGO PARK. 33.
RATS The problem, in the Veterans Memorial Park at Queens Borough Hall, is caused by longtime renovation at the court complex at Queens Boulevard and the Van Wyck Expressway. 34-35-36.
GARBAGE A big concern on the Queens Boulevard commercial stretch, particularly at the (34) 63d Drive, (35)71st Avenue intersections and (36) on Austin Street. 37.
CRIME Burglaries in residences in Forest Hills and Rego Park are a major concern.
NORTHEAST QUEENS 38.
TRAFFIC Congestion in area of Main Street and Roosevelt Avenue is a nightmare. 39.
CROWDING Families crowded into one- and two-family housing are putting a strain on services. 40.
GRAFFITI Commercial buildings are the chief target.
Storekeepers say they fight a constant battle to keep their buildings clean. 41.
AIRPLANE NOISE Source: La Guardia. 42.
TRAFFIC Congestion plagues Northern Boulevard from Utopia Parkway to the city line. 43-44.
ILLEGAL DUMPING Mattresses and other trash are dumped regularly at Bell Boulevard and the Grand Central Parkway (43) and along the Long Island Expressway. (44) 45.
ILLEGAL DUMPING Vacant lots and industrial strips are a prime ground for dumpers. 46.
AIRPLANE NOISE Source: La Guardia. 47.
AIRPLANE NOISE Source: La Guardia 48.
AUTO THEFT Big problem due in part, to the proximity to major highways which offer thieves easy flight. 49.
CROWDING St.
John's University and Queens College create needs for student housing, which is often met by illegal basement apartments.
Puts drain on services. 50.
NOISE Motorcycles roar through quiet, winding streets.
SOUTHWEST QUEENS 51.
CROWDING Many families crowd into one and two-family houses. 52.
PARKING Commercial vans park illegally next to fire hydrants and block driveways. 53.
CRIME Residents of Jamaica Avenue in the 70's, near Brooklyn, are concerned about street crime and muggings. 54.
AIRPLANE NOISE From Kennedy International Airport.
"You either do lip reading or you don't know what people are saying in your house," says Anne Grossberg, district manager of Community Board 10. 55.
ILLEGAL USE OF PROPERTY People set up auto shops in their front and back yards. 56.
ILLEGAL DUMPING Trash, tires and furniture end up at site at 81st Street and Linden Boulevard. 57.
LIVERY CABS They double- and triple-park at Lefferts Boulevard and 115th Avenue.
ROCKAWAYS 58.
DRUGS Large marijuana market along Beach 15th Street. 59.
ILLEGAL DUMPING A huge problem because of the large number of empty lots. 60.
TRASH Pickup slacks off during the winter, and fierce winds rip across the peninsula and scatter trash. 61.
NO YOUTH ACTIVITIES No bowling alleys or large recreation centers, leading to hanging out on the boardwalk.
SOUTHEAST QUEENS 62.
ILLEGAL DUMPING A big eyesore at Montauk Street and Murdoch Avenue. 63.
TRUANTS They regularly gather at the Jamaica Mall area of 165th Street, causing concern among merchants. 64.
POTHOLES A big problem, but many residents say they understand because of last winter's severity. 65.
ILLEGAL USE OF PROPERTY People set up auto shops in their front and back yards. 66-67.
DRUGS There are many drug-selling sites.
Two mentioned prominently are (66) 169th Street and Hillside Avenue, near the IND subway station, and the (67) Baisley Park Houses at Guy Brewer Boulevard and Foch Avenue. 68.
DRUGS Drug sales are prevalent along Jamaica Avenue, between 123d and 129th Streets. 69-70.
ILLEGAL DUMPING Furniture, garbage and tires are dumped at (69) 92d Avenue and 103d Street and (70) along 92d Avenue near the Long Island Rail Road tracks. 71.
TREES People complain that trees aren't pruned enough.


A User's Guide To Making A Monument
THE SCULPTOR JUDITH SHEA concerns herself with what she calls the "shadows of our culture," aspects of the American experience that she thinks receive too little attention.
Last year, the centerpiece at a show of her work at the Max Protech Gallery was a giant refutation of heroics, an equestrian statue of a nude man titled "No More Monument."
On Aug. 24, at the entrance to Central Park at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street, she oversaw the installation of "The Other Monument," an equestrian statue of a black man, as a counterweight to Augustus Saint-Gaudens's bright equestrian statue of William Tecumseh Sherman a few paces beyond.
The work reflects the "dark side" of the Civil War, providing a monument that was missing, says Ms.
Shea.


Kids Just Want to Have Fun, Don't They?
To the Editor:
As a former child, I'm just amazed that anyone expects children to enjoy such preachy and manipulative television programs as the tale of how Kiki Flores learned not to be ashamed of her Mexican accent because "we're living in a very small world. We've got to learn to understand one another" ("A Children's TV Production Company Grows Up," Aug. 21).


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 4, 1994  Weeks This Last On Week Week&gt; List Nonfiction  1 7 FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.   2 10 WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.   3 3 NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.   4 21 CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.   5 29 THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) An 11-year-old boy has a deadly secret.   6 2 GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.   7 3 LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.   8 12 THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.   9 11 A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.   10 2 THE WYNDHAM LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) In Regency England, a demanding earl and a serene duchess cope with life together.   11 1 SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.   12 1 THUNDER POINT, by Jack Higgins. (Berkley, $5.99.) The discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War II scandals that could embarrass the British.   13 6 POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother and daughter win $60 million.   14 104 A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during a murder trial in rural Mississippi.   15 1 GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) Romance between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large hotel chain.    Weeks This Last On Week Week&gt; List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous  1 34 CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.   2 565 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) Witticisms by a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
2
181
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
43
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice for parents-to-be.
4
14
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 20, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


A Volunteer for Campaign To Save Paradise Theater
To the Editor:
I couldn't help but be moved by the plight of the Loew's Paradise Theater in Fordham, described in the July 31 article, "Campaign for the Paradise Tries to Save the Inside, Too." The very idea that it might be turned into a shopping center!


If You're Thinking of Living In/The Flatiron District; A Neighborhood Bulging at the Edges
ON any weekday in the Flatiron District of downtown Manhattan, cement mixers grind, jackhammers bang and workmen chip away at generations of rust and neglect from scaffolds along the Avenue of the Americas.
This is one of the most dynamic and changing neighborhoods in New York City, one in which even the boundaries seem to move.
Three years ago residents considered the district to be 14th to 23d Streets and Broadway to Avenue of the Americas; the newly formed Flatiron District Business Association now defines the east-west borders as Seventh Avenue and Park Avenue South, an expansion of about 25 percent.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
Tamika Young, on the cover of your magazine, looks jaunty and self-assured in her bandanna and beads.
But the picture belies the horrible existence of this young woman and her friends.
Is this what our government social programs have done for us?


Mavericks Enlist Kidd With 9-Year Pact
The Dallas Mavericks signed guard JASON KIDD yesterday to a nine-year contract reportedly worth some $60 million.
The team declined to release the contract's worth, but The Dallas Morning News, quoting an unnamed source, said the discussions centered on a $60 million package.
The Mavericks said the contract forced them to renounce their rights to the unrestricted free agents TONY CAMPBELL, FAT LEVER and RANDY WHITE.
The club will be prohibited from re-signing the three until the 57th day of the season.
The 6-foot-4-inch Kidd, 21, was selected second over all in the N.B.A. draft last June after his sophomore year at California. (AP)


The Mellowing of a Gay Punk Rebel
WHEN Tom Robinson was an openly gay punk rock rebel in the late 1970's, he had no idea that a decade and a half later he would be extolling the satisfactions of fatherhood and a long-term relationship with a woman he refers to as his partner.
"In 1977 it really did feel that the world would end or change," the English singer and songwriter recalls.
"The winter of '79 seemed so far into the future to me that it was unimaginable."


Where Culinary Art Is Thriving, Too
AMSTERDAM'S GRAND BAR AND ROTISSERIE * (212) 925-6166; 454 Broadway, at Grand Street; $; all major credit cards
This downtown branch of the original Amsterdam's on the Upper West Side is a big expanse with a long handsome bar on one side and an open rotisserie grill faced in crisp black and white ceramic tile on the other.
It is a good and friendly spot for a casual meal.
Recommended dishes include the charcoal-grilled hamburger dressed with a caper-mustard sauce and accompanied by french fries; rotisserie-broiled chicken; roasted salmon salad with avocado-basil mayonnaise and buttered carrots, zucchini and tomatoes, and the grilled marinated loin of pork sandwich, which is served on country bread with a mustard dressing, garlic, roasted peppers and arugula.
To begin, try the pizzette with zucchini, roasted red peppers, prosciutto, mozzarella and tomato, or the fried calamari with a tomato and red pepper sauce. (Review: 11/1/85; revisited: 8/94)


AUG. 28-SEPT. 3: Egypt and Now Morocco; Another Arab State Warms To Israel; More May Follow
Recognizing that skepticism reigns among its people, Israel's Labor-led Government has used various arguments to drum up support for its self-rule agreement with the Palestinians.
One key point: it should be easier now to make peace with moderate Arab states.
That argument looked good last week when Israel and Morocco announced that they were on the path to diplomatic relations, starting with liaison offices to be set up soon in one another's country to handle economic and cultural relations.


Thames Cruises
To the Editor: To your list of Thames River cruises ("Boating in Big Ben's Shadow," July 10) add the boat from Kew Gardens to Westminster Pier.
After a day of tramping around the Royal Botanic Gardens, the 75-minute river cruise is a tonic for tootsies as well as a deliberately slow re-acclimation to the hubbub of London.
DENISE OUTLAW  Setauket, L.I.


Jennifer Bowman, Glover Lawrence
Jennifer Whyte Bowman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Bowman of Haddonfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Glover Harold Lawrence, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Abbott Lawrence 3d of Salem, Ore.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert L. Veon performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence, both 27, are studying for M.B.A. degrees at Stanford University.
She graduated cum laude from Smith College.
Her father is the executive vice president at Jackson-Cross Company, a commercial real estate brokerage in Philadelphia.


Joe Dowling Likes His Actors to Feel Free
WHEN BRIAN FRIEL'S "Philadelphia, Here I Come!" had its premiere in 1964 at the Gaiety Theater in Dublin, 16-year-old Joe Dowling saw the play 19 times.
"One day I went in and paid for seats for every night of the week," he recalls.
"The woman at the box office didn't know what hit her."
Since then, Mr.
Dowling has directed Mr.
Friel's "Faith Healer" and "Translations" at home in Ireland and abroad; he is currently mounting his third version of "Philadelphia, Here I Come!" The Roundabout Theater Company production is in previews at the Criterion Center on Broadway, where it opens on Thursday.


A Day in the Life: Soul Mates and Checkmates at Play
6 A.M.: The street lamps have not yet turned over their duty to the dawn.
John Moldonado, a homeless man, trudges over to 19 vacant chess tables in the southwest corner of Washington Square Park.
He unfurls a blanket on one bench and sets up the pieces on two tables.
This is his job: securing tables for Elias Zamora and Sweet Pea.
Whoever gets his pieces on the table first owns it for the day.
For this, Mr.
Moldonado gets $3 to $5 per table, more on weekends.
9:15 A.M.: A boom box plays classical music.
Half the tables are occupied.
The morning's topic: the previous day's slaying of a cherished neighborhood jeweler, who often fed the needy.
"He should die a slow death," Mr.
Moldonado says of the killer.


Funeral for Stagehand Gunned Down Outside NBC Studio


A Promise of New Life For the Ghost Buildings
To the Editor:
Some of the projects cited as ruins in the July 24 essay, "Save the Ghost Buildings," are in the process of renovation.
These great buildings will be returned to productive use by creative groups and individuals who refuse to discount New York's history in envisioning the city's future.


Q. &amp; A.
When A Sponsor Won't Sell Q My building was converted to cooperative ownership six years ago.
At the time, the sponsor told us he would sell his apartments.
To date he has not sold one.
Because he owns two-thirds of the units in the building, no bank will give a mortgage to a buyer.
The sponsor has a good positive cash flow from the building and has no intention of selling his units.
Meanwhile, I and other owners can't sell.
We're trapped.
Is there anything we can do to force him to sell some of his units?
Do we have legal recourse? . . .
Brant Thomas, Brooklyn.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
As a Latina New Yorker I am always glad to see your paper and your magazine focus on the lives of young people of color.
It is quite infrequent that the media, mainstream or otherwise, stop to listen to these young people tell their stories.
However, there were some things I did find fault with:


Winning Is No. 1
To the Sports Editor:
William Rhoden's "Blacks No Longer Face Physical Fences, but Barriers Still Exist," (The Times, Aug. 28), about barriers for blacks in college football, told the inspiring story of Prentice Gautt's career in the game and then descended into illogic that is offensive to all races.
Pieties aside, the purpose of college football players, coaches and administrative staff is to win games.


Cheers for Migne the Mogul
To the Editor:
While "rascal" today may constitute a compliment when applied to a publisher, I still would rush to Jacques-Paul Migne's defense, since Steven Epstein's review of R. Howard Bloch's biography of Migne (Aug. 14) will be all that many readers ever know about him.


At 80, Freddie Franklin Is Still Whizzing Around
AGNES DE MILLE ONCE SAID that with the exception of the great choreographer and character dancer Leonide Massine, Frederic Franklin has "the most exact sense of timing of any man in the dance world." That's probably still true.
The British-born Mr.
Franklin, who turned 80 this summer, performed a mind-boggling assortment of roles during his long stage career.
He continues to whiz about, reviving works and sharing his knowledge.


Caroline Schmidt, David E. Coats
Caroline Ann Schmidt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Schmidt of Bellerose Village, L.I., is to be married today to David Edward Coats, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred C. Coats of Houston.
The Rev.
Canon F. Anthony Cayless is to perform the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I.
The bride graduated cum laude from Duke University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of California at Los Angeles.
She expects to begin work this month as an associate for Coopers &amp; Lybrand Consulting, in Boston.


Drug Agents See Shift in Trafficking in Speed
The clandestine production of methamphetamine, or speed, is nothing new in California.
But what has changed is who is cooking up and selling the drug, a crystalline powder.
What was once the nearly unchallenged province of motorcycle gangs like the Hell's Angels has been taken over by well-organized Mexican syndicates, state and Federal officials say.


Woman Of Year Award For Two
IN a ceremony that attracted a veritable who's who of the county's female political leaders, two women -- Charlotte Watson, executive director of My Sister's Place, a shelter for battered women, and Elinor Drachman Helfman, a lawyer known for her advocacy of women's rights -- were honored as co-recipients of the Westchester Woman of the Year award.
A Different Start, a program in Yonkers that is dedicated to helping teen-age mothers and their children, was named Project of the Year.





WESTCHESTER GUIDE
M*A*S*H REDUX
The Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck inaugurates its second season of play readings with a new version of MASH, to be performed on Friday at 8 P.M.
Four new plays and musicals will be presented during the fall season, produced by Lester Osterman and directed by Mark S. Graham.
David Rogers is the author of this newest reincarnation of Richard Hooker's original book chronicling the antics of the 4077th Army Medical Unit during the Korean War.
Hawkeye Pierce and Trapper John are still the pivotal characters.


Pressure-Treated Wood In Estuaries
In the July 10 article on the new restrictions by New Jersey on pressure-treated wood in estuaries, there is a quotation from Victor Lindenheim of the American Wood Preservers Institute criticizing our research on the toxicity of the product.
Mr.
Lindenheim is quoted as saying that the conclusions were based on laboratory studies in which the ratio of wood to water is very high, and unlike the natural environment.


Sanders Turns Down an Offer by Saints
The New Orleans Saints offered DEION SANDERS more money than any other team, but he turned the offer down because it wasn't guaranteed, the team's executive vice president, JIM MILLER, said yesterday.
"The deal was based on how many games he would play," Miller said.
"It made no sense to us to guarantee money, which they certainly had not been shy about asking for."


Anna M. Cathcart, Peter J. Harvey
Anna Morrow Cathcart, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul M. Cathcart of Katonah, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Peter Jairl Harvey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Mosby Harvey Jr. of Muscatine, Iowa.
The Rev.
James W. Crawford, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


Saving Boots: A Fat, Friendly, Old Dog Story
SUNDANCE the cat was dying over the Fourth of July weekend, which might have been why Carol Chesler stopped to pet a jolly, fat dog splayed out on the sidewalk in front of an auto body shop off Houston Street.
She is a cat person, not a dog person, but, as she says, "Who knows why we do things?"
She and a friend had just come back from a hike over the Brooklyn Bridge.
They began chatting with the people who ran the shop and found out that the dog had been abandoned by the shop's previous owners.
He was considerably overweight, a doughnut-eating dog, and his black fur was matted with dirt and paint.
But he wore a collar with a license number; someone, once, had cared.
He was very friendly, and whenever Ms.
Chesler and her friend stopped petting him, he would raise one white forepaw for a shake.
He knew how to work a crowd.
But the new owners had no interest in him.
Ms.
Chesler asked them to take care of the dog just until after the holiday, to give her time to make some calls.


Corvette Museum
On July 2, 1992, the Chevrolet assembly plant in Bowling Green, Ky., produced its one millionth Corvette.
That white convertible with a red interior is now on permanent display with 52 other Corvettes -- including an original model from 1953 -- at the new National Corvette Museum in Bowling Green.
Also on view is the 1990 ZR1 racing Corvette that set a world endurance record by going 175 miles an hour for 24 hours -- and the world's only Corvette with an aluminum body.
The museum is at 350 Corvette Drive; (502) 781-7973.


How the Serbs' Serb Began To Look Like a Diplomat
FOR Bozidar Babic, a designer of window displays here in Slobodan Milosevic's home town, it is quite clear: the Serbian president has become a traitor by abandoning his brother Serbs in Bosnia.
"What President Milosevic has done amounts to an act of treachery," Mr.
Babic said.
"He has committed high treason by suddenly turning on the Serbs he supported. I have always voted for him, but now I really don't know if I would again."


Frugal Travelers
To the Editor: Contrary to the impressions left by letters from Caroline Portnoy and Arthur L. Joselson (July 31), you have readers who enjoy adventures on a budget.
For some of us, there is a great distance between a room for $50 a night and one for $80; and, regardless of room cost, some of us prefer to carry our own suitcases and take the stairs rather than the elevator.
Please continue the "Frugal Traveler" series.
I am saving the articles and planning my trip.
Susan Spano understands how I like to travel.
CHRIS A. SUCZEK  Bellingham, Wash.


Jennifer Richards And Jamey Ballot
Jennifer Lynn Richards, the daughter of Mrs.
David M. Bryce of Frederick, Md., is to be married there today at the Ceresville Mansion to James Pulitzer Ballot, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Ballot of Waverly, Pa.
The Rev.
Ginger Memmott, a Presbyterian minister, is to perform the ceremony; Rabbi Reeve Brenner is to participate.
The bride, 27, is the publicity director at St.
Martin's Press, the New York book publisher.
She graduated cum laude from Syracuse University.
She is also the daughter of the late Robert B. Richards, a former insurance executive, and is the stepdaughter of Mr.
Bryce, a customer service planner at United Airlines in Washington.
Her mother, Diana Bryce, is a branch manager in Westminster, Md., for Legg Mason, a stockbrokerage.


Editorial Notebook; The End of 'the Movement'
How much influence would the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. wield today had he not been assassinated?
Not much, I suspect.
Dr.
King's moral authority rested upon the indisputable fact that African-Americans in the South were disfranchised by a white power structure that stopped at nothing to keep its power.
The savagery was evident on the evening news, as when children were set upon with dogs and water cannons in the streets of Birmingham.
The passing of racism's most visible forms -- and the corresponding rise of a black elite -- would have required Dr.
King to become more than just a champion of the African-American oppressed.
His condemnation of the Vietnam War foreshadowed what might have become a broader strategy.
So did his failed fair-housing campaign in Chicago in 1966.
There were no dogs and water cannons in Chicago to inspire public outrage.
Civil rights rhetoric by itself was no match for a patronage machine that could appear in blackface when it needed to.
Dr.
King's rallies were anemically attended.
The machine, with black underbosses like the legendary Congressman William Dawson, sent Dr.
King home defeated.


Melissa S. Lipow, Joshua H. Vinik
Melissa Susan Lipow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jason Lipow of Marlboro, N.J., is to be married today to Joshua H. Vinik, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Julius Vinik of Hartland Village, S.I.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik is to officiate at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
The bride, 30, is a system engineer at the Amdahl Corporation, a computer concern in East Brunswick, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from Clark University.
Her father retired as an assistant patent counsel for Johnson &amp; Johnson in New Brunswick, N.J., where her mother, Barbara Lipow, retired as an accountant.


The Ethics Impasse
President Clinton will be pushing "aggressively" for campaign finance and lobbying reform when Congress returns.
So said Tony Coelho, the former California Congressman turned New York investment banker who is now calling the shots at the Democratic National Committee, in a television interview last week.
As a House leader, Mr.
Coelho helped teach the Democrats how to harvest money from political action committees and resigned his seat in 1990 under a cloud caused by a questionable investment.
So he seems an unlikely choice to be speaking for the President on the stalled campaign finance and ethics legislation.
But given the dilatory performance of his President and the Democrats in Congress, help from any quarter is welcome.
Perhaps the energetic Mr.
Coelho can move Mr.
Clinton from crowd-pleasing talk to action.


Conversations: Norberto Fuentes; A Former Cheerleader of Revolution Looks Back in Indignation at Cuba
ALL of Norberto Fuentes's life has been a blend of politics, romanticism and literature.
The writer's departure from his native Cuba nine days ago was no different.
In the days when Cubans were fleeing by the thousands on homemade rafts, Mr.
Fuentes, who had once been a celebrated author and cheerleader for the revolution, found another way out.
Finally, in the 23d day of Mr.
Fuentes's hunger strike, President Fidel Castro said the writer, now one of his most prominent critics, could go.


School District That Still Isn't Ready for School
Brooklyn's largest school district, in such disarray three-and-a-half years ago that Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez seized control of it, is once again being ripped apart by school board politics.
One week before the start of the school year, a score of principal and supervisory jobs remain unfilled in the district, No. 17, and the board, which has failed to meet on a number of occasions, has not yet approved this year's school budget.


THIS BUD'S FOR YOU
MORE THAN A few eyebrows were raised in the world of gardening earlier this year when White Flower Farm, the tony Connecticut nursery, included a selection of annuals in its catalogue for the first time.
Anywhere else, an offering of annuals -- flowers that germinate, bloom, set seed and die in a single season -- would be unremarkable: in the average garden catalogue, you can hardly miss them, page upon page of stoplight-red salvias and sulfurous yellow marigolds.
But White Flower Farm's stately catalogue has always devoted itself exclusively to the most refined perennials, bulbs and shrubs -- horticulture's aristocrats.
Coming upon annuals in the pages of White Flower Farm is a little like finding Elmore Leonard in The New Yorker.
Considering the influence the firm exerts on garden taste in this country, you have to wonder if perhaps a revolution is in the making.
For more than a hundred years, annuals have lived on the wrong side of the tracks in American gardening.
Too gaudy in hue, too promiscuous in bloom and perhaps also too easy to grow, annuals have long been regarded as frivolous, low-rent flowers, the sort of thing planted by the sort of people who keep lawn ornaments in the front yard.
Certainly many crimes against taste have been committed with these particular weapons: think of the horticultural felonies perpetrated by ambitious gas station owners -- those discarded radials potted up with impatiens; the Shell logos outlined in marigolds -- or all those patriotic plantings (in red salvias, white petunias and blue lobelias) carved into the lawns in front of thousand-seat steak palaces.


Whitney St. John, James Fairchild
MANY people cite Whitney St.
John, 28, and James Fairchild, 38, as proof that style is not yet dead in New York City.
The two met at Ralph Lauren, where she is the fashion director for Ralph, the new lower-priced women's line, and he is the creative director for gentlemen's clothing.


Doctor Faults State Report On Faintings
The most seriously ill of several hospital workers who fainted after smelling mysterious fumes while treating a dying patient has criticized a new state study that said the cause of the mass fainting was shared stress.
The hospital worker, Dr.
Julie Gorchynski, who was bedridden for months after the bizarre incident on Feb. 19 and has had three operations to stem a bone disease that is destroying her knees, said today that the researchers for the state study did not interview her or review her medical records.


U.S. to Charter Boats and Jets if Hurricane Nears Guantanamo
The threat of seasonal hurricanes in the Caribbean has prompted American military planners to draft an emergency plan to shelter or evacuate tens of thousands of Cuban and Haitian refugees living in tent cities at the Guantanamo Bay naval base.
The base has room in hardened bunkers for 14,000 people, but 40,000 Cubans and Haitians will be detained there by the end of this weekend.
The Pentagon says the number could grow to 60,000 in the next few weeks.


Barnes &amp; Noble Strikes Again
Barnes &amp; Noble will open yet another superstore, its sixth in Manhattan, this time in midtown on the East Side.
The former Conran's space in the Citicorp building, on 53d Street and Third Avenue, will be the site of the two-story bookstore.
It is to open before the holiday season.


A FABLE FOR FLEAS
If introspection plays no role in scientific discovery, then how does Wade interpret the biographical record of Niels Bohr, which documents Bohrs's rich inner life and its influence on his discoveries and leadership in quantum physics?
If the roots of science are unilaterally empirical, how does Wade account for the conceptual development of quantum theory, traceable to the philosophical schools of logical positivism, pragmatism and even existentialism?


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Auto sales, August, millions, ann. rate
6.4
6.6
Wednesday
Wholesale sales, July, percent change
0.5
0.3
Nonfarm productivity, 2d qtr., final, pct. chg.
-1.2
-1.2
Consumer credit, July, change in billions
$10.9
$11.0
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
332
330
Friday
Producer prices, August, percent change
0.5
0.4
This Week's Numbers
Monday
Labor Day; no developments allowed
Tuesday
Senate returns from summer recess
Wednesday
House does likewise


Corrections
The What's Doing column on July 31, about Santa Fe, misstated the tribe of Helen Hardin, an artist, because of erroneous information from the Institute of American Indian Arts Museum, where her paintings are on exhibit until today.
She was a Santa Clara Pueblo Indian, not a Navajo.


Tomatostock


Raving Beauty
You're zaftig.
You're majestic.
No, you're comely -- make that haunting.
Maybe you'd be fetching if people still used the word.
Beauty is as fickle as what describes it.
Fair used to be popular.
Now it means stay out of the sun.
My grandmother was born when food was scarce and fat was beautiful.
Granny Ethel was a big woman.
This was said with awe and reverence.
Today, it's "body definition" that's dope, or fly, the hip-hop words for cool.
Did Scarlett O'Hara, with her 17-inch waist, have good abs?
Seeing Marilyn Monroe's soft, round arms, gym-hacks think, No bi's, no tri's.
Once she was drop-dead.
Gorgeous can be lethal: She took my breath away.
She was to die for.
A man-killer.
A knockout.
The living end.
Men have died for beauty since Helen of Troy.
But if she were alive today, we'd look at her and say: Who does she think she is?
Helen of Troy?
Beauty's shelf life lasts as long as a tweeze.
Frizzy hair, once a curse, is now pre-Raphaelite.
Gaptoothed, lopsided Lauren Hutton is quirky.
And Jackie Onassis' very particular looks -- a cross between the Statue of Liberty and Elvis -- are, for the moment, classic.
Elegant, noble, attractive, smart, earthy, divine, good-looking, radiant, ravishing, luscious, precious, dewy, bewitching, beguiling, entrancing, bold, boss.
World War II's swell and even good old lovely seem as dated as the Victrola.
Yesterday's gamin is today's waif.
A well-turned leg probably came in with the lathe.
Want to get arrested?
Call a woman cute.
Big lips are big.
Big lips are bad.
To make Emma Bovary relevant, Flaubert would have to call her bitchin'.
Irving Berlin would write "A Honey-Dip Is Like a Melody." And Ernest Hemingway would be powerfully influenced by "Wayne's World." In "The Sun Also Rises," he gave us one of fiction's great beauties, Lady Brett Ashley.
Hemingway called her a piece, a slang word for gun.
Men couldn't take their eyes off her.
Here's Jake Barnes watching Robert Cohn watch Lady Brett in Waynespeak: "She was foxy, Schwing!, a babe-a-licious robo-babe. The chick wore maximum grunge and her hair was brushed back like a boy's. She started all that. She was Ca-junga!, a babia majora, and you missed none of it with that wool jersey."


Melissa C. Thomas and Brian K. Hunt
Melissa Christian Thomas, the daughter of Eileen and Major E. Thomas Jr., is to be married today to Brian Kenneth Hunt, a son of Eveline and Kenneth E. Hunt of Detroit.
The Rev.
Salvatore Caputo, a Roman Catholic priest, is to officiate at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
The Rev.
Joe Louis Rempson, of interfaith fellowship, is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 26, graduated from Princeton University.
She is a doctoral candidate in organizational behavior at Northwestern University, from which the bridegroom received a master's degree in management.
Her father is the dean of continuing education, grants and development at Bronx Community College.
Her mother is a fieldwork adviser at the Bank Street College of Education in New York.


Cuba Calls U.S. Refugee Offer Inadequate
Cuba's chief negotiator in the immigration talks with the United States said yesterday that the Clinton Administration's offer to grant entry rights to at least 20,000 Cubans a year was inadequate.
He suggested that this amount would be too small to stop Cubans from setting out in rafts for Florida.
The negotiator, Ricardo Alarcon, said in an interview that his Government would like the United States to admit for a specific time, perhaps a year, all Cubans who have expressed interest in moving to the United States.


German Plan for Phased Union of Europe Provokes Controversy
Leaders of Germany's governing party have broken sharply with longstanding European policy by suggesting that a "hard core" of nations should move quickly toward integration and leave others to come along later at their own pace.
The proposal has provoked controversy within Germany and protests from other European countries.
Until now, the 12 nations of the European Union have sought to maintain at least public agreement on the principle that progress toward economic and political integration should come only at a pace which all could accept.
This week's proposal from Bonn was the first high-level challenge to that principle.


Wall Street; Merger Made in Heaven? For Now
IT WAS just hours after the engagement was announced, and the two executives conversed with all the deference and high hopes that are typical of the just-committed couple.
"We both offered to step down" as chief executive officer, said Norman Augustine, C.E.O. of Martin Marietta, in an interview on Tuesday.
Instead, an office of the chairman would be created to include both of them because, as every starry eyed couple can tell you, "two heads are better than one."
"If we don't (agree on things), Norm's the boss," offered Daniel Tellep, C.E.O. of Lockheed Corporation, which is merging with Mr.
Augustine's company.


The Lincoln Brigade
To the Editor:
I enjoyed reading Richard Gid Powers's review of Peter N. Carroll's "Odyssey of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade" (Aug. 7), the story of the 2,800 Americans (of whom I was one; I was the political commissar of the Canadian-American MacKenzie-Papineau Battalion of the XV Brigade in 1937 and 1938) who volunteered in the 1930's to defend the democratically elected Spanish Republic from the assault of fascist forces.


'Natural' Supermarket From Grains to Pizza
A FULL service natural-food supermarket has opened in Huntington.
Straight From the Heart, at 80 East Main Street (549-3750), which bills itself as "Long Island's largest natural market," is a combination market, health store, delicatessen and restaurant.
Its 7,000 square feet are crammed with everything organic, from produce to pizza, sauces, spices, grains, herbs and salads as well as hot and cold daily specials at eight tables in its tiny restaurant section.
This vegeterian nirvana, which replaces an auto parts store at this site, has a climate and humidity controlled grain room that protects bulk grains from rancidity and infestation.
Twenty-six organic coffees, as well as organic orzo, quinoa, granola, apple rings and dates, along with a myriad of other flours, wheats and grains can be purchased there in just the quantities home cooks need and no more.


Zimbabwe Taking a Lead In Promoting Birth Control
Part Avon Lady, part Dr.
Ruth, Maureen Dick works the African countryside, hut to hut, on her sturdy Government-issue bicycle.
In her knapsack she carries a blood-pressure gauge, a logbook, a supply of pills and condoms, and a seven-inch wooden penis for demonstration purposes.


2 Experts' Collectible-Car Picks
Each year, two experts on collectible cars, Dave Brownell and Rick Cole, put together lists of vintage automobilies that they think are good buys right now.
The collector-car market has been particularly hard hit in the last few years.
Prices had become overheated in the 1980's, driven up by speculators, and once the recession took hold the market deflated.
Amid the relatively good buys, which are the best of the good?
Mr.
Brownell, the editor of special Interest Autos magazine and Hemmings Motor News, a monthly compendium of ads for old cars, parts and services for collectors, has chosen some "sleepers" that could prove to be solid investments while providing some fun in the meantime.
Here are Mr. Borwnell's selections and comments:
1961-67 Lincoln Continental four-door convertible -- "Impeccably understated styling, constructed to nearly Rolls-Royce standards. Current asking prices range from around $2,000 for shaggy unrestored cars to about $17,000 for show-ready restorations. Buy the best one your budget allows because they are very complex and therefore expensive cars to restore."
1968-70 Dodge Charger R/T -- "A muscle car with some luxurious touches, as opposed to stripped-down corporate cousins like the Plymouth Road Runner." A partly restored '68 was offered in a recent Hemmings ad for $3,500, while on the same page a "recently restored" rust-free car from California, had an asking price of $8,000.
1961-73 Volvo P1800, 1800S, 1800E and 1800ES -- "Built mainly for style rather than speed, these handsome coupes and sport wagons were Volvo's flagship in the United States for a dozen years." Early models are somewhat underpowered and badly susceptible to rust, he said, and the 2-liter 1800E is known for fuel-injection problems.
Prices range from $4,500 to $11,500 depending on condition.
1973 Corvette L-48 -- "Offers impressive performance even when measured against today's cars. The big difference is that a good '73 L-48 convertible will cost about one-fifth the sticker of a new Vette drop-top." Cars with removable 'T-tops" cost even less than the convertibles. The average asking price for a ready-to-drive L-48 is about $12,000.
1969-73 Porsche 911T -- "These attractive coupes seem like a giveaway at around $10,000 for excellent examples. To be fair, the 911T is hardly perfect. Older Porsches are no stranger to rust, sometimes chronically so, and such cars should be strictly avoided because they cost the earth to restore.
Every year for the last 10 years, Mr.
Cole, a partner in the World Classic Auction and Exposition Company in Danville, Calif., has published his 'Gold List" of cars that he expects to appreciate significantly in the next five years. Here are his recent selections:
1972-74 BMW 3.0 CS Coupe -- Current value: $8,000 to $14,000.
Five-year projection: up to $25,000.
1940's woodie sedans and wagons -- Current value: $22,500 to $27,500.
Five-year projection: up to $35,000.
1951-62 Mercedes-Benz 300 sedan -- Current value: $8,000 to $15,000.
Five-year projection: up to $30,000.
1955-62 MGA 1500 and 1600 roadster -- Current value $8,000 to $12,000.
Five-year projection: up to $25,000.
1950--51 Mercury Monterey coupe -- Current value: $8,000 to $12,000.
Five-year projection: up to $20,000.
1961-67 Chevrolet Impala and Impala SS convertibles -- Current value: $10,000 to $15,000.
Five-year projection: up to $35,000.
1963-65 Alfa Romeo Giulie, Spider and Spider Veloce -- Current value: $13,000 to $16,000.
Five-year projection: up to $25,000.
1956-67 Volkswagen microbus -- Current value: $1,000 to $8,000.
Five-year projection: up to $25,000.
1969-71 Jaguar XKE roadster -- in average condition (to be driven rather than displayed at car shows).
Current value: $18,000 to $25,000.
Five-year projection: up to $35,000.
1959-64 Plymouth Fury and Sport Fury convertibles -- Current value: $8,000 to $16,000.
Five-year projection: up to $25,000.


For $64,000, What Is 'Fiction'?
GIVEN THE CONTESTS OF the 90's, with their spinning wheels and flashing boards, it seems amazing that for a brief time in the 1950's, what seemed like deep knowledge of serious subjects could lead to great wealth and celebrity.
An obscure graduate student from Queens named Herb Stempel, for example, briefly became about as celebrated as such contrasting heroes of the era as Elvis Presley and Willie Mays simply by answering questions: What was the name of the man who lent his horse to Paul Revere?
What was the horse's name?
What color was it?
The problem is, of course, that Herb Stempel probably did not know the answers to all those questions, even though, as he mopped his brow before millions of viewers, he offered a pretty good imitation of somebody who did.
And who, no matter how smart, could have known all the answers?
Richard McCutcheon, a uniformed captain in the Marines who was the first to win the top prize on "The $64,000 Question," correctly named the five dishes and two wines served in 1939 by King George VI to Albert Lebrun, the President of France.
Could anyone have got that one without coaching?


Agriculture Secretary's Position Was Misrepresented
To the Editor:
The article, "How Tyson Became the Chicken King" (Aug. 28), contained a reference to Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy that is completely unsubstantiated by the record.


'African Women'
To the Editor:
Veronica Chambers's review of my book "African Women" is riddled with misstatements of important facts.
Here are some of the most egregious.


For Sale: Wheels. Price: Negotiable. Apply at Your Local Mall.
On Saturday morning, Aug. 27, William Baggott of Babylon Village drove his shiny black 1983 Cadillac Seville to the Great South Bay Shopping Center on Montauk Highway.
Heading for the row of empty spaces closest to the entrance, he parked beneath a birch tree, near a Mercury Capri equipped with a new fuel pump, timing belt and transmission -- all for $395 -- and a white Camaro missing its passenger-side mirror.


The Local News According to Bob Harris
In the basement of his house in Fresh Meadows, Queens, eye deep in stacks of dusty files and newsletters, Bob Harris dips into a pile of newspaper clippings and lays them out on an ironing board.
On sheets of white paper, he creates a collage of headlines and text about the things that get him going, like the proliferation of X-rated clubs and the illegal conversion of single-family houses.
When he is finished, he will print up 400 copies of the eight-page newsletter and mail them to civic leaders and legislators.
In this largely middle class and largely white redoubt of Queens, Bob Harris sees himself as something of an Everyman; his wife and three children, Everyfamily.


Authenticity Is Not The End-All
To the Editor:
Although I agree with Richard Taruskin on many things, I do not accept that the movements of a polyphonic Mass-setting must become tediously repetitive if they are performed one after another in concert without their original liturgical breaks  [ "The Trouble With Classics: They Are Only Human," Aug. 14 ] .


Mid-Chicago Course
Golf may be the quintessential suburban experience, but not in Chicago.
This summer, the country's first center-city golf course opened in a former rail yard along Chicago's Lake Michigan shore, a short stroll from fashionable Michigan Avenue.
Golfers playing the nine-hole, par-27 course at Illinois Center Golf can gaze up from the fairway at Sears Tower, the John Hancock Building and, just across the street, the 80-story Amoco Building.
Less pleasant reminders of urban life are traffic sounds.
But the lush fairways -- and hidden sand traps -- are pure country club.
The course, at 221 North Columbus Drive, charges $22 to play nine holes.
Call (312) 616-1234.
TERRY TRUCCO


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SCIENCE  REINVENTING THE FUTURE  Conversations With  the World's Leading Scientists.
By Thomas A. Bass.
Addison-Wesley, $24.95.


The Lincoln Brigade
To the Editor:
Richard Gid Powers's review of "The Odyssey of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade," honest and objective as it was, leaves out some important elements.
The Communist International directed by Stalin established the role that all the international brigades (including the Abraham Lincoln Brigade) would play in the foreign policy strategy of the Soviet Union.
Basically this was to assume control of the Republican Government of Spain and to prevent any social revolution from occurring against the fascist forces of Franco.
Behind the lines, the Communists and the brigades they controlled progressively took power away from the militant Socialists led by Largo Caballero; assassinated Andres Nin, the leftist leader associated with the P.O.U.M., a truly revolutionary Marxist party; fought against the anarchists and their union, the C.N.T.; and prevented the enactment of a program that promised land to the Spanish peasants and freedom from Spanish colonialism over the Riffs.
Thus losing its popular appeal, the Spanish Republic fell to Franco.


Kids Just Want to Have Fun, Don't They?
To the Editor:
Your article clearly makes the point, whether intentionally or not, that the overriding objective of shows like "The Puzzleworks" has more to do with lucrative merchandising deals than any genuine concern for the intellectual well-being of children.
All of which makes particularly ironic the closing comment by Lancit Media's Cecily Truett that "to be able to make television that nutures kids' humanity is a wonderful way to make a living."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Warriors at Heart
ONE would expect an army-navy store to sell army and navy clothing.
But tanks, ambulances and jeeps?
So many military vehicles are parked in front of the new army-navy store in Bayport that customers have a hard time finding a place to park.
"Parking is a big problem," said George Homfeld, co-owner of the store, Military Connection Inc.
"So I took the ambulance with the Red Cross insignia home one day and parked it in my own driveway. But the neighbors complained. I live in a condo. So now I only bring home the jeep."


Paul C. Cabot, 95, Financial Strategist; Began Mutual Funds
Paul Codman Cabot, the founder of the country's first mutual fund and a former treasurer of Harvard University, died on Thursday at Deaconess-Glover Hospital in Needham, Mass.
He was 95 and lived in Needham.
Mr.
Cabot died of natural causes, said Theresa Poule of the J. S. Waterman and Sons Funeral Home in Wellesley, Mass.


Spiffy Gleanings From the Arcade
WHEN HE WAS GROWING up in the 1930's in East Liverpool, Ohio, James Smith 2d lived a trolley-car ride away from paradise: the Rock Springs amusement park in Chester, W. Va.
On family outings there twice a month when he was 6 or 7, he loved riding the Ferris wheel, listening to the oom-pah-pah of the carousel and eating cotton candy.
"As soon as I could sneak away from the adults," says Dr.
Smith, now a New York plastic surgeon, "I'd head for the penny arcade." As a teen-ager, he continued playing the coin-operated baseball and horse-racing games at the local pool hall.
"To my father," he recalls, "that was gambling -- outright sinning. So when I got caught, he read me the riot act."


Bozeman: Just No Comparison
To the Editor:
Ann Hornaday's article "If You Film It There, the Tourists Will Surely Come"  [ Aug. 14 ]  compares Winterset and Dyersville, Iowa, to Bozeman, Mont., as examples of "small towns that have served as locations for movies" and have prospered (or will) for that reason.


U.S. Broadcasts Keep Cubans Posted in Crisis; A Hypocritical Policy
To the Editor:
I'm dismayed by our increasing hostility to Cuba's Government.
We have tried to justify our embargo, which we have expanded to include foods and medicines, on the basis that we insist on greater democracy and civil rights there.
Yet our hypocrisy is exposed by the fact that we have had cordial relations for years with brutal military dictatorships in Guatemala, El Salvador, Chile under Augusto Pinochet, Nicaragua under Anastasio Somoza and Cuba under Fulgencio Batista.


CRIME
Fat chance of missing Stephanie Plum in ONE FOR THE MONEY (Scribners, $20).
A Jersey girl with Bette Midler's mouth and Cher's fashion sense -- big hair, gold hoop earrings, Spandex bike shorts, tons of turquoise eye shadow and attitude out to here -- Stephanie kind of glows in the dark in Janet Evanovich's hip-swinging genre debut.
Stephanie sashays into the crime-busting business when she is laid off as a discount lingerie buyer.
Reduced to cadging meals from her mother ("The urge to scream told me I was home"), she blackmails her cousin Vinnie for a job with his bail bonding company.
Her prey call her "the bounty hunter from hell," but she keeps losing her big prize, hunky Joe Morelli, a New Jersey vice cop who skipped out on a homicide rap the same way he skipped out on Stephanie after sweet-talking her out of her virginity when they were in high school.


Easy-to-Pit Plums Make Tasty Seasonal Treats
WEEKS before the geese start to gather and fly off in formation, little purple freestone plums appear in the market.
Then you know summer has passed its peak.
These plums, often called prune plums or Italian prunes, available during August and much of September, bridge the gap between summer and fall.
Unlike most plums, which are best eaten raw, these are better cooked.
And they are the most convenient to use for cooking because the pits can be removed so easily.


Karen K. Miller and Craig A. Bunnell
Dr.
Karen Klahr Miller, a daughter of Irene and Dr.
William Miller of Woodbridge, Conn., is to be married today to Dr.
Craig Alan Bunnell, a son of Doris and Hugh Bunnell of Lakewood, Colo.
Rabbi Albert Ginsburgh is to officiate at the summer house of the bride's parents in Rangeley, Me.
The bride, 34, is a resident in internal medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, where the bridegroom is a fellow in hematology and oncology.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her medical degree from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is a professor emeritus of ophthalmology and visual science at Yale, in New Haven.


Mating Patterns Among the Canids
The article "Coyotes Having Come East, What Now?" (Aug. 22) was excellent except for one point: a wildlife biologist with the state's Department of Environmental Protection was quoted as saying "Coyotes are not known to breed with dogs because of differences in biology; even if they did, their offspring would be sterile."
This is not true!
I repectfully refer the biologist to the textbook, "The Wild Canids" (M. W. Fox, editor, Krieger Publications) and Hope Ryden's book "God's Dog: The North American Coyote" (Lyons &amp; Burford Publishers).


A. W. Strawbridge And R. K. Maurer
Alexandra White Strawbridge, a daughter of Mrs.
Marcus W. Smith of Locust Valley, L.I., and Robert E. Strawbridge 3d of Jackson, Wyo., was married yesterday to Richard Karl Maurer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Maurer of Richmond.
The Rev.
Stephen Foote, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
James Church in Prouts Neck, Me.
The bride, 29, graduated from Lewis and Clark College and received a master's degree in acupuncture and Oriental medicine from the Oregon College of Oriental Medicine.
Her father is an investor in Jackson.


To Give Rats a Good Home, Step 1: Let 3 City Agencies Take Charge
Though she hardly ever speaks to them, Doris Boyette knows quite a lot about her neighbors in the building next door.
She knows, for example, which families have children, because they're the ones who throw dirty diapers out the window into the alleyway and cloistered backyard area between the two buildings.
She also knows what many of the tenants have for dinner, because they throw their leftovers and take-out containers out the windows, too.


M. N. Coffeen, Bruno J. Paganal
Myriamne Nicola Coffeen, the daughter of Drs.
David and Yola Coffeen of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday in New Rochelle, N.Y., to Bruno Johann Paganal, a son of Ferdinand and Rosmarie Paganal of Emmenbrucke, Switzerland.
Mayor Timothy Idoni of New Rochelle officiated at the home of Robert and Judith Bases, friends of the bride's parents.


Following the Fish Through Gateway to Raritan Bay
In June 1968, the spring of my junior year at college, I moved to a hippie farm in Pennington, N.J.
We listened a lot to "Street Fighting Man" by the Rolling Stones, waving our clenched fists defiantly as we mouthed the lyrics.
Ed Broderick was a holdover from the previous, non-hippie year at the farm.
I worked diligently to initiate Ed into the mysteries of the psychedelic Maoism, and Ed worked just as hard to introduce me to his lifelong passion, fishing.
Contrary to my collegiate expectations, fishing proved to be a more long-lived and useful ideology than the teachings of The Chairman.


Susan Schifano, Steven Peterson
Susan Marie Schifano, a daughter of Vincent and Dr.
Natalie Schifano of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to Steven Lloyd Peterson, the son of Alph and Ethel Peterson of Stuart, Fla.
The Rev.
Dale Lind performed the Lutheran ceremony at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
The bride, 28, graduated from the State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
She designs clothing for Wear 2B Seen, an apparel company in New York.
Her father is the president of Schifano Associates, a graphic design company in Dobbs Ferry.
Her mother is the district supervisor for the art program in the Lawrence, L.I., public schools.


Lunch Boxes We'll Probably Never See
IT'S back-to-school time, and young male and female minds are turning to thoughts of -- lunch.
Well, not just lunch.
In an awful lot of cases, lunch boxes.
For in the grade-school sensibility the lunch box is usually not just a utilitarian, portable food container but a reflection of one's identity -- and its selection is a precursor to such defining decisions in later life as, say, which kind of car one will drive or which designer kitchen gadget one will display but never use.
So the choice of lunch box is not made lightly (unless, that is, you have been fated to use a hand-me-down from an older sibling).


Pace University's Goldstein Center
To the Editor:
While your Posting on Aug. 7 reported accurately on the interior of Pace University's Ann and Alfred Goldstein Academic Center that we are building on our Pleasantville, N.Y., campus, the headline, "Offices and Lounges for Pace," gave the impression that it might be used for social activities as much as for serious scholarly pursuit.
This is certainly not the case.


Can Anyone Dash Past Dallas?
There are five new coaches, two new owners, a new batch of offensive rules and a new way of conducting business in the National Football League.
There are still other new faces in new places and a new television network to dispense the games.
One old story line, however, remains.
Can anyone catch the Dallas Cowboys? Literally.


Troubadours Of Fickle Time And Its Passing
AS THE REMNANTS OF TROPICAL Storm Beryl pelted Giants Stadium with buckets of rain a few weeks ago, turning the set into a slick, treacherous puddle, the Rolling Stones took the stage and broke into the familiar chords of "Not Fade Away," the Norman Petty-Charles Hardin standard they first recorded 31 years ago in England.
"I'm gonna tell you how it's gonna be," sang the 51-year-old Mick Jagger, as he swaggered across the stage, seemingly impervious to the rain and the passage of three decades.
"You're gonna give your love to me./ Love will last more than one day./ Well, love is love and not fade away . . ."
Like all their shows, the Rolling Stones' new "Voodoo Lounge" tour is a meticulously orchestrated spectacle: it has a surreal, futuristic set that looks like something out of Fritz Lang's "Metropolis," a phallic light tower that's part brontosaurus, part cobra; billboard-size video animations, lasers and 60-foot-tall inflatable dolls.
But while some of these elaborate special effects could not be used in the driving rain -- no giant Elvis balloon looming over the set, no fat Shiva god squatting on the deck -- no one in the New Jersey stadium seemed to notice.


Baseball's Next Stop: The Twilight Zone?
Now that a deadline has basically been established for the resumption of the season and the salvaging of the World Series, major league baseball is one step closer to finding out if there is any "there" there.
"There" is life after the strike-shattered 1994 season.
Baseball never has gone through a year without ending a season on the playing field so nobody knows what lies in the great beyond.
With the owners and players clinging rigidly to their bargaining positions, it looks as if they will find out.
From the looks of things, they will most likely find chaos.


Lake Champlain
About this time of year, inhabitants of more temperate climes start saying they miss the "seasons." For seasons, read "fall." There's something powerfully appealing about autumn, and perhaps nowhere is it so heightened -- the flagrant display of foliage, the nightly dip of temperatures, the acrid scent of wood smoke -- as in Vermont.
The interior of the state (denser in color-producing maples) probably rates higher on the ooh-ah foliage meter than does the Lake Champlain region (across the lake are the wild Adirondacks of New York).
But this area offers myriad attractions year-round, with events to lure those seeking autumnal delights.
Any vacation during this season involves a good dose of what Vermonters call "leaf peeping." The state's 24-hour Foliage Hotline (802) 828-3239, can help visitors draw a bead on peak color from Sept. 1 to Oct. 24.
For more information contact the Vermont Department of Travel and Tourism, 134 State Street, Montpelier, Vt. 05601-1471; (802) 828-3236 or (800) 837-6668.
Information is also available by fax: call (800) 833-9756 and follow the instructions.
Events
Harvest festivals and chicken-pie suppers are fall fund-raising staples for many small Vermont communities.
The best way to find them is to read local newspapers and look for notices in the windows of general stores.
The Vermont Department of Travel and Tourism also has listings.


Laura Z. Childress and Brack Hazen
Dr.
Laura Zue Childress, a daughter of Charles L. Childress of Florence, Ky., and the late Kathryn L. Childress, was married yesterday to Freeman Brackett Hazen 3d, the son of Mr.
Hazen Jr. of Pompano Beach, Fla., and Barbara S. Hazen of New York.
The Rev.
Leslie Heyboer performed the ceremony at St.
John's Unitarian Church in Cincinnati.
Dr.
Hazen, 31, is a resident in pathology at the University Hospital in Cincinnati.
She graduated cum laude from Thomas More College and received her M.D. degree from the University of Louisville.


For Many, a Small Comfort
Saying Japan must "look squarely" at its history, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama last week announced a plan to spend about $1 billion over 10 years to atone for Japan's aggression in World War II.
He cited in particular the forced recruitment of women throughout Asia to provide sex to Japanese soldiers.
With the 50th anniversary of its surrender coming next year, Japan is anxious to put the war behind it to improve relations with its Asian neighbors, to whom it is drawing closer economically.


Powlus Becomes A Power Name
At Notre Dame, legends are built quickly and then take off, usually at breakneck speed.
Ron Powlus's was hurtling ahead of him like a runaway train, fueled by great potential and a year of anticipation, and carrying with it all the usual expectations of national championship contention in the season ahead.
Clearly, Powlus had some serious catching up to do.


Harvesting Art, History and an Ear of Corn
WHY go to the country to see a corn patch when there's one waiting for you in Madison Square Park?
On Saturday, the corn patch, part of an artwork called "Circle of Hope," will be the scene of a public reception, complete with a corn-picking, in celebration of the harvest.


Gurus of Multimedia Gulch
When traditional publishers fret over losing young readers to new technologies, the periodical of their nightmares may look a lot like Substance, which calls itself a "digizine," or digital magazine, and appears on a CD-ROM.
Load Substance into a personal computer and an opening screen displays the word "Content," the letters slowly rotating like the spaceships in "2001: A Space Odyssey." Point with a mouse and click on a story about the industrial-noise band Nine Inch Nails.
Click again to hear a Q. and A. with the band's frontman, Trent Reznor, or cut away to watch his music videos, including "Happiness in Slavery," a depiction of a machine plucking at human flesh that was too graphic to be shown on MTV.


DEMOCRATS GLUM ABOUT PROSPECTS AS ELECTIONS NEAR
As they take to the stump this Labor Day weekend for the traditional opening of the fall campaigns, politicians of both parties share a like-minded view of the electoral landscape: The prospects for Democrats at all levels are bleak.
The only unknown is just how bleak.
Democrats held high hopes earlier this year that they could boast to the voters of a major overhaul in the health care system and maybe even the welfare system.
At the very least, they thought, they would be able to point to an economy on the mend.


SUNDAY, September 4, 1994; Slippery Slope in Yosemite
Had Abraham Lincoln worked in the National Park Service he might have observed that you can warn all of the people all of the time, but it won't do you a bit of good.
They'll continue to smoke cigarettes, put their arms in closing subway doors and climb slippery rocks.
The sign above, in bright yellow plastic, is bolted to a rock near Bridalveil Fall in Yosemite National Park, Calif.
Not only does it explain that the rocks are slippery, it clearly states that "fatalities have occurred." These pictures were taken last Labor Day weekend, but the odds are that someone is clambering over the same rocks today.


Andrea Mohin, Jack Robertiello
Andrea Lee Mohin, a photographer at The New York Times, and Jack Robertiello, a food and travel writer, are to be married today at the Brooklyn Society for Ethical Culture.
Jean S. Kotkin, a former president of the Ethical Culture Union, is to officiate.


Habitats/Bayside, Queens; A Second Homecoming
THE white ice cream truck, its bells ringing, cruises up the narrow street in Bayside, Queens, braking at points established over decades of driving this same route.
At almost every stop, children come tearing out of their houses, a few leaping steps ahead of their indulgent parents.


INSIDE
U.S.-Russia Split on Bosnia
Russia warned the United States not to lift the arms embargo against Bosnian Muslims even if the Serbs do not accept a peace plan by Oct. 15.
The warning showed a new rift among the powers over ending the war.
Page 4.
Cuban Seeks an Open Door
Cuba's envoy to immigration talks said the United States' offer of increased entry rights was too low, and that for a time, all Cubans who want to come should be admitted.
Page 12.
Russia and China Sign Pacts
Russia and China eased their longstanding cold war and border tensions with a pact to reduce military measures against each other.
The agreement was signed at the end of presidential talks.
Page 8.


Correction
A picture caption last Sunday with a front-page article about multilevel stores misstated the design history of three two-level stores on Madison Avenue near 69th Street.
None of them were patterned after Charivari's 72d Street store.


Texas, Without Many Regulars, Barely Holds Off Pitt
Texas, minus four starters entering a game in which it proceeded to lose three more, was able to escape today with a 30-28 victory over Pittsburgh.
Pitt had a chance to tie the game with 36 seconds left, after scoring on a 16-yard pass from quarterback Sean Fitzgerald to receiver Mark Butler.
But Fitzgerald's 2-point pass attempt to Chad Askew was well defended by the Texas sophomore substitute Taje Allen.


The Executive Computer; On the Road to Chicago, Little Time for Leisurely Reflection
YOU or your business may have been planning to take a slow trip to Chicago, the next iteration of the Microsoft Corporation's popular Windows operating system software for personal computers that is due out by the middle of next year.
But the folks in Redmond, Wash., have another agenda: they think you should take an express train, if not the Concorde, and they do not intend to offer more leisurely options.


Heather Worden, Christopher Curvin
Heather Ann Worden, a daughter of John and Linda Worden of Seneca Falls, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Haven Curvin, the son of Nancy W. Curvin of Geneva, N.Y. and Richard T. Curvin of Moravia, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ralph Worden, the bride's great-uncle, performed the Presbyterian ceremony in St.
John's Chapel at Hobart College in Geneva.
Mrs.
Curvin, 25, is a sales assistant in New York at Tucker Anthony, a securities brokerage, where her husband, 26, is a government bond trader.
Her parents own a dairy farm in Seneca Falls.


Woes of Moynihan Opponent
Bernadette Castro has raised only $266,000 for her Senate bid and is suffering staff defections with the election two months away.
Page 15.


SUNDAY, September 4, 1994; A Tale of Two Menus
Lawrence, Kan., is cosmopolitan, but it's still the type of town where a family might take Grandmother out for a big noontime meal called dinner.
Be sure Grandmother has the stomach of a trend-driven New Yorker, however, if you take her to the American Bistro in the historic Eldridge Hotel.
At this restaurant in the heart of meat-and-potatoes farmland, Grandmother could choose from "New Zealand Red Deer medallions wrapped with cured venison and topped with a chipotle rattlesnake butter" (served with blue corn polenta) or "Tea Smoked Rack of Lamb with spicy red and green Thai curry sauces, served with a fig coleslaw and lemongrass essence couscous."
Whew!
Grandmother might be more comfortable with the menu at a restaurant called the Grange Hall in Greenwich Village, which offers "Midwestern farm food," including pickled beets, fresh sausage, buttered sugar snap peas, corn and sweet pepper salad, pork chops with poached apples, lamb steak with fried potatoes, chowchow, iced devil's-food layer cake and Orange Crush to wash it all down.


Corrections
A Correspondent's Report on Aug. 14 about the exchange rate for the dollar in European countries misstated the number of Americans who visit Europe annually.
The average from 1990 to 1993 was about 7.2 million, according to the European Travel Commission.


AUG. 28-SEPT. 3: The Lockheed-Marietta Deal; Fewer Bangers for the Bucks: Shape of Defense to Come
The future of the defense industry became clear last week: There will be far fewer contractors, but they will be larger and more diversified as a result of mergers.
At least, that was the widely voiced prediction as Lockheed and Martin Marietta announced they had agreed to unite to form a $23-billion-a-year giant, if Federal antitrust authorities have no objections.


Where Have You Gone, Robert Frank?
HE BATTERED FURNISHINGS IN THE LOFT where the artists Robert Frank and June Leaf have lived since 1971 offer few of the comforts and joys taken for granted by most Americans.
A former S.R.O. hotel off the Bowery in lower Manhattan, its front criss-crossed with graffiti and sheets of plywood, the place feels as if it still might belong to vagrants.
Leaf's clothes hang from a portable dress trolley in the hallway.
A plastic shower stall is wedged next to the tiny stove in the kitchen.
The exposed brick walls and rough, unvarnished wood on the three floors would need weeks of scrubbing to pass muster as a yuppie dwelling.
It is raw space -- working space -- with Frank's film canisters stacked up in dusty corners and Leaf's tiny sculptures and objets trouves perched on window sills.
The two could probably afford to live wherever and however they liked.
But everything about the way Frank and Leaf lead their lives seems to announce that the occupants could care less about money, dirt, post-modern convenience or what passes for good taste.


Margot Klimczak, Andrew Schmolka
Margot Renee Klimczak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley F. Klimczak of Lake Forest, Ill., is to be married today to Andrew Franklin Schmolka, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo L. Schmolka of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Cantor Ian Geller is to officiate at the Cuneo Museum and Gardens in Vernon Hills, Ill.
The Rev.
Michael McMahon, a Roman Catholic priest, is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 24, and bridegroom, 26, graduated from Yale University, he summa cum laude.
Until recently, she was an assistant asset manager at Whittier Partners, a real estate firm in Boston.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of Prudential Securities in Chicago.


Inadequate U.N. Effort Seen Against Killers In Rwanda
United States officials and relief workers here say that before any effective rebuilding of Rwanda can begin, those responsible for massacres in the civil war must first be brought to justice soon.
But, the officials add, United Nations efforts toward this goal have so far been inadequate.
A small team of United Nations experts investigated the massacres this week, but they said they had been hampered by a lack of staff and resources.
Their final report is not expected until the end of November, and there will be further delays before an international tribunal can be established.


Newark's New Subpoenas Barely Raise an Eyebrow
Once again the Newark city government and its dealings with private companies are under investigation by Federal law-enforcement officials, who said last week that they were looking into whether companies had paid bribes to city officials in return for obtaining municipal contracts, tax abatements and zoning changes.
Federal subpoenas were served in the last week for all of the Newark City Council's records since 1989.
After the holiday weekend the records, along with some members of the City Council, will start arriving at the Federal office building a block from City Hall.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
99.12
100.45
104.68
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5532
1.5315
1.6640
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3073
1.3703
1.3193
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5275
1.5490
1.5030
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$387.00
$383.50
$369.25 Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


On Language; Maid Service
Where are the fair maidens of yesteryear?
The noun, developed from an Old English word dating from the year 950, long ago acquired a poetic or archaic air; a maiden was defined as "an unmarried woman," with the particular expectation of virginity.
The maidenhead was the hymen, a membrane unbroken in many women who had not had sexual intercourse.
A maidservant, first used in the 1382 Wycliffe Bible, was a young woman who served a master or mistress; a half-millennium later, Thursday became maid's night out.
In today's language, the maidservant has been euphemized; if you want maid service at a hotel, you punch "housekeeper," and if you want to hire a maid, you look in the classified ads under domestic servant; only in casual speech do you wish you could afford to hire a maid.
The noun hangs on in maid of honor, the chief unmarried attendant to the bride at a wedding; the association with "honor" may be preserving the usage, as nobody has yet demanded to be called bride's chief female attendant.


FASHION
That touch of neon: Hot pink, bold orange and other loud colors are appearing on shirts, sweaters, socks and backpacks as provocative contrast to the basic black and muted earth tones that rule youth fashion.


March of Opponents of Confederate Flag


Desperation Drives Escape of Muslim Refugees
He laughs and jokes when asked how he summoned the courage to cross the siege lines.
But it was desperation that led Rasim Ganic and his 17-year-old son to risk the dangerous five-day trek out of Srebrenica, an eastern Muslim enclave encircled by Serbs.
"We came out because we were alone with no one to take care of us," Mr.
Ganic smiled, glancing at his wife of 35 years, with whom he was reunited in late August on Government-held territory.
"There was no one there to cook for us or wash our clothes."


The Executive Life; Seeking Classrooms That Are Classless
FOR Hollywood executives, deciding where to send their children to school is a test of values.
The fancy private schools are falling into disfavor among many liberal parents searching for educational environments that de-emphasize power, prestige and wealth.
Some have opted for alternative schools with progressive curriculums.
But as those schools, too, burgeon with student bodies largely from the upper crust of Hollywood, a new group of entertainment decision makers is choosing lesser-known private schools or, of all things, public education.


A FABLE FOR FLEAS
It's disappointing that Nicholas Wade dismisses Vaclav Havel's call for a science that "transcends its own limits" as "a throwback to the numerology and astrology from which the era of rationalism has still not fully rescued us" (Method and Madness: "A Fable for Fleas," Aug. 14).


Neighborhood Picks Its Issue, And Differences Run Deep
The West Side fights itself over a highway project.
The East Village implodes between anarchists, neo-punks and young professionals.
But there will always be a harmonious Upper East Side, or at least so it seemed until a plan surfaced to hire 500 security guards to patrol from 59th to 96th Streets.
The ensuing clash among Upper East Siders has cast their neighborhood's diverse elements into relief and underlined the inherent tensions between them.
Although no one predicts a new era of hostility, the differences run deep.


Kirsten E. Cooper and Dwight Poler
Kirsten Elizabeth Cooper, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
John Cooper 3d of Short Hills, N.J., is to be married today to Dwight MacVicar Poler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Poler of Grafton, Mass.
The Rev.
Christopher R. Sherrill is to perform the Episcopal ceremony at All Saints By-the-Sea Chapel in Southport, Me.
The bride and bridegroom, both 28, graduated from Amherst College, she magna cum laude.
She received a law degree from Columbia University.
The bride is an associate with Palmer &amp; Dodge, a Boston law firm.
Her father is an executive vice president, the general counsel and the corporate secretary of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., the advertising agency in New York.


In America; Mrs. Parks's Bequest
Things are not likely to get much worse.
There isn't much that's worse than a society that pretends to be civilized and free while brutalizing its elders and slaughtering its young.
Early last week came the astonishing news that a black man had put his hands on Rosa Parks.
Some moral cipher, reeking of alcohol, had invaded the home of the 81-year-old mother of the civil rights movement, had pummeled her until she gave up her money and then fled, leaving her bruised and shaken but no less stoic and dignified than in 1955 when a bus driver in Montgomery, Ala., told her to get up and give her seat to a white person and she softly replied no, there will be no more of that.


Siberia Awaits the Onslaught
TO a traveler flying in the wake of the turbulent Lena River as it snakes deep into the richest forests of Siberia, the wilderness looks vast, utterly untouched.
It must be one of the last places on earth where it is possible to race above the tree tops for hours without seeing anything made by man.
Bear, tigers, sable and wolves roam free here.
The physical treasures in the region -- 5 million square miles if one measures from the Urals to the Far East -- are unparalleled, and to many eyes, so is its harsh beauty.


Father Pat Stands Firm as Brinks Trial Nears
The Rev.
Patrick Moloney, slight of build with grizzled beard and boundless energy, still sets his table for 12, and most nights, the table is full.
He still runs his home for troubled teen-age boys, takes donations in the form of used but vendable goods, and says Mass almost nightly.
But Father Pat, as the 62-year-old priest is known, wears an electronic bracelet on his ankle, so that the FBI can track his movements.
Many friends no longer call.
And there are only three youths at Bonitas House, at 606 East Ninth Street.
"Before I came under this cloud, we helped 16 young people here to prepare for school or find work," he said.


Opening New Fronts At Battery Park City
ONLY a decade ago, the word "City" in Battery Park City seemed misplaced; not because the project's scale and ambition were insufficient but because this new 92-acre neighborhood on the Hudson River had little of the drama and combustion that characterize truly urban life.
While its plazas are crossed today by streams of ferry-borne commuters and its playgrounds are filled with squealing children, the development still has an insular quality that attracts those seeking a respite from Manhattan and bothers those who wish it were more public.
Whether Battery Park City will ever be fully integrated into the fabric of New York remains to be seen.


THE NATION: Taking Sausage; The Art of Reprocessing the Democratic Process
ALREADY, some pundits and politicians are weaving a tidy narrative around the collapse of health care reform.
The Clinton Administration overreached, they say.
After a long and vigorous debate about the Clinton plan, people gradually turned away from the idea of a comprehensive overhaul and Congress responded to their will.
The Framers, in other words, would be pleased; the system worked.
But there is another case to be made: That the system was simply overwhelmed by millions of dollars worth of lobbying, polling and advertising.
That it was whipsawed by two years of strategizing and manipulation by the top consultants and theoreticians in both parties.
That Americans were taken on an emotional, 18-month journey that produced not a new consensus but an exhausted paralysis -- and is likely to feed their already corrosive cynicism toward their government.


Frugal Travelers
To the Editor: Judging from the mail on "Frugal Traveler" (Letters, July 31), readers of The New York Times have a hard time understanding the pleasure Susan Spano gets from lugging her suitcase around.
It's really not so bad.
Several years ago, burdened with a heavy bag, I approached a train that would take me from Charles de Gaulle Airport to the Gare du Nord.
As I wondered how I would lift my suitcase on board, an elegant matron asked her teen-age son to help me.


Karen J. Smith, Thompson Davies
Karen Jill Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benton R. Smith of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday in San Diego to Thompson Earle Davies, a son of Marilew Earle Davies and John G. Davies, both of San Diego.
Judge Terry O'Rourke of the Superior Court of San Diego officiated at the home of bridegroom's mother.
Mrs.
Smith Davies, 30, graduated from the State University at Oneonta, N.Y., and received a master's degree in tourism and travel management from the New School for Social Research.
She is a marketing manager at Citibank in New York.
Her father owns Wheels Satellite, a shipping concern in New York.


Angels Everywhere
Have you noticed?
It is a strange and subtle little trend, this one, but pervasive.
Look at the kids.
Amid the typical gaggle lined up outside the rock venues or fooling around on the subway platform -- mostly clothed in T-shirts emblazoned with unprintable sentiments and unsavory gestures -- you can spot a jarring exception.
Angels.
Raphael is possibly the hottest new artist around.
His dimpled cherubs adorn not only the apparel of the young but the walls of their dorms and the night stands of their trendier elders.
Books on angels are big sellers, including one that ended up on The Times's best-seller list.
The Metropolitan Museum shop has trouble keeping up with the demand for reproductions of angel art: angel posters, pins, statuary, stationery and literature.


Turning Beach Dross Into Works of Art
SOUND EFFECTS," the show opening on Sept. 18 at the Rye Arts Center here, is thoroughly environmental: Hilda Green Demsky's paintings and sculptures not only depict refuse-choked waters and garbage-laden beaches but also incorporate offending objects into the artwork itself.
Ms.
Demsky, an award-winning artist from Larchmont, can find beauty in the waterlogged twisting of decomposing rope.
But there is nothing detached about her paintings, with their eerie blues, purples and reds and clocks warning of time running out.
"For the first time in my life, I feel I have a subject for my art that I'm passionate about," Ms.
Demsky said recently in her Port Chester studio.
"Portraits and still lifes were great to do, but now that I'm focused on marine life, I really feel I have a calling."


When Carousel Figures Go Into Collections
The recent article about collecting carousel animals ("For Collectors of Carousel Animals, the Thrill of Discovery") did not present the other side of the story: collecting encourages thieves to steal vulnerable carvings and motivates carousel owners to dismantle and sell off their operating carousels.
Not all art is intended for museums or for individual ownership.
Carousel carvings were made for the public to enjoy on operating machines.
There are efforts of individuals -- like Dr.
Floyd Moreland, who saved the carousel at Seaside Heights -- to protect and maintain the few carousels that do survive.


Vikings Sign Salisbury and Cut Ware
The Minnesota Vikings re-signed quarterback SEAN SALISBURY yesterday and waived the 1989 Heisman Trophy winner, ANDRE WARE.
Salisbury, cut by Houston on Friday, will back up WARREN MOON and BRAD JOHNSON.
Terms of the deal were not announced.


Zoe Lieberman, Howard Sanders
Zoe Ann Lieberman, the daughter of Judith and Herbert Lieberman of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married last evening to Howard Craig Sanders, the son of Arlene and Harold Sanders of Los Angeles.
Cantor Raymond Smolover performed the ceremony at Lyndhurst in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 27, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is a talent agent at the Lucy Kroll Agency in New York.
Her father is a novelist and also a managing director of condensed books at Reader's Digest in Pleasantville, N.Y.
Her mother is a broker at Houilhan-Lawrence, real-estate agents in Chappaqua.


They Also Serve
Yet beneath this crush of ephemera, the Open is really about the basics of the game -- a ball, a racquet, the score.
The people who see that all this runs smoothly -- that the server will always have a ball, that a favorite racquet will always be well strung, that everyone will know the score -- work in the realm of the always seen but rarely contemplated.
Now, pay attention.
Think Players Are High-Strung?
Check Their Racquets.
PETE SAMPRAS, the world's No. 1-ranked player, walked to the back of the players' lounge the other day, handed Roger Petersman three Wilson Pro Staff racquets and walked off.
"VS All Season, 16 gauge, at 72 pounds," recited Mr.
Petersman, explaining that Mr.
Sampras wanted the racquets restrung with Babolat VS All Season natural gut, average weight, "tight as a board."
Mr.
Petersman remembers.
"Pete has at least six racquets strung each day he's at the Open and one freshly strung minutes before he walks onto the court," he said.
Granted, Mr.
Sampras is considered a bit fanatical about his racquets. ("It's the most important part of my game," he says.) But as head of the racquet-stringing at the Open, Mr.
Petersman (like the 20 other top stringers here) is expected to know these things.
During the year, the stringers teach tennis and own pro shops. (Mr. Petersman is the technical product manager for Babolat U.S.A. in Dayton, Ohio.) But they go to the Open to work nonstop from 7 A.M. to midnight -- stringing, balancing and regripping more than 250 racquets each day, or 3,500 during the tournament.
"I can't play here, so I might as well be here somehow," said Ian Lev, a stringer from Weston, Conn.
When a string breaks during a match, the racquet is immediately re-strung.
The stringer personally runs the racquet back onto the court and hands it to the player.
"Who else could you trust?" asked Tom Parry, another stringer.
Not that the players can't afford it, but none of this service comes cheap -- about $60 a racquet, cash, Visa or MasterCard accepted, no checks, no American Express.
Where 'Ball Boys' Are Also Girls, Grown-Ups, and Sometimes, Players
A PATCH of blue in a sea of concrete, 280 more-or-less young men and women are perched high above center court.
Having passed rigorous muster for agility, speed, accuracy and, of course, neatness -- but contrary to popular perception, not for powerful connections -- they are waiting for their captain, Tina Taps, to give them their fetching and throwing orders for the first day of play.
In their red-trimmed, navy and white Fila outfits with pure white K-Swiss sneakers, their job as "ball boys" (actually 25 percent are girls) is to remain practically invisible on court, while making sure all the tennis balls are flowing in the right direction.
"I don't watch tennis players anymore; I watch the ball people," said Ms.
Taps, whose job is to monitor, evaluate and insure that everyone follows the rules of this game.
"They're not allowed to ask for autographs or to take pictures," said Ms.
Taps, 35 years old, who during the year works for the United States Tennis Association.
Which is not to say that they do nothing but stand there and wait for a ball to chase.
Once, Ms.
Taps recalled, Ilie Nastase, the famously temperamental Romanian, asked a ball boy to play out his point in a doubles match.
The ball boy, Gary Spitz, was too dumbfounded to do anything but take the racquet and win the point, on camera.
Ms.
Taps calls them her kids, and most are teen-agers from Queens.
But they are as old as 35, and include a doctor, a lawyer and an accountant.
The lawyer is Mr.
Spitz, who is 30 and has been doing this for 15 years now.
"I couldn't get a better seat," said Mr.
Spitz, who is now trying out to be an umpire.
They Just Don't Paint It Like They Used To
Danny Rodriguez Musri spends more than 10 hours a day standing on an electric lift, drawing pencil lines and placing letters and numbers on a big white wall.
That big white wall, looming over the entering crowd, is the main scoreboard.
For the last 10 years, Mr.
Musri, 37, a graphic artist from Argentina, has been charting the entire Open draw, round by round.
Before the Open opens, Mr.
Musri spends several days laying out the board, making sure every measured line is in place.
Then he lays down the draw (with names in black computer-generated letters, or red for seeded players).
Three quarters of an inch separates first-round names, with more space as the draw winds down, to the commodious two inches of the final round.
And for a fortnight of nights.
Mr.
Musri records the winners and scores of each match.
Because of the scoreboard's location, just left of the entrance, his work area also becomes an instant information booth.
On the first day of the Open, fans could be heard asking such well-informed questions as: "Who will be playing in the final?" and "Is Andre Agassi really with Brooke Shields?"
There are also those who call out, "Last year, they used to paint it." These are the nostalgists, who probably also wish the tournament were still played on grass, and they are only mostly wrong.
Until 1984, the board was painted in a fine calligraphic hand by a man named Jerry Perline, who ran a sign company in Jamaica.
Mr.
Perline used a French quill brush dipped into an orange juice can full of red paint.
At the Open now, no one seems to know how to find him.
But Mr.
Musri has preserved one small bit of the Perline art: the little brackets linking the two players in each match are done in red paint, by hand.


Missing the Red Flags at Kidder
To the Editor:
While "Fool's Profits: Just How Dumb Was Kidder?" (Market Watch, Aug. 7) deplored Kidder, Peabody's failure to learn of its problem far earlier than it did, more emphasis should have been placed on the responsibility of Kidder's parent, the General Electric Company, and specifically the audit and compensation committees of G.E.'s board.
When an employee is being paid the kind of money that Joseph Jett was for supposedly contributing a sizable portion of earnings to a corporation and when profits for the transactions in which the employee is engaged are astounding, even by Wall Street standards, then the activities of that employee require more scrutiny than a simple random review.


BEST SELLERS: September 4, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
1
6
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
3
2
27
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
4
3
13
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
5
4
11
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
6
5
108
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
6
3
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) An American woman's role as a chaperone in Georgian England brings her a surprising romance.
8
7
5
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
9
9
21
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) Murder in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
10
1
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) On a return to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters many strange facets of life and a murderer he once knew.
11
8
2
THE HIDDEN CITY, by David Eddings. (Ballantine/Del Rey, $23.) In the "Tamuli" fantasy series, heroes and gods confront the forces that shape destiny.
12
10
6
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Putnam, $22.95.) A defense attorney finds himself caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
13
11
7
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman tries to cope after an act of violence destroys her perfect family life.
14
12
11
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
15*
14
2
THE SEVENTH GATE, by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman. (Bantam, $22.95.) A titanic struggle between good and evil is staged in the final volume of the "Death Gate" cycle.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
69
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
10
3
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of an American family.
3
9
4
THE TRIBE OF TIGER, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) The nature and culture of cats.
4
2
26
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
7
3
OCTOBER 1964, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $24.) The season in which the Cardinals beat the Yankees, reflecting great changes in baseball and society.
6
4
37
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
7
3
11
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
8
5
6
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
9
6
8
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
10
8
4
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent, lady's man and freeloader.
11
11
20
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
12
12
12
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
13
14
3
FEAR OF FIFTY, by Erica Jong. (HarperCollins, $24.) A "midlife memoir" by the novelist, poet, essayist and feminist.
14
13
5
GAL: A True Life, by Ruthie Bolton. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) A black woman recalls her troubled childhood in Charleston, S.C.
15
33
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
19
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
67
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
19
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
33
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 20, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) DAISY BATES IN THE DESERT, by Julia Blackburn. (Pantheon, $22.) A bold biography whose author risks identifying with the consciousness of her subject, an adventurer, a self-taught anthropologist and a liar who invented her past anew at every turning of her life.
IN THE TENNESSEE COUNTRY, by Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $21.) In mellow, elegant prose, this fine novel follows the quest of an academic hustler and failed artist to pin down a cousin who escaped from history a generation after the Civil War.
JOE PAPP: An American Life, by Helen Epstein. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) This biography of the fabulously energetic, effective theatrical producer depicts a New Yorker whose street-fighting skills lent authority to his art.
MANDATE OF HEAVEN: A New Generation of Entrepreneurs, Dissidents, Bohemians, and Technocrats Lays Claim to China's Future, by Orville Schell. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) Graceful analysis and unobtrusive reporting of developments since the Tiananmen Square massacre five years ago.
MR.
VERTIGO, by Paul Auster. (Viking, $21.95.) A badly abused 9-year-old boy is taught to fly by a mysterious Master Yehudi in this fanciful novel of an education for death or for art, controlled by the metaphorical meanings of flight.
MY OWN COUNTRY: A Doctor's Story of a Town and Its People in the Age of AIDS, by Abraham Verghese. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An eloquent personal memoir of a foreign-born doctor's experience in Tennessee, where he arrived just in time to encounter and treat men returning home with the AIDS they caught in the big city.
THE RAPE OF EUROPA: The Fate of Europe's Treasures in the Third Reich and the Second World War, by Lynn H. Nicholas. (Knopf, $27.50.) A hair-raising account of the Nazis' megalomaniac looting of Europe's artistic treasures and the Allies' strivings to find the stuff, save it and bring it back.
THE REPUBLIC OF WHORES: A Fragment From the Time of the Cults, by Josef Skvorecky. (Ecco, $21.) Published in Czech in 1971, this keen comic novel concerns a Warsaw Pact tank commander and his men, who hate their allies far more than their prospective American enemies.
SAME-SEX UNIONS IN PREMODERN EUROPE, by John Boswell. (Villard, $25.) A Yale historian's learned, knotty study of male love (whose exact nature isn't clear) and the ceremonies used to solemnize it from the 11th to 16th centuries.
A STRANGER IN THIS WORLD, by Kevin Canty. (Doubleday, $20.) A debut collection of sharp, smart short stories about people caught at the intersection between what they know they should do and what they can't help doing.
UNDER THE FROG: A Black Comedy, by Tibor Fischer. (New Press, $17.) An energetic, naughty novel of Hungary behind the Iron Curtain, rendered in wild scenarios (like streaking the Interior Ministry), ending with the 1956 rising.


China Flanigan, Adrian D. Blake
China Duncan Flanigan, an office manager at WHTZ-FM, a New York radio station, is to be married today to Adrian Dana Blake, the director of distribution for Broadway Video Entertainment, a production and distribution company in New York.
The Rev.
William White is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis of Assisi Church in Incline Village, Nev.
The bride, 25, graduated from Hartwick College.
She is a daughter of John Flanigan of Reno and China Girard of Laguna Niguel, Calif.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a vice president and board member of Anheuser-Busch Inc.
Her mother is a writer.
The bride's grandfather, the late Horace Flanigan, was the chairman of the Manufacturer's Hanover Trust Company.


Not Exactly the Song of Norway
MORTEN GUNNAR LARSEN'S parents weren't exactly scandalized when he suggested, while still a student at the Norwegian Music Academy in Oslo, that he might prefer playing the music of Jelly Roll Morton and Scott Joplin to that of Grieg and Sibelius.
Neither were they entirely supportive.
"It was like, 'This is not proper music, and you shouldn't spend so much time doing it; this is just a pastime,' and so on and so on," Mr.
Larsen recalled.
But when he recorded his first album in 1976, and it went on to receive the Norwegian equivalent of a Grammy, his parents -- and his piano teacher -- "said, 'O.K., this must be something.' "


Essay Contests Are Failing to Help Owners Unload Homes
Once upon a time Frank and Joann Nero had a frustrated home seller's dream: if they could not get one person to give them $300,000 for their four-bedroom house overlooking the Hudson, maybe they could get 3,000 people to give them $100 each.
So they decided to run a contest with the house as the prize.
They spent two months setting up the contest, which requires an essay along with the $100, and thousands of dollars promoting it.
They gave up their weekends to conduct tours of the house.
They hoped for 3,000 entries, and thus, $300,000, but they might have settled for 2,500 or so.


Classics to Youth Fare on Fall Programs
THE "Superstuff for Kids" series at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck begins on Saturday afternoon at 2, when the Practical Cats Company presents "The Three Golden Hairs," billed as "a dazzling combination of comedy, music and masks." The children's programs continue on Sept. 17 with the folk singer Josh White Jr.
Eight concerts make up the Emelin's Distinguished Guest Artists Series, beginning with the pianist Richard Goode on Sept. 20, followed by the violinists Ani Kavafian and Gil Shaham, the pianists Anne-Marie McDermott and Menahem Pressler, the Takacs and Ysaye String Quartets and the Moscow Conservatory Trio, making its Westchester debut.


Trauma and Those Who Are Witnesses
The recent article "Flaws Persist in Trauma Network" leaves out a group commonly overlooked: the family, friends and witnesses of the critical incident.
All of us are potentially members of this group, and within this group children are the most frequently neglected.
Inconsistently, family members might receive some kind of treatment that will lessen the likelihood of developing post-traumatic stress disorder.
The International Critical Incident Stress Management Foundation, based in Maryland, has addressed this real threat as it is posed to emergency response personnel.
What of the family and friends and other civilians exposed to the incident?


Ireland Hotel
To the Editor: Independent travelers to Ireland who plan to stay at the well-known Ashford Castle Hotel in Cong, County Mayo, should be aware that the hotel does not always honor a confirmed reservation.
As we arrived for our stay in May, we were surprised to see a large tour bus.
When we went in to register, we were informed by a starchy young man that the hotel was full.
We reminded him that the contract we had with Ashford Castle obliged us to pay for the night's lodging whether or not we claimed the room, and that in return, the hotel was obliged to provide a room for us.
Nonetheless, he said, the hotel was full.
How about staying in the village, two miles away?
We knew there was nothing remotely equivalent there, and we left, having been reminded once again that hotels catering to the tour bus trade are often inhospitable to independent travelers.


Visions of Community With Roots in the 60's
FOR ARCHITECTS, IT'S TOO SOON for a Woodstock reunion.
In this patient, not to say plodding, art form, the 60's counterculture never had a union in the first place.
Architects seldom get to do much building before they're 50, and beyond that, a movement that defined itself in opposition to authority was bound to have a rough time claiming an art that is traditionally bound to the status quo.
But a countercultural vision of community has emerged in recent projects by some of the most prominent survivors of that generation.
Stewart Brand, author of a recent book, "How Buildings Learn," is not an architect, but as editor of the Whole Earth Catalogue, he was the leading champion of Buckminster Fuller's geodesic dome, a design that came closest to providing the counterculture with an architectural symbol.
Now, Brand writes that domes "were a massive, total failure." They leaked.
They offered no privacy.
They resisted alterations.


Stephanie Cook, F. Michael Ayles
Stephanie Lee Cook, the daughter of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
John W. Cook of Guilford, Conn., was married there yesterday to F. Michael Ayles, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Ayles, also of Guilford.
The ceremony, at the First Congregational Church, was performed by the bride's father, a Congregational minister, who is the president of the Henry Luce Foundation in New York.
Mrs.
Ayles, 28, graduated from the University of Hawaii and the University of Texas and is to begin studying for a master's degree in physical medicine at Quinnipiac College next week.
Her mother, Phyllis D. Cook, is the president of the New Haven Arthritis Rehabilitation Center.


Church Helps a Tenor Get His Wings
Aubry Bryan admits that some Sundays when he sings at the Mother A.M.E.
Zion Church on West 137th Street, he imagines that the richly appointed church auditorium is instead a European opera house and that he is the tenor they've all come to hear.
"I probably shouldn't say that or somebody's going to tell me to stop daydreaming in church," says Mr.
Bryan, a classically trained tenor who is one of four soloists in the choir.
"But it's true."


When Quiet Is Pervasive In Schools
Dark brown braids hanging from her bowed head, 7-year-old Tiffanie Daniels closed her eyes and said a silent prayer: "Please, God, give me a happy year and a long, good life."
Her classmates in Carole Ann Elmore's third-grade class at Bethel Elementary School in this small town in northwestern South Carolina also stopped their early morning fidgeting and chattering.
They sat quietly.
Some looked around.
Others put their heads on their desks.


Would East River Festival Last Long in Central Park?
To the Editor:
I am writing about the Aug. 21 puff piece, "A Taste of San Juan on the East River," regarding the festival held Sundays in East River Park.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
GALAPAGOS NATURE
Fifty of Katie Lee's illustrations of the flora and fauna of the Galapagos Islands, soon to be published in "A Visit to Galapagos" (Abrams, New York) go on display at the Silo in New Milford today through Oct. 2.
They are remarkable studies in gouache and pen and ink, depicting every last whisker, feather and scale in clinical detail, yet elegant, artful and emotionally compelling.
Not only do they hold the attention of the viewer far longer than most paintings do, but they also evoke a welter of thoughts about the world's wildlife, which is what Ms.
Lee had in mind.
Conveying respect for all of the planet's creatures and plants is her mission.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
We see the vulnerable, nurturing side of a gang girl throughout much of LeBlanc's article, subtitled "The Making of a Street Feminist." A street feminist?
Let's not kid ourselves.
Imagine that your daughter attended a school rife with gangs whose members beat girls simply for being vulnerable.
Suppose the leader of the gang singled out your daughter as someone she had a "beef" with.
One day, you get a call saying your daughter is in the hospital, badly beaten and slashed by girls at school.
Would you refer to her assailants as "street feminists"?
MOIRA DICKER Bronx


Private Security Expansion Called 'Elitist and Divisive'
To the Editor:
Douglas Elliman's plan for a private security force on the Upper East Side, discussed in the Aug. 28 article, "A Fierce Debate Raging Over Plans for Security Force," is misdirected.
The added tax burden to create a private entity not answerable to the electorate nor directed by the Police Department is wrong.
We have all seen private guards on Park and Fifth Avenues, and increasing their presence in our community to 500 is elitist, divisive and inefficient.


Commercial Property/The Art World; Galleries, Off Critical List, Opening or Expanding
WHEN Gary Snyder opened Snyder Fine Arts in SoHo four years ago, the gallery stuck out like a sore thumb.
It specialized in American art from the 20's through the 50's, a much better fit with the uptown art scene than with the avant garde art in SoHo.
But SoHo space was $16 a square foot and rents on 57th Street were triple that.
Not anymore.
Next month Mr.
Snyder will move into 2,000 square feet at 20 West 57th Street, a building just off Fifth Avenue that has several galleries carrying traditional art.
And he is paying less than $30 a foot.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
"Gang Girl" haunted me for a long time, and confirmed the African adage "it takes a whole village to raise a child." Until we as a community face the responsibility of providing these children with their basic needs, we will continue to live with the inevitable results of their self-destruction -- crime and violence, and more crime and violence.


Americans Insulted by a Bonus Offer
JOHN HARKES said it was an insult that England's Football Association offered the United States team a $25,000 bonus if the Americans win their exhibition game Wednesday night.
Harkes, who is likely to make his seventh Wembley appearance in the Americans' first game there, is recovering from a calf strain.


Jean-Claude Van Damme, the, uh, Actor?
Jean-Claude van Damme IS A household name, if the household has a 12-year-old boy in it.
Most peace-loving adults have never seen one of his movies: low-budget epics in which the 33-year-old actor can usually be counted upon to 1) leap in the air, execute a 360-degree spin and slam the villain in the face with his feet, 2) flex the muscles that once won him the crown of Mr. Belgium and 3) do the splits.


F.Y.I.
You're Now Entering. . .
Q.
I'm always speeding past the Manhattan side arch of the Manhattan Bridge, so I can never really see what the sculpture on it represents.
What is it?


Fast Food, Slow Traffic?
According to market research, the small commercial strip at the north end of Westchester Avenue, just off the Bruckner Expressway, is the perfect spot for a fast food joint.
Traffic along I-95, which comes into the Bronx as the Cross-Bronx Expressway and leaves as the New England Thruway, virtually guarantees a steady stream of customers.
So it is no surprise that McDonald's is negotiating to build a restaurant on a parking lot at Westchester and Wilkinson Avenues.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
PORN WARS:A few months ago, Body Worship, a fashion shop on East Seventh Street agrees to change a sadomasochistic window display.
A visit last week shows little change.
The display: a leashed, naked female mannequin with spikes hovering over her head.
Meanwhile, look for a battle on East 28th Street, where a peep-show store opened last month at No. 48. . . .
BOXED IN: The Box Tree Hotel, on East 49th Street, is having a little problem, not just with the strikers still at its restaurant.
The Buildings Department, which fined it $800 in May for having the wrong kind of certificate of occupancy, says the hotel has not filed to alter its documentation.
If a new violation is issued and upheld, the hotel could face a $5,000 fine. . . .
SEEN ON TIMES SQUARE: A team of three men for Fox &amp; Fowle Architects surveys 41st, 42d and 43d Streets, evaluating facades.
That means plans to gut and renovate storefronts can be put out to bid, and the Times Square Redevelopment Plan will be under way. . . .
WATER LOG: Price rises to $14 for a drop-in swim at the Asphalt Green Aquacenter at 92d Street and York, and workers try to fix the 50-meter pool's movable bulkhead.
It's been weeks since the pride of the city's swimming community actually worked right. . . .
THINK YOUR APARTMENT IS BAD?: On Friday, the Tenement Museum will open the doors to two restored period tenement apartments at 97 Orchard Street, a building landmarked because it represents the earliest, and perhaps the worst, form of tenement housing built in New York City. . . .
SOME MAY GET BETTER: The neoclassical apartment building at 409 Edgecombe Avenue, a once-elegant address in Harlem, gets $90,000 in city financing to remove asbestos from the roof.
Tenants had sued to force the city to make repairs before the building is transferred from city's hands to tenants'. . . .
AND A LOCK COMES OFF: Two owners of a house on historic Astor Row on West 134th Street return wood needed to restore antique porches there.
They had seized the supplies after a dispute with the New York Landmarks Conservancy.


Confidence Dip Imperils Stocks And Clinton
THE American economy is growing at a nice clip.
But public confidence is not.
And because many do not think the future will be better than the present, both investors and Democrats may be in for disappointments.
The lack of optimism may seem puzzling.
Since President Clinton's election, the number of people with jobs has grown by 4.7 million, or 4.2 percent.
Not since Jimmy Carter has a presidential term begun by producing so many jobs.


All Quiet on Jordan Front as Season Ends
As his first baseball season ended, MICHAEL JORDAN showed he still has a lot to learn.
Jordan was hitless in four at-bats last night, striking out twice to finish with a .202 average for the Class AA Birmingham Barons.
The Barons, however, did beat the Huntsville Stars, 4-2, in Hunstville, Ala.


The Voice of the Rooster Is Heard in Manhattan
To the Editor:
The troublesome Queens rooster in the Aug. 28 article "Why'd a Rooster Cross 30th Ave.?" probably escaped from an Operation Greenthumb area.
The rooster, being wiser than the City Council, realized it didn't want to be part of a bird-brained idea.


A London Haven
To the Editor: For several years now Susan Allen Toth and I have been pen pals.
I adore her writings and particularly enjoyed "Green Havens in London's Heart" (July 10).
However, there is one more haven I would like to mention.
My husband and I often stay at 43 Cloth Fair in the City, a Landmark Trust house and the home once of John Betjeman, a poet laureate of England.
The windows of this house look out over the tranquil churchyard of St.
Bartholomew the Great.
The churchyard, with its many trees, is particularly green at this time of year.
There is a walking path and benches to rest on and look upward at the leafy patterns made by the trees.


THE NEWEST MOYNIHAN
If being a United States Senator involved only a grasp of minutiae, Daniel Patrick Moynihan would indeed be the best man for the job ("The Newest Moynihan," by Todd S. Purdum, Aug. 7).
But voters deserve more than a professorial "Jeopardy!" contestant.


Brian Mitchell and Allyson Tucker
Allyson Tucker, an actress and a dancer in New York, was married yesterday to Brian Stokes Mitchell, an actor and a composer, also in New York.
The Rev.
James Hicks, a Methodist minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Erskine R. Tucker, in River Hills, Wis.
The Rev.
David Sharp, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Tucker-Mitchell, who appeared on Broadway in "The Will Rogers Follies" and "Oh, Kay," most recently performed in "Anything Goes" at Theaterfest in Montclair, N.J.
She graduated from Brown University and is a law student at Georgetown University.
Her father retired as a pathologist at St.
Francis Hospital in Milwaukee.


Preserving His 'Realm,' His Pocket of Bayside, Cause by Cause
Leading a guest through the neighborhood and house where he was born 63 years ago and fully expects to die, Mandingo Osceola Tshaka is drawn to people and places only he can see.
The rain is falling gently in Bayside, and the Queens farmland of his boyhood seems to rise from the mist.
Across the road that is now the Clearview Expressway, two doctors lived and kept horses.
They liked the boy and taught him how to ride.
In the summer, he headed the other way, toward Alley Pond Park, where he spent lazy days by Oakland Lake with his dog, Prince.


Ms. Ceballo, Mr. Countryman
Rosario Ceballo, the daughter of Ana Ramos and Jose Ceballo of New York, is to be married today to Matthew Jon Countryman, the son of Joan Cannady Countryman of Providence, R.I., and the late Peter Countryman.
Marion Heacock, a Quaker, and the Rev.
Robert Bierne, a Roman Catholic priest, are to lead the interfaith ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's mother.
The bride, 28, graduated from Yale University and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in psychology at the University of Michigan.


For the Revived Boat Industry, There's Blue Seas, Nothing but Blue Seas
The boating industry woke up last winter from a deep recessionary slumber.
And now, with sales still looking lively, marine dealers have developed a relatively upbeat mood for this year's fall boat show season.
With industry predictions for a 15 to 20 percent increase in boating retail sales for 1994 -- a figure approaching $13 billion -- manufacturers plan to flood the shows with new models and marine accessories.
While the market still is a long ways from its $18 billion peak in 1988, retailers are mixing caution with equal parts of enthusiasm.


Ms. Thiebault, William H. Morin
Virginie Simone Thiebault, a daughter of Simone Thiebault of Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, and the late Pierre C. Thiebault, was married yesterday at St.
Genevieve Church in Luynes, France, to William Hoover Morin, a son of Elizabeth and Rudolph Morin of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Jean-Louis Gaudier, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
William Ferrell, an evangelical minister, took part.
Mrs.
Morin, 27, graduated from the Institut de Management International in Paris, and she and her husband received master's degrees in management from Northwestern University.
Her father was a personnel manager in Paris for the Mobil Oil Corporation.


Sports of The Times; Quarterback Controversies In the Wings
UNTIL now, both the Giants and the Jets have been able to hide the possibility of the dreaded quarterback controversy under the surface of semantics.
At any other position, it doesn't matter.
There has never been a tight end controversy or a cornerback controversy.
But a quarterback controversy can split a team the way an ax splits a log.
The players take sides and the fans take sides over the weekly question: which quarterback should be starting.
And the coach must take sides.


Variations in Black, Accents in White
The fashion world, always addicted to black, turns into an army of inky silhouettes as summer turns to fall.
Many people accentuate the black with just a dash of white or ivory.
What makes dressing in black interesting today is that the styles are no longer limited to the little dress that used to dominate.
The new formula stretches from jeans and sweatshirts to couture ensembles.
Between these esthetic poles is a wide range of sportswear separates: sleek pants suits or black trousers worn with an unexpected black sequin sweater, and the popular ankle-length tube dresses and skirts with white motifs or T-shirts knotted in front.
The trend-setter was a femme fatale in a body-encasing dress alighting from a cab on Fifth Avenue, lower left.
For many women, the all-black style marks a return to sophisticated city life.
For others, it's a psychological bridge between summer and fall.


Chang On Rise, But Agassi Is in Way
He was a Grand Slam champion before anyone really knew who he was.
Michael Chang was 17 years 3 months old when he won the French Open in 1989, the youngest man ever to win any of the four Slam events.
He is 22 now, still looking to make his way back to those heights.
He has won his share of lesser tournaments, his millions.
He has been ranked as high as fifth in the world and is seeded sixth here at the United States Open.
But Chang has not made the final of a Grand Slam since he beat Ivan Lendl and Stefan Edberg to win on the red clay in Paris five years ago.
This Open could be the best ticket he has had, unless Andre Agassi, Chang's next opponent, can do anything about it in the Round of 16.


Lack of Lighting A Highway Hazard
There is an extremely dangerous situation caused by the complete lack of nighttime lighting on a heavily traveled portion of a major highway from New York City northward into Westchester.
The darkness begins about a mile south of the Saw Mill River Parkway toll booths.
The booths are well enough lighted, but immediately after passing through them, a driver is again plunged into darkness.
Switching headlights to the high beam helps very little and slowing down risks a rear-end collision.
The ramp to the Cross County Parkway is also pitch dark and slopes sharply downward.


Naming My Building
I admit, on occasion, to envy.
While my friends and colleagues seem to dance perpetually on the lip of the volcano, I plow the field at its base, where I am periodically encased in lava.
Often the source of my rancor is slight.
Early this summer, I was pained by the realization that many of my friends in Manhattan live in buildings that have glamorous, history-laden names -- like the Dakota, the Gansevoort, the Peter Warren -- while I live in a building known only by its address.
Instead of swallowing my pride, as is my habit, I decided to seek justice by organizing my fellow residents and shareholders into naming our edifice.


In the Region/Westchester; Meeting the Challenge of Overcrowding in Schools
STUDENTS returning to classes in Westchester's public schools this week may notice that classrooms have become somewhat more cramped as enrollments continue to swell and a new premium has been placed on every square foot of space.
In the last few years, the crowding has occurred mainly at the elementary-school level.
But lately the situation is starting to affect the upper grades as well.


McNair Sparkles in Loss
There were 268 passing yards for Alcorn State, 260 for Grambling.
There were 360 total yards of offense for Alcorn State and 350 for Grambling.
Alcorn State had 35 points.
Grambling had 35.
And that was only in the first half tonight.


At Work; At the Labor Board, New Vigor
PROFESSORS who go to Washington have a way of getting chewed up and spit out, as Robert Bork and Lani Guinier discovered.
William B. Gould IV, a former Stanford law professor was luckier, though if he were the T-shirt type, he might wear one that reads "I survived the confirmation process." As it is, he tells audiences with no small measure of pride that he was confirmed last March to his new post as chairman of the National Labor Relations Board with the highest negative vote -- 58 to 38 -- of any Clinton nominee.
Six months later, on the eve of Labor Day, he still sounds quietly indignant at what turned into an unexpectedly bruising experience, and one seemingly out of proportion to the board's size and influence -- diminutive on both counts -- within the Federal bureaucracy.
"I am proud of my record as an impartial arbitrator, accepted by both sides. I am also proud of ideas I've formulated. I have never seen any reason to apologize," said Mr.
Gould, who was a well-known arbitrator and expert in labor law when the call came from the Administration last year.


'The Big Guy Can Take Care of Himself'
As Thornton Willett sees it, he is a big man (6 foot 4, 235 pounds) who fights for the little guy.
And his education (he majored in philosophy at Harvard) has convinced him that the rights of individuals, especially those without political power, must be protected and expanded.
"The big guy can take care of himself," Mr.
Willett says.
"The people who need help are the ones who endure the poor results of the school and the smell of a noxious canal."


Karen L. Bowen and Dirk Imhof
Karen Lee Bowen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William G. Bowen of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dirk Imhof, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rik Imhof-Van den Broeck of Kontich, Belgium.
The Rev.
Carl Wartenburg, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony in the faculty room of Nassau Hall at Princeton University.
Mrs.
Bowen-Imhof, 29, is a candidate for a Ph.D. degree in art history from Brown University, from which she received a master's degree in that subject.
She graduated cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, a former president of Princeton University, is the president of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation in New York.


Community Colleges Gain Students and Some Respect
OVER half of all freshmen entering public and private colleges across the country this fall are enrolled in community colleges, and at the top of the list are Nassau and Suffolk Community College.
"We're part of a national phenomenon that's occurred over the last two years," said John F. Cooper, the president of Suffolk Community College, which got its start 35 years ago in makeshift classrooms in Sachem Junior-Senior High School in Ronkonkoma.


Glitter of Republican Senate Candidate Hasn't Meant Gold
When New York Republicans drafted Bernadette Castro as their candidate for the United States Senate, they counted on her personal wealth and well-heeled friends to bankroll a serious threat to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, one of the most powerful Democrats in Washington.
But Ms.
Castro, a political neophyte, has failed so far to raise or spend the money that analysts say is needed to establish her as a serious challenger to Mr.
Moynihan, a three-term incumbent.


The 40 Years' Domestic War
NORTHERN BORDERS By Howard Frank Mosher. 291 pp. New York: Doubleday. $22.95.


The Sounds and Sights of Summer's End
ARRIVAL of the Labor Day weekend signals the end of summertime.
Chrysanthemums, asters and goldenrods begin to bloom, overtaking the black-eyed susans.
The shorter days mean fewer hours to work outdoors and it would seem that the season is all but over.
Even the children have gone, returning to school.
It is not yet time to cancel things out, however.
There are glorious weeks ahead, weeks in which to enjoy the sounds of the season as well as some of its sights.


ABOUT BOOKS
Palisades Park Memories
SAD to say, there are people alive who never strolled the midways of the Palisades Amusement Park, the state's premier amusement park for more than 70 years.
They never rode the carousels, screeched as the roller coasters negotiated hairpin turns, swam in what was billed as "the world's largest outdoor salt-water pool," threw softballs at fuzzy stuffed animals, gushed at star entertainers like Frankie Avalon and Tony Bennett and unfailingly fell victim to the aroma of sizzling french fries.


Slow Trips to Boston And Washington
Speed is not the point of the East Coast Explorer, a 14-passenger Ford Club Van that takes all day to travel between New York and Boston or Washington, making sightseeing stops along the way.
Larry Lustig, the owner-driver of the budget-oriented service, picks up and leaves off passengers by reservation at budget motels and other sites, notably hostels, in all three cities.
Tour stops differ going and coming: On the way to Boston, the van crosses the Connecticut River by ferry, visiting the Gillette Castle in Hadlyme, Mystic, Conn., and Newport, R.I.


Baby's Feeding Time and the Wheels of Justice
In an age when the number of working mothers is growing and a decline in professional collegiality is often lamented, it was all but inevitable that some court somewhere would eventually entertain a "motion to exclude gurgling infant."
The motion was filed in a state court here on Monday, by Norman Riedmuller, a Houston lawyer.
Mr.
Riedmuller was seeking court protection from "a certain form of discovery abuse," namely Paula Brown, the 5-month-old, 20-pound daughter of his opposing counsel, Lisa B. Brown.


World Markets; Signs of Stability Keep Sao Paulo Hot
WITH one month to go before Brazil's presidential election, a centrist candidate has decisively overtaken his socialist opponent in all opinion polls, setting off a frenzy of investment and pushing Sao Paulo's stock index up 67 percent since the beginning of July.
This year, in fact, the Sao Paulo stock exchange has risen faster than any other exchange in North or South America, thanks in part to foreign investors who pumped $1 billion into the exchange in August alone.


Woodstock Journal; 'Hootchy Show' Still Shimmies in '94
This week at the Shenandoah County Fair, Mike Shifflett parted with 50 cents to peek at Bloody Mary, advertised as "the giant python who almost killed her last owner." He scoffed at forking over $5 for a palm reading, but then headed for his favorite stop, "the Hootchy Show."
The hootchy tent proclaims "Las Vegas" in blinking lights, and the ticket stand promises "Girls, Girls, Girls." It is among the last of the carnival burlesque shows that for most of the century were a staple of America's midways.


A Triumph of Faith, and Just in Time
The Jewish New Year has long been known as the Season of Renewal, but recent events at Congregation Derech Emunoh, the landmark synagogue of the Rockaways, have infused the term with vivid new meaning.
Eight weeks ago, the 90-year-old synagogue was seriously damaged by a suspicious early-morning fire that tore open holes in its roof, ceiling and walls.
Both the neo-Georgian building, set amid a wasteland of empty urban-renewal blocks, and its congregation had begun to crumble years before, and the fire seemed likely to disperse the tiny remnant of members forever.


Corrections
A report on Aug. 21 about the wedding of Leslie Allison Carson and Alden Harwood Sulger 3d misidentified the school that awarded the bride her undergraduate degree.
It is the University of Colorado.


POSTINGS: Prices for Lofts in Flux; Midtown Rises, Downtown Falls
For decades, living lofts -- those cavernous, often one-room spaces in old warehouses that are preferred by many artists, bohemians and large families -- have been associated mainly with downtown Manhattan, generally below Houston Street in neighborhoods like SoHo and TriBeCa and the surrounding environs.
But recent price trends indicate that loft living has a stronger appeal farther uptown, where it now costs more.


Frugal Travelers
To the Editor: Regarding the two recent responses to Susan Spano's "Penny-Wise in Paris: Right-Bank Choices" (Frugal Traveler, June 5) -- hard to believe, I know, but frugal travelers really do exist.
We are not necessarily 20.
We are 40, 50 (I am 51) and older.
I travel to Europe twice a year (off season) for 17 days each time.
My budget is $100 a day and includes air fare from Seattle and transportation in Europe.
So that leaves me approximately $45 to $50 a day for hotel, food and sightseeing.
I don't have luggage to schlep because I travel carry-on.
I would not dream of spending $10 or more on a taxi ride from the airport.
For one thing, the public bus is fun; for another, that $10 will be a nice lunch or dinner at some point in the vacation.
Mostly what I do is walk and look, walk and look, and it doesn't cost a sou or a peseta.


Easy-to-Pit Plums Make Tasty Seasonal Treats
WEEKS before the geese start to gather and fly off in formation, little purple freestone plums appear in the market.
Then you know summer has passed its peak.
These plums, often called prune plums or Italian prunes, available during August and much of September, bridge the gap between summer and fall.
Unlike most plums, which are best eaten raw, these are better cooked.
And they are the most convenient to use for cooking because the pits can be removed so easily.


Samples of Antarctica Outside Auckland
Travelers to New Zealand who are looking for an even more exotic experience can sample a bit of Antarctica at a new attraction just outside Auckland.
At Antarctic Encounter, visitors can ride in a Sno-Cat, a huge vehicle with treads wide enough to traverse snowy landscapes, and inspect a re-creation of the explorer Robert Falcon Scott's 1911 headquarters.
They will also see an orca whale and penguins and other Antarctic exhibits, including a display on how exploration is expected to be conducted in the 21st century.
Antarctic Encounter is linked to Kelly Tarlton's Journey Under the Sea, an aquarium named for a New Zealand diver and inventor who died seven weeks after it opened in January 1985.
The two attractions are connected by a moving walkway in a transparent acrylic tunnel that passes through two huge underwater tanks full of sharks, stingrays, eels and many of the aquarium's 1,500 other fish.


SUNDAY, September 4, 1994; Even Cowgirls Get the Bill
In real life (unlike in the movies) the city slickers who go to dude ranches are not all men.
In some places, none of them are.
Resorts and tour companies have been catering more and more to niche clienteles -- retirees, art lovers, gay men, women, New Age devotees.
And in the hills of Chase County, Kan., there's a ranch for female cowpersons.
Prairie Women Adventures and Retreat is owned by a woman, run by women and accepts only guests who are women, and who pay $225 to $275 to live for three days as cowhands without men who like to walk bowlegged and act like Jack Palance.
The guests drive pickups, pitch hay and sort, brand and castrate calves.
The getaway attracts urban women, like one Manhattan executive who says, "One day I'm sitting in my office in corporate America, and the next day I'm nursing a calf and fixing a fence."


Hiking the Bavarian Way
AFTER the snow melts, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany's premier alpine resort, turns into a hiker's paradise.
Situated about 60 miles south of Munich, Garmisch-Partenkirchen (the two towns were unified in 1935 in preparation for the 1936 Winter Olympics but still like to maintain their separate identities) lies in a deep valley beneath the Zugspitze, at 9,721 feet Germany's highest mountain.
The surrounding foothills and mountains offer trails of every kind, from calm walks around blue alpine lakes to steep climbs up naked glaciers.
Mountain hiking is a German national pastime, some might even say obsession.
In the years before the First World War, when going up into the mountains had a kind of cult status, hikers would make virtual pilgrimages to places like Garmisch-Partenkirchen.
These days, the world of German mountain hiking and its rites has as much to do with material pleasures, like wearing a fashionable brand of hiking boots, as spiritual ones.
A broad cross-section of Germans goes up in the mountains, from kindergarteners to pensioners, with most taking it all very seriously, like Americans who play softball to win.
This, along with the vast network of trails, can be daunting if you are a beginner.
But once you have chosen a trail, just follow the signposts -- which were more of a help to me during my visit in July than any of the maps I tried using -- and don't worry about not keeping up.


NEW YORKERS &amp; COMPANY
Record Promoter Tunes In To Audience Stuck in Traffic
Danny Buch, of Atlantic Records, took advantage of commuters stuck in rush-hour traffic and turned it into an advertiser's dream.


RATKO MLADIC
HE IS A CHILD OF WAR AND now a man of war.
His eyes are a piercing light blue, his hair close cropped and steel gray, his face as wide as a shovel.
Seated at a conference table, Gen.
Ratko Mladic talks in a husky baritone about the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina that has left several hundred thousand dead or missing and driven a million people from their homes.
We are in a small stuccoed building in the ski resort town of Pale.
Perched on a bluff amid red pines, the building commands a spectacular view of the mountains above Sarajevo.
Here the Bosnian Serbs have established the presidency of their self-proclaimed rebel state, the Republika Srpska, or Republic of Serbians.
In peacetime the building was a psychiatric sanitarium.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Amid the crush of U.S.
Open ephemera, someone has to take care of the basics -- the ball, the racquet, the score.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  In the brutal money-management world, Laura Sloate is as tough as they come.
No big deal, but she's also blind.


Potent New Blend of Heroin Ends 8 Very Different Lives
Aaron Lockhart was a chef at Serendipity, the stylish ice cream parlor-cum-restaurant on the Upper East Side where well-to-do parents take their children on Saturday afternoons.
Simon Tejada Matos drove a taxi.
John Borland was a gifted musician who earned a living tuning pianos.
Gregory Ancona worked as a clerk for an art-shipping company and tended bar to support himself as an aspiring sculptor.
The four men never met.
But along with four others -- a lawyer, a carpenter who sometimes drove a limousine, a young man who wore expensive clothes and jewelry but did not seem to have a regular job and a man who is still unidentified -- they died sudden, agonizing deaths in the latter days of August in one of the worst cases of multiple drug overdose in New York City in more than a decade.


Geography Primer On Deli's Inspiration
The A La Carte of Aug. 21 discusses a Bridgehampton deli called Schmoozie's.
It states that the deli's owner, Mr.
Karas, "was introduced to Jerry's in Beverly Hills, Calif., by his friend Wolfgang Puck." It also states that Schmoozie's is patterned after Jerry's.
I wish to offer two corrections: (1) the famous Jerry's is in Studio City, Calif. (over the hills from Beverly).
There's also a branch in Marina del Rey.
Jerry's did start in Beverly Hills -- but moved to Studio City about eight years ago.


The Sounds and Sights of Summer's End
ARRIVAL of the Labor Day weekend signals the end of summertime.
Chrysanthemums, asters and goldenrods begin to bloom, overtaking the black-eyed susans.
The shorter days mean fewer hours to work outdoors and it would seem that the season is all but over.
Even the children have gone, returning to school.
It is not yet time to cancel things out, however.
There are glorious weeks ahead, weeks in which to enjoy the sounds of the season as well as some of its sights.


Peace on Irish Horizon Doesn't Spell Prosperity
FOR all the jubilation in the nationalist strongholds of West Belfast, for all the waving of Irish flags and the taunts of "You're going home, Brit" by young Catholics to British foot soldiers, no one familiar with the last 25 tragic years in Northern Ireland believed that the province's future had been remotely settled last week.
There was a recognition on all sides that the Irish Republican Army's decision to call off its violent campaign to drive Britain from Northern Ireland was just one step on a tortuous journey toward a lasting settlement, and that even a permanent defusing of the bombs would address only some of the province's deep-rooted problems.
And as it became dimly imaginable that there could be some sort of phased British withdrawal or a move toward unification of the predominantly Protestant North with the overwhelmingly Catholic Republic of Ireland, the more pragmatic analysts of "the troubles" posed a tough question: Who is going to pay for peace?


Corrections
An article on Aug. 21 about Doyden Castle in Cornwall gave an incorrect name and telephone number for information about renting accommodations in the castle.
The information is available from Holiday Cottage Booking Office, (44 225) 791199.
The article also misstated the significance of the castle ruins at Tintagel in Arthurian legend.
The ruins, according to legend, are the site of King Arthur's birth, not the site of Camelot.


Catherine A. Lackey and Leslie Chao
Catherine Ann Lackey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Billy D. Lackey of Albuquerque, N.M., is to be married today to Leslie Tse-Hou Chao, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond M. C. Chao of Hong Kong.
The Rev.
Stephen E. Chamberlain, a Baptist minister, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Meadowood resort in St.
Helena, Calif.
The bride graduated from Colgate University and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
She is an associate at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


16 Games, What'll You Get? A Tougher Brown
This is what Giants quarterback Dave Brown has to look forward to in his first year as a starter.
It was 1983, and John Elway, after a solid preseason, had just been named the man by his coach, Dan Reeves.
Elway was just a rookie, but he was one of the most heralded college quarterbacks ever and Reeves liked what he saw and decided to make him his starter.
And why not?
Elway's preseason statistics weren't great but they weren't bad.
He was 38 of 76, throwing for 430 yards, 2 touchdowns and 4 interceptions.
He was sacked seven times and had a 53.9 rating.


RESULTS PLUS
DIVING  Final Dive Brings Gold for Olympian  Fu Mingxia of China, the defending titlist and Olympic champion, produced a stunning final dive to snatch the gold medal from her countrywoman Chi Bin at the world swimming championships yesterday in Rome.
Needing to score over 62 points on her final dive in the 10-meter high board, Fu brought gasps of admiration from the crowd with an inward three-and-a-half somersault.
It earned her scores of 8.5 and four 8.00's to collect 75.48, easily the highest of the competition. (AP)


Stacy A. Rotta, Mark E. Holmen
Stacy Ann Rotta, a daughter of Rita P. Rotta of Birmingham, Mich., and Lawrence E. Rotta of Mount Clemens, Mich., was married yesterday to Mark Eric Holmen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Robert Holmen of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Charles Kavanagh, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of the Snows in Stratton Mountain, Vt.
The bride, 31, graduated from Wayne State University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is a second vice president in corporate benefits at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Her father is an education consultant for the Macomb Intermediate School District in Mount Clemens.
Her mother is the administrator with Ogne, Alberts &amp; Stuart, a law firm in Troy, Mich.


Special Unit Ushers Homeless From Subways
As members of the transit police Homeless Outreach Unit put on rubber gloves and nylon vests for another night patrolling the dank subway tunnels below the Bowery, Lieut.
John Romero spotted a prostitute he knew ambling along Houston Street.
"Barbara, come here," he called out to the woman, whom he knew as a frequent crack smoker in the tunnels.
"I want to talk to you."


No Headline
"This is not just another meeting. The long-term fate of this planet is in the balance." J. JOSEPH SPEIDEL of Population Action International.  [ 1:5. ]


American Football Conference
Teams are listed in order of predicted finish.
A.F.C.
EAST BUFFALO BILLS 1993: Finished 12-4.
Lost, 30-13, to Dallas in the SuperBowl STRENGTHS: A high-energy, experienced offense with talent at all the skill positions.
Running back Thurman Thomas is still the most versatile running back in the league.
And Bruce Smith is still one of the most respected pass rushers.
WEAKNESSES: Quarterback Jim Kelly is battling tendinitis in his throwing shoulder.
He's been beaten up in the last four years and has weathered most of it.
Tackle Howard (House) Ballard went to Seattle as a free agent.
His replacement, Jerry Crafts at 6-6, 351 pounds, is as big as a luxury liner, but is inexperienced.
OUTLOOK: The Bills are confident that they can make it back to another Super Bowl.
They said the same thing last year.
And the year before that, and the year before that . . .
Take them seriously.
MIAMI DOLPHINS 1993: Finished 9-7.
STRENGHTS: The secondary is strong with cornerback Troy Vincent, returning from a knee injury, and the free-agent acquisitions of cornerback Tyrone Braxton and safety Gene Atkins.
WEAKNESSES: The rushing attack isn't going to send shivers through anyone.
Running back Terry Kirby was a pleasant surprise as a rookie last year.
But they need more from him, Keith Byars and Mark Higgs to have a decent threat in the rushing department.
OUTLOOK: Everyone wants to see how quarterback Dan Marino returns from the torn Achilles' tendon that sidelined him for most of last season.
If Marino returns to form, the Dolphins stand a good shot at Making the Super Bowl.
INDIANAPOLIS COSTS 1993: Finished 4-12.
STRENGTHS: The linebacking corps has a mixture of youth and experience and is the cornerstone of the defense.
Watch Tony Bennett, a free agent from Green Bay, as a pass rusher.
First-round pick Marshall Faulk has put some teeth in the rushing attack.
WEAKNESSES: It's fair to say that Jim Harbaugh doesn't have the gun that Jeff George had at quarterback.
The problem for Harbaugh is no one is sure what type of quarterback he is after being browbeaten for most of his seven years in Chicago.
We'll soon find out.
OUTLOOK: If Faulk can take some of the pressure off Harbaugh, like Thurman Thomas does from Jim Kelly in Buffalo, then the Colts can do some things.
How much can they get accomplished?
Who knows.
But as long as Faulk is in the mix, it should be fun to watch.
NEW YORK JETS: 1993: Finished 8-8.
STRENGHTS: The offense could be a powerhouse.
Running back Johnny Johnson and tight end Johnny Mitchell are gamebreakers.
Receiver Rob Moore is developing into a big-play man.
Linebacker Mo Lewis might be the most underrated player at his position in the league.
WEAKNESSES: Rookie cornerback Aaron Glenn, who will start opposite veteran James Hasty in the secondary, could be liability because of his lack of experience.
The Jets still don't have a dominant pass rusher on the defensive line.
OUTLOOK: For the Jets to make a run at the playoffs two players must stay healthy and have Pro Bowl-caliber years -- quarterbck Boomer Esiason and defensive end Jeff Lageman.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS: 1993: Finished 5-11.
STRENGTHS: Running back Marion Butts could be the switch that turns on the lights for the Patriots' offense and take pressure off second-year quarterback Drew Bledsoe.
The secondary won't be pushovers now that cornerback Ricky Reynolds and safety Myron Guyton have been added.
WEAKNESSES: The Patriots' defense finished No. 22 against the run last season, which bothered Coach Bill Parcells to no end.
Perhaps one of those monster linebackers, Vincent Brown and Willie McGinest, can plug up those holes.
OUTLOOK: The only thing standing in the Patriots' way of being a consistent winner is time.
They're a fairly young team that needs time to build experience and confidence.
They'll be better than 5-11 this year.
A.F.C.
CENTRAL HOUSTON OILERS 1993: Finished 12-4.
STRENGTHS: The offensive line remains strong, anchored by veteran center Bruce Matthews.
The secondary is also tough with safety Bubba McDowell and cornerback Cris Dishman.
Running back Gary Brown was a splendid surprise last year rushing for 1,002 yards in just eight games.
WEAKNESSES: The Oilers took a big hit in the pass-rush department with the departures of defensive ends William Fuller and Sean Jones.
That kind of talent depletion isn't easily filled.
OUTLOOK: Quarterback Cody Carison was a very capable backup to Warren Moon.
Now, Carlson is the starter.
There's a big difference.
Moon had run that offense for 10 years.
Carlson knows it, but how well can he run it week in and week out?
PITTSBURGH STEELERS 1993: Finished 9-7.
STRENGHTS: Barry Foster is a big-time running back who is used to carrying the load.
A pair of Pro Bowlers, linebacker Greg Lloyd and cornerback Rod Woodson, give Pittsburgh one of the fastest defenses in the league.
WEAKNESSES: The receiving corps doesn't give defenses nearly as many headaches as it should.
They're hoping first-round pick Charles Johnson can rectify that situation.
OUTLOOK: When Foster went down with an ankle injury last year so did the Steelers' offense.
They need Foster healthy if they're going to have a chance at making the playoffs.
CLEVELAND BROWNS 1993: Finished 7-9.
STRENGTHS: The Browns ranked No. 12 in defense in the league last year and a big part of that was tackle Michael Dean Perry.
Safety Eric Turner, who had five interceptions last year, should help the defense.
WEAKNESSES: Whether it's Vinny Testaverde or Mark Rypien at quarterback, it doesn't matter.
The Browns aren't going to get any sparks from the position.
OUTLOOK: The Browns have always promised to find a role for mighty mile running back Eric Metcalf.
They're promising again this year to make him a prominent part of the offense.
That would be an entertaining diversion from another possible quarterback controversy.
CINCINNATI BENGALS 1993: Finished 3-13.
STRENGTHS: A defense that can boast six No. 1 picks, including this year's numero uno, Dan (Big Daddy) Wilkinson.
With Wilkinson and Danny Copeland, a first-rounder in 1993, at the tackles, the Bengals have the makings of one of the most dominant defensive fronts in the league.
WEAKNESSES: The offense finished 27th in the league last year and the same group returns intact.
The offensive line is porous.
Quarterback David Klinger is still stumbling around in the dark.
Running back Harold Green is a bright spot.
But how much can one man do?
OUTLOOK: Last year, General Manager Mike Brown called his team "The gang that couldn't shoot straight." The same can still be said of the offense, but the defense can draw a bead and knock out anyone.
Unfortunately for Cincinnati, it takes three units to make a whole team.
A.F.C.
WEST LOS ANGELES RAIDERS 1993: Finished 10-6.
STRENGTHS: A corps of receivers that could qualify for the Olympic sprint relay team.
The defense has some emerging stars in linemen Chester McGlockton, Anthony Smith and Nolan Harrison.
The secondary is solid with cornerbacks Terry McDaniel and Lionel Washington and safety Eddie Anderson.
WEAKNESSES: The lack of a rushing attack kept them from beating the Bills at Buffalo in the playoffs last year.
The Raiders have added Harvey Williams from Kansas City as a way of beefing up the deficiency.
Ty Montgomery will start at halfback and Napoleon McCallum is the fullback.
OUTLOOK: The Black and Silver won't have many occasions to be black and blue this year, because they'll be the ones handing out the licks.
With the speed they have they should run right past a lot of teams.
The key will be whether quarterback Jeff Hostetler will be able to find those fleet-footed receivers.
DENVER BRONCOS 1993: Finished 9-7.
STRENGTHS: The offense took a giant step forward with the addition of speedy receivers Anthony Miller and Mike Pritchard.
They're joining quarterback John Elway, running back Rod Bernstine and tight end Shannon Sharpe, who had 81 receptions last year.
WEAKNESSES: The defense finished 19th in the league last year and lost cornerback Tyrone Braxton.
Free safety Steve Atwater can only do so much.
Free agents Ray Crockett and Ben Smith will start at the corners.
OUTLOOK: The only thing that can stand in the Broncos' way this year is their defense.
If it can hold their own, the offense will stand tall.
With Miller and Pritchard as targets, Elway could be in for another big year in terms of numbers.
But he'd rather have a shot at a Super Bowl championship and the Bronocs have a fighting chance.
KANSAS CHIEFS 1993: Finished 11-5.
STRENGTHS: The defensive front seven, which includes linebacker Derrick Thomas, defensive end Neil Smith and tackles Joe Phillips and Dan Saleaumua, is one of the toughest.
Quarterback Joe Montana is 38 years old, but when he's healthy and on, he's still one of the best.
WEAKNESSES: Greg Hill, the first-round pick, is going to be asked to handle the rushing load, because as good as Marcus Allen is he's not you enough to carry the ball 200 times a season.
OUTLOOK: Quarterback Steve Bono was one of the smartest moves the Chiefs could have made.
ONe good lick, like the one that knocked him 9out of the A.F.C. championship game at Buffalo last season, and Montana is on the shelf for a while.
Bono knows the offense and can run it.
The Chiefs are going to be in the thick of the playoff race.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS 1993: Finished 6-10.
STRENGTHS: Defensively, the Seahawks can display some of the best players in the league at their positions.
Defensive tackle Cortez Kennedy and linebacker Rufus Porter are great pass rushers and safety Eugene Robinson is a big hitter.
Quarterback Rick Mirer is beginning to emerge and running back Chris Warren has put together back-to-back 1,000-yard rushing seasons.
WEAKNESSES: Receiver Brian Blades, who had 80 catches and three touchdowns last year, needs a counterbalance.
The Seahawks acquired tackle Howard Ballard to shore up their offensive line, but they lost tackle Andy Heck.
OUTLOOK: The Seahawks are a mystery team.
They have a collection of fine, young players, but they don't seem to be able to get it together to build a consistent winner.
With Kennedy and Mirer, the Seahawks have the cornerstones for success.
But the team remains an undeveloped project.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS 1993: Finished 8-8.
STRENGTHS: Defensive linemen Leslie O'Neal and Chris Mims give the Chargers defense its bark and linebacker Junior Seau gives it the bit.
Natrone Means was a pleasant surprise as a rookie, rushing for 645 yards.
WEAKNESSES: The offense has been depleted of explosiveness by the departure of running back Marion Butts and receiver Anthony Miller.
Quarterback Stan Humphries is workmanlike and gets the job done, but with fewer weapons to work with he's going to have to work magic this year.
OUTLOOK: The chargers aren't nearly as good as they were two years ago when they won the A.F.C.
West.
They're also a much different team with the loss of Rod Bernstine, John Friesz, Butts and Miller.
They'll have a difficult time getting anywhere in this division, especially with the Raiders, Chiefs and the Broncos sitting on top of them.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
LeBlanc is not the first to shock us with a description of armies of children without parents or a firm social structure.
William Golding told the same story in "Lord of the Flies." What we need is a government acting in loco parentis and turning every urban slum into a kibbutz.
JOHN BRODSKY, M.D.
Swarthmore, Pa.


Story Time


Irish Premier Tries to Widen Ulster Accord
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds of Ireland said today that he was pressing behind-the-scenes contacts with Northern Ireland's outlawed Protestant guerrillas to persuade them to join the cease-fire declared three days ago by the rival Irish Republican Army.
With the specter of Protestant violence still hanging over the uneasy truce, Mr.
Reynolds, the political leader of mostly Roman Catholic Ireland, said he wanted to reassure even extremist Protestant factions here that they had nothing to fear by joining the I.R.A. in giving up violence to pursue peace talks.


Method and Madness; Little Brother
Not so long ago, high technology was seen as the likely handmaiden of totalitarian government, with surveillance systems and central computers tracking every citizen from cradle to grave.
By a strange turn of events, what is now in progress is the very opposite of that nightmare.
So many powerful technologies are streaming into private hands that Government is struggling to protect even the bare minimum of its legitimate domains.
Once only governments could launch photo-reconnaissance satellites; now the C.I.A. is anxiously trying to curb commercial systems that can discern objects as small as a yard across, high enough resolution to interest generals as much as geologists.
A fleet of navigational satellites designed to give military commanders their exact position anywhere in the world is now in essence available to anyone; the Pentagon has let the public listen in on a degraded signal, but commercial vendors with clever algorithms can restore it to near-military accuracy.


MEN WORKING
A tour of small-town Italy where the white shirt goes to work.


Linda A. Schultz, David W. Yim
Linda Anne Schultz, a senior financial analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc., a securities brokerage, and David W. Yim, a senior fixed income analyst at IDS Financial Services, both in Minneapolis, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Foltz-Morrison performed the ceremony at the Valley Community Presbyterian Church in Minneapolis.
The bride, 32, graduated from Iowa State University of Science and Technology.
She is a daughter of Karen Schultz of West Des Moines and the late George Schultz.


Reform Is Dead. Long Live Reform.
A wise adage tells us that the best should not be the enemy of the good.
The current debate about health care reform suggests a further proviso: the second best should not be the enemy of the third best.
It seems only yesterday that critics of the Clinton plan were saying that the same objectives could be achieved more simply and, anyway, 95 percent coverage was as good as universal.
Now the best hope for progressive legislation, the "mainstream" coalition led by Senators John Chafee and John Breaux, has a plan for 92 percent coverage.
But support for its financing is shaky.
So unless the coalition accepts some of Senator George Mitchell's revenue measures -- or, better yet, a tax on freeloader employers that don't insure -- we may soon hear that we will do well to keep steady at 85 percent of Americans insured.


Fort Monmouth Journal; Transfer of Army Band Stirs Dismay in Region
A SUDDEN Army announcement that the 389th Army Band whose history here goes back 64 years -- will be packing up its instruments and shipping out permanently to the Aberdeen Proving Grounds in Maryland has surprised central New Jersey.
It has also sent politicians scurrying to see if they can reverse the action.
It further downgrades Fort Monmouth's already shrinking role as a troop training site, which dates to its founding in 1917 as the home of the Signal Corps.
And the announcement brought groans from mayors in nearby municipalities where the band had performed free at parades and ceremonies.
The towns would have to pay about $1,400 to have the band come from Maryland.


Pageantry And Plays In Tuxedo
DOES anybody attend the New York Renaissance Festival just to catch a classical doubleheader: "The Merry Wives of Windsor" and Chaucer's "Merchant's Tale"?
Most likely not.
Consider the diversions there.
And there is a there there (65 acres in Sterling Forest) and other stages (seven in all, including an irresistible Storybook Stage for youngsters, with its Story Tyme Theater).
And there's an escapologist, all chained and padlocked, on another; 10 seconds and he's out.
What about the equestrian demonstrations and jousters-in-training?
Those are just a couple of the sideshows.


Everywhere You Look, 'Crypt' and More 'Crypt'
WILLIAM M. GAINES MUST be spinning in his grave, albeit happily.
Mr.
Gaines, who published the macabre comic-book series "Tales From the Crypt" in the early 1950's, would probably never have predicted that those slightly schlocky cartoons featuring the creepy Crypt Keeper as host would someday become a billion-dollar industry.
But that is precisely what may happen over the next two years as a sixth season of HBO's "Tales From the Crypt" hits the market along with three feature films based on the series, an adventure game show called "Secrets of the Crypt Keeper's Haunted House" and a line of "Crypt" merchandise.
From the lurid comic-book gore usually consumed by boys in flashlight-under-the-blanket fashion, "Tales From the Crypt" has become a slick ratings hit for HBO, a successful series of reruns on Fox and a Saturday-morning cartoon, "Tales From the Crypt Keeper," on ABC.
The thread these vehicles share is the Crypt Keeper, the mordant and skeletal host of the HBO series who has become a star in his own right, even jamming with the band on "The Tonight Show With Jay Leno."


'I Just Quit,' Rosalie Gwathmey Said. And She Walked Away.
COULD a passion, a need to make, just die?
Could a thing be real one moment, and then suddenly not real anymore?
There was an extreme feeling of peace as I sat with Rosalie Gwathmey, whose photographs of black people in the Deep South, taken in the years when she worked closely with the Photo League, have just been resurrected and put on display by Glenn Horowitz, rare book seller in East Hampton on Newtown Lane.


A Haitian Family Hides, but Pain and Fear Follow
Robert Jean and his three children sat together in the shade of a palm tree this week, a portrait of a modern-day Haitian family framed in suffering.
There is 19-year-old Natasha, who said she was raped repeatedly on June 1 by five men who wore civilian clothes but carried military weapons.
There is Rudy, 17, who said he was handcuffed, beaten with batons and forced to watch.
The men laughed, saying that this was what happened to "democracy people."


Where Newfoundland's Vikings Walked
TEETERING on the edge of North America, Newfoundland has been in position for some of the epochal moments of world history.
Five hundred years before Columbus set sail, this was where Viking explorers established a colony in the New World.
Five hundred million years earlier, it is where continents collided.
Once the continents drew apart, glaciers creeping down from the Arctic incised the myriad lakes, ponds, bogs and deep fjords that account for the island's crunchy ruggedness and create a habitat for everything from caribou and Arctic hare to rock ptarmigans.


A Nice Guy in a Nasty Business
TINKER IN TELEVISION From General Sarnoff to General Electric.
By Grant Tinker and Bud Rukeyser.
Illustrated. 270 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


It's Theater All Day Long
DOES anybody attend the New York Renaissance Festival just to catch a classical doubleheader, Shakespeare's "Merry Wives of Windsor" and Chaucer's "Merchant's Tale"?
Most likely not.
Consider the diversions there.
And there is a there there (65 acres in Sterling Forest), with other stages (seven in all, including the irresistible Storybook Stage for youngsters, with its Story Tyme Theater and its sing-alongs).
See the escapologist, chained and padlocked; 10 seconds and he's out.
And the equestrian demonstrations: jousters-in-training.
Those are just sideshows.


Megan G. Falk, James F. Pickette
Megan Gracey Falk, the daughter of Donna and Arthur Falk of Flemington, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Francis Pickette, a son of Dorothy and T. Robert Pickette of Boston.
John Purdy, a Roman Catholic deacon, officiated at the Church of St.
Magdalen.


Ms. Wright, Dr. Mennenoh
Kelly Marie Wright, a daughter of Joan M. Wright of Woodcliff Lake, N.J., and the late David K. Wright, was married on Friday to Dr.
Henning Mennenoh, a son of Ute and Ulrich Mennenoh of Remscheid, Germany, in a civil ceremony at Remscheid Town Hall.
Mrs.
Wright-Mennenoh, 25, is a freelance translator and interpreter in Berlin, where she is studying for a doctorate in political science at the Free University of Berlin.
She graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in political science from the University of Hanover in Germany.
Her mother, a former New Jersey assemblywoman from Bergen County, is the director of planning for the county in Paramus, N.J.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Agassi Surges Ahead, but Davenport Sinks
The role of the dangerous floater was defined in stereo yesterday at the United States Open, where the seedings continue to be more fiction than fact.
While unseeded Andre Agassi surfaced, soared and happily hurled his used shirts into a sea of waiting arms in the Stadium Court's bleachers, a flummoxed Lindsay Davenport sank like a stone, the sixth-seeded victim of a speedy challenger who made no distinction between favorites and floaters.


On Sunday; Words of Peace From Patriarch Of I.R.A. Anger
A PRIVATE gathering of Irishmen last week at an upstairs room of a Second Avenue pub in Manhattan had all the melodramatic stealth that long has hobbled the image of Ireland's struggle for peace and unity.
"All that were missing were the trench coats," said Representative Peter T. King, a Nassau County Republican and a fervid Irish-American who has taken heat from editorial writers, voters and the State Department for a decade of visits to Belfast in open support of the guerrilla fight of the Irish Republican Army.


In Ridgefield, Works Familiar and New
THE first impression of this year's anthology at the Kouros Sculpture Center, in Ridgefield, is of art mustering near the entrance as if on its way out.
In reality, the reverse is true: Several sculptures remain from last year and about 15 new ones have been added.
But as with a stone tossed into a pool, the effect is more noticeable on the perimeter than at the center.


National Football Conference
Teams are listed in order of predicted finish.
N.F.C.
EAST DALLAS COWBOYS 1993: Super Bowl champions, finished 12-4, defeated Buffalo, 30-13, in Super Bowl.
STRENGTHS: Potent offense and talented at all the skill positions with quarterback Troy Aikman, running back Emmitt Smith and receiver Michael Irvin.
Defensive line brings a great deal of pressure and stays fresh with a constant rotation system.


THE PRESIDENT'S PAST
We read Michael Kelly's article ("The President's Past," July 31) in amazement and anger.
As the authors of books on Arkansas politics, we have analyzed, documented, taught and written about Bill Clinton for nearly 20 years.
Your title is misleading; only one paragraph of this lengthy piece is devoted to what Clinton accomplished in Arkansas, slighting not only 12 years of remarkable achievement but a record of commitment and political courage.
Governor Clinton twice vetoed bills sponsored by the National Rifle Association.
He faced down conservative legislators to initiate and maintain school-based health clinics.
If, as Kelly suggests, Clinton has a near-pathological need for approval, where did he get the strength to stand up against the teachers' union, a powerful and previously supportive group that threatened him with political extinction?
And whydidn't Kelly point out that the many-tentacled forces of Stephens Inc. spent 10 years trying to beat Clinton's political brains out because he dared to destroy their longtime monopoly on public bonds in Arkansas?


Corrections
A chart on Aug. 14 accompanying an article about family violence incorrectly characterized the services offered by Sanctuary for Families.
The group does indeed have residential facilities.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
Gang Girl" glorified a reprehensible individual who, if not for your article, would have remained unknown outside her immediate block or neighborhood in Brooklyn. Now, with her face on your cover, she can nurture visions of a mini-series and national notoriety. WILLIAM C. LOGAN Brooklyn


Packers Brace as Sharpe Plans to Sit Out
STERLING SHARPE, the National Football League's best wide receiver for the last two seasons, told Coach MIKE HOLMGREN yesterday that he would sit out the 1994 season under terms of his present contract, which would have paid him $1.3 million in base salary plus about $690,000 in incentives.
Sharpe signed a 10-year deal in 1991 believed to be worth $15.5 million.
But he is apparently irked that other wide receivers in the league have surpassed his compensation and four of his teammates now have higher average salaries.
Sharpe hasn't missed an N.F.L. game in six years in the league, playing 96 consecutive games despite an array of injuries.
General Manager RON WOLF said yesterday that the Packers' weeklong efforts to satisfy Sharpe's contract demands have reached an impasse. (AP)


Business Diary: August 28 - September 2
THE ECONOMY The Economy Cools as It Coasts Into Labor Day In the last flurry of statistics before Labor Day forces everyone to start acting like a grown-up again, the economy is looking pretty much as it has for a while now: it's slowing, but not too much.
Consumer confidence eased for the second month in August, and the housing market is still heading down -- as people kick themselves for missing those rock-bottom mortgage rates.
As for the unemployment rate, it's coasting along at 6.1 percent -- about where it's been for four months after plunging early in the year.
But the slowing trend showed up in a report that just 179,000 payroll jobs were added in August -- fewer than expected.
And inflation?
Nowhere on the horizon: average hourly earnings rose just 2 cents last month -- nothing to set off a spending spree.
Given all this, it seems unlikely that the Federal Reserve will feel the need to raise interest rates again at its policy meeting this month.
But you never know.


Summer Travel Across Nation Shows a Surge
Inspired by low air fares, economic confidence and the unshakable lure of the road, Americans have been traveling this summer like never before.
Preliminary figures strongly suggest that, from the New Jersey Shore to the Las Vegas Strip, the number of summer vacationers will set a record.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
EL BARRIO  Modern Artists Offer Works Inspired by Those of Past
In celebration of its 25th birthday, El Museo del Barrio, the museum dedicated to the arts of Latin American cultures, has arranged an exhibit in which contemporary artists have what the museum calls a "visual dialogue" with artists of the past.


Slight Improvement In Beach Water Quality
The water quality at beaches around the nation has improved marginally in recent years, according to the National Resources Defense Council, an environmental group based in New York, but contamination levels are still unacceptably high.
Last year, the group found there were 2,438 beach closings or swimming advisories because of bacterial contamination from human and animal waste, 182 fewer than in 1992.
However, the slight drop is more because of random factors such as lighter rainfall, rather than a real improvement in sewage conditions, according to Karen O'Malley, a spokeswoman for the group.


A.L. Central Could Have Been a Contender
This is one year when one of baseball's old barometers should definitely hold form.
The teams in first place on Labor Day should be in first place at the end of the season.
Maybe that's because the major leagues have already reached the end of the season.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; Gargoyles, the Guggenheim, Cantilevered Balconies
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
Irving Place Gargoyles
Q .
Tell me about the building with all the gargoyles at 81 Irving Place in Manhattan . . .
Arthur Ehrlich, Port Ewen, N.Y.


For N.H.L. Players The Vacation Is Over
It seems like weeks since the hockey season ended.
And that's just what it has been, not quite 12 of them, since the Rangers clinched the Stanley Cup on June 14, by the margin of one goal, in Game 7 of the final round of the playoffs against the Vancouver Canucks.
But the sport with the shortest off season gets back to work this week with all 26 National Hockey League teams beginning training camp to prepare for the 27-week regular schedule, which begins Oct. 1, its earliest starting date ever.
One of the reasons for the early start is to get the playoffs finished by early June.


Hard Times in the American City
The affronts to civilization borne by American cities mounted last week, and neither young nor old were spared.
In Detroit, Rosa Parks, 81, who helped launch the civil rights movement in 1955 when she refused to give up her seat on a bus to a white man, was beaten in her bedroom by a burglar who took less than $100.
She was treated at a hospital and released, and the police took precautions to protect the suspect arrested for fear fellow jail inmates would exact revenge.


25 Years Later, Monday Night Is a Fall Classic
At its silver anniversary, ABC's "Monday Night Football" is a certifiable institution.
When the Raiders play the 49ers tomorrow night, the game will get its predictably high rating.
If form holds, Year 25 will find "M.N.F." in the top 10 of all prime-time series, as it has been since the 1990-91 season.
But before "Monday Night Football" stormed the football kingdom in 1970, before the first team of Keith Jackson, Howard Cosell and Don Meredith yielded after Year 1 to Cosell, Meredith and Frank Gifford, the National Football League entertained thoughts of "Friday Night Football," or "Monday Night Football" on CBS or NBC.


Jessica L. Lustig, W. R. Rosenblatt
Jessica Lynn Lustig, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold S. Lustig of Pittsburgh, is to be married there today to William Reiss Rosenblatt, a son of Mr. &amp; Mrs.
Louis Rosenblatt of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Debra Pine is to officiate at the Rivers Club.
The bride, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Temple University.
She is the editor of the BMG Classical Record Club in New York.
Her father is a vice president, in Pittsburgh, for Gruntal &amp; Company, the investment bank.
Her mother, Natalie F. Lustig, is a librarian at the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.


Gretchen A. Craft, James S. Rubin
Gretchen Anne Craft, a daughter of Karen W. and John C. Craft of Kansas City, Mo., is to be married there today to James Samuel Rubin, a son of Judith O. and Robert E. Rubin, President Clinton's assistant for economic policy in Washington.
Joseph Stevens Jr., the Chief Judge of the Federal District Court for the Western District of Missouri in Kansas City, is to officiate at the Ritz-Carlton.
The bride, 28, is a law clerk in Manhattan for Judge Pierre N. Leval of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
She is to be a law clerk to Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the United States Supreme Court next year.
She graduated from Yale University, from which she and the bridegroom also received their law degrees.
Her father is a partner at Craft, Fridkin &amp; Rhyne, a Kansas City law firm.


Mutual Funds; Facing the Currency Risk Question
INVESTING overseas is a two-part equation: the stocks or bonds you bought must perform well, and so must the currencies of the country where they were issued.
This year has proved to be a good lesson in the second half of the equation.
The currencies of Japan and Europe soared against the dollar, lifting the returns of mutual funds invested there that had not hedged currencies back to the dollar.
But when the dollar strengthens, unhedged funds could make money abroad in local market terms but lose when the profits are converted into dollars.
Hedging would allow the same fund to earn the market return but would neutralize the currency component.


Christine Sang and David E. Weng
Dr.
Christine Nai-Mei Sang and Dr.
David Edward Weng were married yesterday in Baltimore.
The Rev.
Phyllis L. Hubbell performed the ceremony at the First Unitarian Church.
Dr.
Sang, a pediatric anesthesiologist, is a clinical associate at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
She graduated magna cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in public health from Harvard University and her M.D. degree from Johns Hopkins University.


Anne W. Salladin, John P. Stern
Anne Woodard Salladin, the daughter of Jean Woodard and Richard C. Salladin, both of Sausalito, Calif., is to be married today to John Peter Stern, the son of H. Peter Stern of Mountainville, N.Y., and Joan Ogden Stern of New York and Mountainville.
Judge Rena K. Uviller of the Court of Claims in Manhattan is to officiate at the home of the bridegroom's mother in Mountainville.
The bride, 36, was until recently an associate at Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, the New York law firm.
In October, she is to join the office of the general counsel at the Treasury Department in Washington.
She graduated from Williams College and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a partner in Orrick, Herrington &amp; Sutcliffe, a San Francisco law firm.
Her mother is a former project director for exhibitions at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.


Resources Strained at Guantanamo Bay
At Camp Romeo, a settlement for Cuban refugees built virtually overnight on a golf course, a group of Cuban men worked today with marines in the dusty heat setting up dozens of portable bathrooms.
Not far away, other refugees lined up with buckets to pick up their daily water rations.
Under a tent, an 8-year-old girl sat on her cot putting diapers on her only toy, an empty box of facial tissue she called "Jani."


Family Planning Stays On the Cairo Agenda
To the Editor:
We were pleased to see your Aug. 28 editorial describing the goals of the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo.
Two points, however, need clarification.
You say the Vatican has "successfully deleted" certain terms like "reproductive rights," "family planning" and "safe motherhood" from the draft program of action.
This is not the case.
Those terms are in the document, placed in brackets, to be finally negotiated by governments in Cairo.
You also imply that there is debate about the right of access to contraception.
The world community agreed at the first conference on population in Bucharest in 1974 on "the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means to do so." That very language is in the Cairo document -- not in brackets.


Sally K. Strupp, F. E. Wakeman 3d
Sally Katherine Strupp, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Strupp of New York and Fisher's Island, N.Y., is to be married today to Frederic Evans Wakeman 3d, the son of Nancy Wakeman of Point Richmond, Calif., and Mr.
Wakeman Jr. of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Joan O'Gorman is to perform the ceremony at the Congregational Church in Manchester, Vt.
Mrs.
Wakeman, 29, is an assistant vice president, in Frankfurt, with Citibank.
She graduated from Colorado College, and she and the bridegroom received M.B.A. degrees from Georgetown University.
Her father is a senior partner in Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, the New York law firm.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
I was struck by the tragedy of girls like Tamika who are allowed to slip through the cracks.
As I write this, Congress struggles over a crime bill.
But even if spending is authorized for crime-prevention programs, little will be focused on Tamika and others like her.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a proposal to redraw the boundaries of New York City school districts misstated the boroughs in which three new districts would be created.
One new district is proposed for the Bronx and two are proposed for Queens.


U.N. Is Facing Angry Debate On Population
Already mired in an angry debate over abortion and women's rights, the United Nations Conference on Population and Development will confront other equally volatile issues when it opens here Monday.
Can the earth sustain its present rate of population growth?
Who is to blame for the destruction of natural resources, profligate consumers in industrial nations or the desperate poor in overcrowded, underdeveloped countries who strip the land of vegetation to survive?
If a plan of action is adopted, who will pay for it?
And where will the money go, to governments or to grass-roots groups working in villages?
Will donor countries try to attach human rights or other conditions to aid?


Gay Bar Shut in 'Loop'
It's long been known as the Loop, the area around East 53d Street and Second Avenue where young male hustlers hang out out and older men cruise to buy sexual favors.
In recent years, the police say, a parallel indoor scene developed at Rounds, a piano bar and restaurant at 303 East 53d St.


Market Not Open
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow has written several columns, most recently "Yesterday Was Just Perfect for a Ball Game" (The Times, Aug. 29), in which he espouses the view that the players are in the right in the baseball strike since they are only "seeking to be paid what they can receive in the open market." Although attractive in its simplicity, this opinion ignores the fact that the market for major league baseball is not open.
It is a legal monopoly that permits most cities to have only one representative team.
Moreover, there are significant barriers to entry that make it difficult, if not impossible, for a new major league baseball league to be introduced and remain financially viable.
Thus, players can command exorbitant salaries, which are directly passed on by the growing number of games on pay television.
So far, at least, there are enough fans willing to pay the prices to support the continued escalation of player salaries.


Pamela N. Merlis, Scott Conover
Pamela Nicole Merlis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Merlis of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to Everest Scott Conover Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Conover of Newtown, Conn.
The Rev.
Margee Iddings, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Milton Inn in Sparks, Md.


The Russians Say a Formal Farewell
"The Russian troops were seen off more willingly than they were met," a Moscow commentator remarked on the TV news program "Details" last week as the last of Russia's troops in Germany withdrew.
His wry tone seemed appropriate to an event both as solemn as the final salute of Gen.
Matvei Burlakov, above, to President Boris N. Yeltsin, left, and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and as oddly festive as Yeltsin's impromptu antics conducting a military band.
The prospect of returning to a land in turmoil was not enticing.
At left, soldiers sat last month on a train in Estonia awaiting evacuation.
The last Russian troops left Estonia and Latvia last week.


The Man Carrying the Ball for Murdoch
"HILL here," David Hill answered the telephone in his crackling working-class Australian accent.
It was the Saturday morning after Fox Television made its first test run as a broadcaster of professional football, a preseason National Football League game in San Francisco last month.
In his Hollywood office, Mr.
Hill, the president of Fox Sports, was recovering from the effort and ruminating over the performance.
"I'm exhausted," he said.
"No one breathed for the first 20 minutes. Couldn't relax until the end credits ran. But we overcame any vestige of doubt that Fox could do football."
An official for a rival network called to say the game's rating was disappointing, that the baseball strike and Fox's months of tireless promotion should have caused a stampede to the fledgling network.
"Hell, it was awesome!" Mr.
Hill shouts.
"First time out? Fox had never done football before? Awesome!"
Ever since Rupert Murdoch bid a breathtaking $1.58 billion last December for the television rights to the National Football Conference for the next four years, Mr.
Hill has been scrambling to build a sports broadcasting division from scratch.
The eccentric, 48-year-old Australian is an unqualified cheerleader for the start-up, usually brimming with bravado.
But Mr.
Hill has his moments of doubt.
He has been spotted in his office, his head in his hands, and muttering, "I'm bleeping scared."
"I have great mood swings," Mr.
Hill conceded.
"I wake up a lot at 4 in the morning with a lot on my mind."
He should have a lot on his mind.
It is up to Mr.
Hill to make good on Mr.
Murdoch's billion-dollar-plus gamble, one the biggest bets in the recent history of television.
For Mr.
Hill, as for the on-the-field quarterbacks like Troy Aikman and Randall Cunningham, the real season begins today.
The network starts at noon with its one-hour "Fox N.F.L. Sunday" pregame studio show, then six games including the Super Bowl champion Dallas Cowboys playing the Pittsburgh Steelers.
For Fox, there is far more at stake than simply success or failure in football.
It is a big step into the mass-market mainstream for the seven-year-old Fox Television Network, which has attracted youthful audiences with programs like "The Simpsons" and "Melrose Place."
Featuring big-name N.F.C. teams from major metropolitan markets -- the Dallas Cowboys, New York Giants, San Francisco 49ers, Washington Redskins, Chicago Bears and others -- will attract new viewers to Fox, well beyond fans of Bart Simpson and Heather Locklear.
Football is a crucial part of the audience-building drive at Fox, but there are others.
After Fox outbid CBS for television rights to the N.F.C. -- NBC has the rights to the N.F.L.'s American Football Conference games, while ABC has Monday night games -- Mr.
Murdoch invested $500 million for 20 percent of New World Communications.
That deal will permit Fox to switch from weaker UHF stations in 12 cities to stronger VHF stations, including markets where it now has football rights like Detroit, Dallas and Atlanta.
Eight of the 12 new stations Fox is picking up were CBS affiliates.
Football, then, is a means to Mr.
Murdoch's larger agenda at Fox -- enhancing its brand recognition, increasing the value of Fox stations and broadening the network's reach to the nearly 100 percent of American TV households touched by ABC, CBS and NBC.
Today, Fox is available in 98.6 percent of all television households.
Pro football should do a lot to bridge Fox's fourth-network credibility gap.
It is only as a long-term investment to build the Fox franchise that the $1.58 billion Mr.
Murdoch is paying for football television rights makes sense.
He is, after all, spending 49 percent more than CBS paid for the previous four years.
When the rights charges of $395 million a year are added to the operating costs for football programming, estimated at $100 million to $150 million annually, nobody expects Fox to make a profit on its four-year deal.
Mr.
Murdoch seems to regard questions about the pricetag as quibbling.
"Did we overpay?" he asked rhetorically.
"Of course we did."
Fox Sports will be the most scrutinized sports start-up ever.
ESPN, the last major TV sports kickoff, began in 1979 with a slow-pitch softball game.
But Mr.
Murdoch doesn't believe in half measures.
"We needed something people would come looking for," said Mr.
Murdoch, who is now eyeing the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and baseball.
"We could have started with minor sports, but no one would have paid notice."
The established networks all built up their sports divisions gradually.
When football began on CBS in 1956, the network paid teams separate fees, and there was no complete N.F.L. network package.
William MacPhail, a former vice president of CBS Sports, recalls paying the Green Bay Packers $31,000 one year.
In 1962, CBS struck its first network deal with the N.F.L. for $4.7 million.
The times, and the stakes, have certainly changed.
Even if Mr.
Murdoch's move into pro football is less about profit than a patient bet to build Fox, the goal is still to attract audiences and limit the losses.
Analysts expect Fox Sports to lose hundreds of millions of dollars over the next four years as advertising is unable to keep up with costs, because Mr.
Murdoch paid the N.F.L. so much for the rights.
Still, the financial difference between success and failure could be sizable, and a real worry for the shareholders of the News Corporation, Fox's parent company, if things go poorly.
"For a company like Fox to try to create a brand, using clearly definable programming like the N.F.L. makes great strategic sense," said Christopher Dixon, an analyst for Paine Webber.
"The question is at what cost. The jury will be out on that question until the end of the season."
Mr.
Hill is the man in charge of managing this enormous financial bet.
At first glance, he seems an unnerving choice.
"I'm a financial illiterate," he cheerfully confesses, while eating an onion and cheese sandwich in his office.
His manner and personality bear little resemblance to the serious, deal-making executives who tend to head the sports divisions of other networks.
On airplane trips, he plays the Tetris video game on his Nintendo Game Boy.
He licks a male publicist on an earlobe to reward a suggestion.
A man of eclectic interests, he is learning Yiddish expressions.
So he has taken to scribbling newly learned Yiddish words on the back of his appointment book: "nebbish," "schmear" and "mensch."
Mr.
Hill's notion of a business night out in Chicago recently was to take his staff to a blues bar, where he gushed over legendary guitarist Buddy Guy, who owns the place.
A devoted surfer, Mr.
Hill loves Bruce Brown's 1966 cult documentary about surfers, "The Endless Summer," and he attended the premiere of its sequel this year.
His daughter Anne's birth announcement in June was accompanied by a quotation from Martin Farquhar Tupper, a 19th century English writer.
Mr.
Hill's philosophy for success in sports programming is simple: be generous in signing up name-brand talent and make sure the production is slick and cutting-edge.
Audience ratings and revenues, he figures, will follow.
"As much a business dyslexic as I am, I know that," he said.
He has spared little expense in hiring well-known football commentators and personalities.
Fox is paying John Madden, football's manic Rabelaisian wit, a total of $30 million for four years, making him the highest paid man, on the field or behind a microphone, in the sport.
Pat Summerall, Mr.
Madden's longtime partner at CBS, will get $1.5 million a year.
Terry Bradshaw, the former star quarterback for the Pittsburgh Steelers, will collect $1.75 million annually from Fox.
A sportscasting newcomer, Jimmy Johnson, who left as coach of the Cowboys last year, after winning two Super Bowls, has been signed up for $600,000 a year.
BESIDES high-priced on-the-air talent, Fox is banking on the sports programming instincts of Mr.
Hill.
First in Australia, and later for Mr.
Murdoch's Sky Television in Britain, Mr.
Hill adapted the tools of American sports TV by using more cameras in more locations, instant replays, enhanced graphics and flashier analyst commentary.
For coverage of the America's Cup yacht races in 1987 in Australia -- "little triangles on blue water," he calls it -- he put tiny cameras aboard yachts for close-up coverage.
"I saw a guy who cared absolutely nothing about boating bring that event alive," said Geoff Mason, the former executive producer of ABC Sports.
In 1988, Mr.
Murdoch hired Mr.
Hill away from the rival Nine Network, owned by another Australian entrepreneur, Kerry Packer.
"The Nine Network was always our competition, and Hill was a legendary figure in Sydney," Mr.
Murdoch recalled.
The Hill reputation was based largely on using American sports programming techniques to alter the look and quicken the pace of soccer, cricket, yachting and auto racing.
MR.
MURDOCH liked Mr.
Hill's work in Australia so much that he soon gave Mr.
Hill two sports start-ups in Europe to direct: Eurosport, a pan-European cable sports service, much like ESPN, which Mr.
Murdoch eventually sold, and Sky Sports, a fast-growing British network for satellite dish owners.
What Mr.
Hill did to cricket programming, first in Australia, and then in Britain, is typical of his approach.
The sport of flat bats, white pullover sweaters and tea breaks is decidedly slow-moving -- so much so that cricket's detractors say that you can gain weight while playing the sport.
Mr.
Hill abhors boredom, and he was committed to accelerating the pace of cricket, at least for television viewers.
A smile comes over Mr.
Hill's ruddy face, topped by bushy white curls, when he describes the changes he made and the mixed reaction to his innovations in presenting the tradition-steeped sport.
With a black marker, Mr.
Hill sketches a circular cricket field with two triangles on top to depict the conventional locations of television cameras, behind the batsmen (hitter) and facing the bowler (pitcher).
"Cricket was always covered from one end, so the bowler bowls from one end, and all you'd see is the batsman's butt," Mr.
Hill recalled.
"That was stupid, so we put cameras at the other end as well . . . This was regarded as the end of civilization."
Then came the duck.
Mr.
Hill ordained that an animated duck waddle across the TV screen when a batsman whiffed to illustrate the term, "out for a duck." The first time he used the duck animation, Mr.
Hill did not give any advance warning to the commentator, who had once captained the Australian national team.
When he saw it, the ex-cricket star, with voice shaking, said, "It's obvious David Hill never played cricket!"
And Ian Woolridge, sports columnist for The Daily Mail of London, said, "Bloody ducks ruined cricket for me. Hilly is totally, absolutely mad. Bonkers -- with a 10-dimensional mind."
Paul Fox, a columnist for The Daily Telegraph of London, observed, "Hill changed cricket beyond all recognition."
WHEN Sky Sports acquired Premier League English soccer, Mr.
Hill dubbed the weekly presentation "Monday Night Football" as homage to the long-running ABC series created by his idol, Roone Arledge, the sports-programming impresario who started ABC's long-running weekly football game broadcast.
But does Mr.
Hill know American football?
Mr.
Hill pondered the question one June evening in the backyard of a rented Brentwood house he shares with his third wife, Joan, and their infant daughter, Anne.
"How much do I know about football?" he asked aloud.
"He doesn't know much," said Barry Frank, Madden's agent.
"I'm not sure if he'll know if some of the people he's hired are good or not."
"He's absorbed the visceral element," said Tim Green, a neophyte Fox analyst.
"Now he's working his way outward on the technical aspects."
Mr.
Hill's football I.Q. is good, not great.
He knows big names, big plays.
He loves the hitting, the sounds, the drama, the quick turnarounds in fortune.
He knows Emmitt Smith, the Dallas Cowboys running back, from Emmett Kelly, the famed sad-faced circus clown.
Yet Mr.
Hill, colleagues say, favors a wide open and loose management style, so Fox Sports is not depending on his grasp of American football minutiae.
Although he is a protean chatterer -- a "human filibuster," his friend, film director Peter Faiman, says -- he listens well, and gives his executives extensive free reign.
THE lavish start-up means satisfying the wish lists of defectors from other networks.
Sandy Grossman, Mr.
Madden's CBS director, will present Fox games with 12 cameras, four more than he had at CBS.
Mr.
Hill's core group has worked merciless hours, and many are smoking so much it seems that Marlboro has bought a sponsorship at Fox Sports.
Rick Dovey, Mr.
Hill's chief of staff at Sky Sports, said that pace is nothing new: "It was easy to work for Hill as long as you wanted to work 100 hours a week. He doesn't organize well but picks people to put his vision into effect."
Most importantly, Mr.
Hill has satisfied Mr.
Madden, a 21st-round draft choice of the Philadelphia Eagles in 1958, who is now the highest paid man -- the Cowboys' quarterback Troy Aikman is next, averaging $6.25 million a year -- in all of football.
Mr.
Madden refused Capital Cities/ABC and General Electric's NBC, whose offer included a G.E. train to travel to games.
MR.
MADDEN is the totem for Fox Sports.
He's in the most promotional spots.
He was host of one of Fox's pre-season specials.
He adorned the cover of TV Guide.
He will call virtually every important game, including the 1997 Super Bowl.
He is a happy man, for aside from his hardware, shoe, video game and athlete's foot spray endorsements, Mr.
Madden is consumed by football.
So, for now, is Fox.
"They'll listen to anything," Mr.
Madden said.
"At CBS, we'd do some of my ideas and not others. Anything I've thought we ought to do at CBS, we'll do at Fox. It's selfish, but Fox Sports is only football."
If Fox's game telecasts match the quality attained by Madden &amp; Company at CBS, Mr.
Hill will be satisfied.
That will be a big challenge given the intricate choreography required of American football programming with its constant replays, instant on-screen diagrams of plays and cutting from one camera to another.
And behind Fox Sports's big-name stars are a corps of low-priced, mainly young announcers who have called few if any football games.
Besides the additional on-field cameras, Fox Sports is changing the weekly pregame schedule with an hour-long studio show, compared with CBS's 30-minute program, "The N.F.L. Today."
Fox, by all accounts, faces a huge challenge in trying to attract a football audience as large as CBS had, given the smaller network's more limited reach.
But Mr.
Hill's staff is not conceding any losses yet.
"Say we get 90 percent of the CBS football audience," said Tracy Dolgin, executive vice president of marketing.
"I have to get 10 percent percent back. If I don't, I'll hold a gun to my head -- after I'm fired."
Still, the top Fox executives are more concerned with using football to build the network's franchise than with this season's audience ratings.
"We'll build our coverage, strengthen our affiliates and increase revenues year after year," said Chase Carey, the chairman of Fox Television.
"No question that after four years, the N.F.C. deal will be materially profitable for us."
Mr.
Hill obviously hopes so.
But he also has to worry week to week.
Before the kickoff today, he seemed to be suffering from some preseason jitters, his moods swinging between confidence and anxiety.
In a self-assured moment, he said, "In reality, this isn't so hard. If you never think you can fail, you probably won't."
Yet later, Mr.
Hill ruefully joked, "What's that the captain of the Titantic said? 'How's it going? Fine!' " David Hill  Current position: President of Fox Sports.
Born: May 21, 1946; Newcastle, Australia.
Education: Normanhurst High School; Sydney, Australia.
Family: Wife, Joan, and daughter, Anne, two months old.
Two children from a previous marriage: Jane, 17; and Julian, 14.
Business idol: Roone Arledge, ABC sports producer of "Monday Night Football." Car: Ford Explorer.
Last Book Read: "The Great Train Robbery," by Michael Crichton.


Holiday Tomorrow
Labor Day will be observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Holiday schedule Traffic Alert TOMORROW  WEST INDIAN DAY PARADE The following streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.: Buffalo Avenue between New York Avenue and Eastern Boulevard; Rochester Avenue between New York Avenue and Eastern Boulevard; Eastern Boulevard between Utica Avenue and Grand Army Plaza.
The parade begins at 11 A.M.


Banish Bulldozers, Save the Community
Yolanda Garcia leans back in her battered white Camaro and points to a vacant lot surrounded by a fence topped with razor wire.
"That's the senior center," she says calmly, surely.
"It will have 72 units, and we want to maybe add small rooms to each unit because so many grandparents have children now." Her gaze moves across the street and stops on the line of decrepit two-story storefronts.
"That's our one-acre park."
On the scale of obsession, she ranks in the serious business category somewhere between Che Guevara and Carrie Nation, with her highest scores on practicality and the sense of meaning.
Her passion is not only Melrose Commons, the development plan for 35 square blocks of the South Bronx that she has worked to modify since she first heard of it in November 1992, banishing bulldozers and bringing in socially aware architectural designs.
Her passion is the community she knew the original plan would destroy, a community, threatened by drugs, poverty and disinvestment, that she means to resurrect, if not outright create.


Christopher Boffey, Laura Kennedy
Laura Michelle Kennedy, a daughter of Patricia L. Miulli and Edward J. Kennedy, both of Chicago, is to be married today to Christopher Boffey, the son of Kay H. Childers of Chevy Chase, Md., and Philip M. Boffey of Irvington, N.Y.
J.
Edward Menger, a friend of the couple, is to perform the ceremony at the Harrison Manor House in Lake Bluff, Ill.
The bride, 31, and her husband, 30, graduated from Northwestern University.
She received a master's degree in Russian area studies from Georgetown University and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in political science at Emory University.
She is to become a Regional Scholarship Exchange fellow this month with the United States Information Agency in Moscow.
Her father is a salesman for the Gestetner Duplicator Corporation in Chicago.
Until recently, her mother owned Me and Suzi, a boutique in Chicago.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Walks in Nashville for History, Art and Botany
Two walking tours of Nashville provide an introduction to the downtown area and an examination of the local botany.
The newly completed Nashville Citywalk directs the visitor through 200 years of the city's past.
The two-mile tour had its debut in July when signs and silhouetted figures were installed along the route.
A painted line on the sidewalk traces the city's past from frontier settlement to "Music City USA."


SUNDAY, September 4, 1994; Phone Book for Space
If calling home on the car phone has lost its thrill, you might take a peek at the "Outer Space Frequency Directory," compiled by Anthony Curtis, a journalism instructor at Salisbury State University in Salisbury, Md.
It lists frequencies used by satellites, shuttle astronauts and radio astronomers.
It also explains how to tune to them.
One quick tip: Curtis says that in many cities a police scanner will pick up the transmissions of space shuttle astronauts.


Why Two Soundtracks Are Music to Boomers' Ears
FORGET THE HIT ALBUMS BY the Rolling Stones, Stone Temple Pilots and Counting Crows.
In the pop-album sweepstakes of late summer, the runaway best sellers have been the soundtracks for the movies "The Lion King" and "Forrest Gump." The hearts of both these misty-eyed fables are in the music-driven youth culture of the 1960's, when all things seemed possible.
"The Lion King," which includes songs by the baby-boomer idol Elton John, offers gentle advice on how to prevent a divisive 1960's-style generation gap.
"Forrest Gump," awash in 60's and 70's oldies, is one long sigh for lost innocence.


Easy-to-Pit Plums Make Tasty Seasonal Treats
WEEKS before the geese start to gather and fly off in formation, little purple freestone plums appear in the market.
Then you know summer has passed its peak.
These plums, often called prune plums or Italian prunes, available during August and much of September, bridge the gap between summer and fall.
Unlike most plums, which are best eaten raw, these are better cooked.
And they are the most convenient to use for cooking because the pits can be removed so easily.


Most Visible And Maybe Most Valuable
Here are 12 men who are expected to leave their mark on this National Football League season.
Eric Metcalf, Browns running back
He is certainly among the more dynamic kick returners in the league, but this season we should see even more of Metcalf in the Cleveland running and passing game.
Few players are more quick and elusive and even fewer are more exciting.


In a Crowded City, Protecting the Curative Powers of Green
When Jacqueline Bukowski returned to Morningside Heights from an extended sojourn in Germany in the late 1970's, she wasn't prepared for the particularly vicious strain of culture shock that hit her.
"I suddenly realized: 'Aaaah! I have no place to plant,' " recalled Ms.
Bukowski, a lawyer and for the last six years the president of the West Side Community Garden, on 89th Street between Columbus and Amsterdam Avenues.
"In Heidelberg, you can rent municipal garden plots, and I always planted things like corn and squash. Back here in New York, I had nothing but window boxes."


Latin-American Little League World Series


By Camera and Kayak Around Fiji Islands
An underwater photography program and a kayaking trip around a remote island bay are among the new tours being offered to visitors to Fiji in the next few months.
Fiji by Kayak, a Fiji-based company, has begun tours of Natewa Bay -- a sparsely populated expanse of lagoons, reef-bordered waters and rain forest on the island of Vanua Levu.
Participants will paddle through protected waters and camp on remote beach and jungle sites, as well as learn fundamentals of kayaking.
No experience is required.
The expedition involves a few hours of paddling each morning to that night's campsite, with the rest of the day free to hike, snorkel, fish or visit villages accessible only by water.
The first and last night of the trip are spent at the Kontiki Resort on the Koro Sea.
Land costs are $945 a person with several departures through the end of November.
For booking in the United States and other information, call Adventure Express at (800) 443-0799.


AUG. 28-SEPT. 3: The Cairo Conference; Lots of People Are Meeting To Argue Over How to Deal With Lots of People
With an attack on Vice President Al Gore, Vatican diplomats last week headed for the United Nations Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, determined to thwart what they cast as an American-sponsored campaign to legitimize abortion at the gathering.
The conference, opening tomorrow under threats of violence by Egyptian Islamic fundamentalists, is supposed to elicit a unified international response from the more than 170 participating governments to the world's looming population crisis.
A central issue will be giving women control over their own fertility.


U.S. Charges Scheme to Hide Political Gifts
A former executive with the Brooklyn company that produces the sugar substitute Sweet 'n Low has been accused by Federal prosecutors of operating a scheme to make illegal political-campaign contributions through the company, the Cumberland Packing Corporation.
Investigators said they were seeking to determine if the illegal contributions, which were made to both Democrats and Republicans, were part of a longtime effort to keep saccharin, an ingredient of Sweet 'n Low, from being banned by the Government.
Sweet 'n Low packets contain a warning that saccharin "has been determined to cause cancer in laboratory animals."


Data Bank/September, 4 1994
Data Bank/September, 4 1994
Personal Income
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.1
0.1
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.2
0.1
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
-2.3
0.8
0.8
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.2
1.1
Economic Activity
Aug.
July
June
Purchasing Managers' Index
56.2
57.8
57.5
Employment
In thousands
123,200
122,500
122,400
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,000 (6.1)
8,000 (6.1)
7,9000(6.0)
Weekly Jobless Claims
Aug. 26
Aug. 19
Aug. 12
In thousands
332
323
325


THE VALUE OF ERROR
Thank you for reminding me to reminisce (On Language: "The Value of Error," by James Gorman, Aug. 14).
When my now-25-year-old daughter, Cybele, was 3 years old, she got me in hot water with her dad when she called him a "male showing his pig" (male chauvinist pig).


Slow Trips to Boston And Washington
Speed is not the point of the East Coast Explorer, a 14-passenger Ford Club Van that takes all day to travel between New York and Boston or Washington, making sightseeing stops along the way.
Larry Lustig, the owner-driver of the budget-oriented service, picks up and leaves off passengers by reservation at budget motels and other sites, notably hostels, in all three cities.
Tour stops differ going and coming: On the way to Boston, the van crosses the Connecticut River by ferry, visiting the Gillette Castle in Hadlyme, Mystic, Conn., and Newport, R.I.


College Goes to the Students
LORI C. LOPRESTI-MORROW, a scientist at Pfizer Inc. in Groton, had been considering going back to school to complete her master's degree in biochemistry.
But the closest university that offered the courses was in Storrs, more than an hour's drive north.


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
"Tamika has opinions," Adrian Nicole LeBlanc writes about her young subject.
What does LeBlanc have?
She watches as Tamika "adds her hard kicks to the body of the Puerto Rican man writhing and cursing on the ground." And yet according to LeBlanc, Tamika is "serious and sexy."


AUG. 28-SEPT. 3: Ron Brown in China; Trade Gets an Open Door, Human Rights the Closet
Just six months ago, United States relations with China seemed to be hitting bottom.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher was in Beijing getting the diplomatic blistering of his career for what Communist Party leaders charged was an attempt to "destabilize" China with an aggressive human rights campaign.


The View From: Manchester; This Doughnut Digester Is an All-Round Environmental Plus
THE way James Plourde sees it, "We put our garbage in the dump, and we don't have to." Garbage, rather than head for the landfill, would better go into bins of wiggly worms, which will convert it to rich, earthy stuff that's a treat to plants.
Mr.
Plourde owns and operates the Manchester Worm Farm.
The farm, which has no fields or meadows, occupies his garage and basement, a few yards off North Main Street in Manchester.
"I've got 50,000 worms here," he said.
He sells various kinds of worms for fishing, usually buying them from other worm dealers.
The 50,000, however, were the "red wigglers" that he raises.


Forget Fancy Programs; Downtown Needs the Basics
To the Editor:
In the July 24 interview with Carl Weisbrod, the new president of the Business Improvement District for lower Manhattan ("Trying to Turn Downtown Around,"), the comments and proposals ignore basic issues, particularly the delivery of daily city services to the area.


Russia and China Act to Cut Arms, Widen Ties
Formally ending an era of tension between two of the world's most powerful countries, Russia and China agreed today not to aim nuclear missiles at each other, never to use force against each other, and to sharply limit the number of troops stationed along their border.
The declaration was signed at the end of talks at the Kremlin between President Jiang Zemin of China and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.
The two men also agreed to work harder on developing economic ties.


The Secret History of the World
LOVE &amp; SLEEP By John Crowley. 502 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $22.95.


Work It, Baby: How Labor Drives Pop Music
IF Labor Day had a soundtrack, it would be a boxed set big enough to fill a floor at Tower Records.
After all, American popular music is a fabric of work songs, stretching from the call-and-responses sung by slaves to the recent club hit by RuPaul, "Supermodel (You Better Work)." Work songs reflect the economics of the time, usually with a desire to escape them.
The ideal labor song, but one of a different nature, is a tune that could actually do work itself.
One of the best examples is the Old Testament story of the Battle of Jericho, in which the Israelites laid siege to Jericho and brought its walls tumbling to the ground with the sound of their trumpets.


When a Cappuccino Is Just the Ticket
THE coffee bar phenomenon continues to percolate, with new shops opening steadily throughout the state.
In addition to a wide assortment of coffee beans (and sometimes loose tea) by the pound, as well as fresh-brewed coffee by the cup, most shops offer biscotti, Danish and cookies as well as selling coffee-making equipment.
In recent travels around the state, we discovered places beyond Fairfield County to share with others in search of the perfect cup of coffee, cappuccino, espresso, caffe latte (espresso with steamed milk and foam), caffe mocha (like latte but with cocoa), caffe Americano (a milder version of espresso), mochaccino (espresso with chocolate and steamed milk) or whatever.


SPECIAL EFFECTS THE NEW OLD-FASHIONED WAY
IT WOULD BE HARD TO COUNT the number of people who have been blown up on the big screen in the last 18 months, the vehicles that have exploded, the human bodies mutilated, burned to death, shot through the heart.
We are neither horrified at graphic representations of violence nor riveted by special effects.
Computer-imaged suffering and gore have ceased to move, even to interest us.
Enter live puppetry and object theater (performance involving anything from a cloth that convulses in dance to a pencil sharpener that reads the evening news), which adult Americans are going to see in increasing numbers.
Unlike human actors, puppets can be mutilated, burned, sent flying and transformed into inhuman things.
But unlike what goes on in the movies, it is real.
These live processes return the horror of the appalling and the surreal magic of the implausible.
No other medium can exploit the sequencing, pacing and structure of the movies in live performance.
And because it can be done for a song, puppetry allows individual artists to express themselves in the fantastical language usually co-opted by commerce.


Enthusiastic Carroll Has the Jets' Attention
The hand-clapping, the schmoozing with assistant trainers, the after-practice basketball games with the ballboys -- they are all a part of Pete Carroll's approach to football.
But Carroll is bringing more than good looks and a helping of good vibrations to a Jets team that opens the regular season today in Buffalo against the Bills.


Getting School Down On Tape
COLLEGE YEARBOOKS are the traditional mementos of campus life.
But today's undergraduates increasingly rely on video to create more personalized remembrances of those years.
So as the class of '98 heads for school in the coming weeks, many mull over the choice of a camcorder as a college companion.
This fall a new kind of camcorder is gaining popularity.
Its design dispenses with conventional viewfinders.
No longer is it necessary to squint down a narrow tube at a tiny picture to follow the action being taped.
Instead the image can be seen on a small, flat full-color screen, measuring three or four inches diagonally.
One looks at it with both eyes, which feels more natural and makes it easier -- particularly for novice videographers -- to frame a scene.
What's more, the miniscreen allows several people to view instant playback simultaneously.


A Young Gallery Promotes Young Britons
DUFFY AYERS, Alan Parker and Fiona Weedon are not exactly household names.
But if Nan Perell and Stephanie Perell Krause have their way, they soon may be.
About 11 months ago, Mrs.
Perell and Mrs.
Krause, a mother-daughter team, started showing works by young British artists like Mr.
Ayres, Mr.
Parker and Ms.
Weedon at their gallery in Dobbs Ferry.


Catherine Crystal and Jonathan Foster
Catherine Robin Crystal, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond F. Crystal of Short Hills, N.J., is to be married today to Jonathan A. T. Foster, the son of Barbara Foster of New York and the late Michael J. Foster.
Rabbi Stephen W. Goodman is to officiate at Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
The bride, 28, and the bridegroom, 30, graduated from Yale University, she cum laude and he magna cum laude.
They received law degrees from Harvard University.
She is the director of the children's benefits access project at the National Association of Child Advocates in Washington.
Her father is an intestinal surgeon in Morris Plains, N.J., and a clinical assistant professor of surgery at the New Jersey Medical School in Newark.
Her mother, Laura B. Crystal, is an administrator at the CSPA medical group in Morris Plains.


New School Year Brings New Problems
AT New Rochelle High School last week, the football coach, Louis DiRienzo, was gearing up for a new year.
With 50 athletes enrolled in a late-summer training camp and last season's triumphs still fresh in his mind, the coach was holding three practices a day.
His goal: another all-star team, another winning season.
"I'm telling the guys, 'Weight training and fitness is where it's at,' " Mr.
DiRienzo said.
"That's what I'm preaching for the 1994-95 school year."


U.S. Broadcasts Keep Cubans Posted in Crisis
To the Editor:
You reported in an Aug. 29 news article: "On the rocky beaches of Cojimar, where Cubans eager to put to sea were waiting for better weather, the news blared out of Raquel Perez Ruiz's house, where she had her radio tuned to Radio Marti for all to hear."
Since the onset of the Cuban crisis, Radio and Television Marti have redoubled their efforts to provide the people of Cuba with accurate, balanced and objective news.


Alyssa A. Rokito and Robert W. Unikel
Alyssa Anne Rokito, the daughter of Drs.
Evelyn and Michael Rokito of East Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Wolf Unikel, the son of Dr.
Barbara Unikel and Alan Unikel, both of Chicago.
Rabbi Michael Katz performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Unikel, 25, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, and she and her husband received law degrees from Northwestern University.
In the fall, she is to become an associate at Kirkland &amp; Ellis, a Chicago law firm.
Her father is an optometrist in Corona, Queens.
Her mother, known professionally as Dr.
Evelyn Wolf, is an attending physician for the Nassau County Department of Health.


Two Stars Ignore Ills To Capture Prix Titles
When Jackie Joyner-Kersee and Nourredine Morceli set foot inside the costly, graceful stadium that is the latest addition to this city's venerable skyline, the sun was shining brightly and their familiar faces were clouded with doubt.
When the day's running and jumping were done, they stood side by side in the rain and quietly rejoiced.


Emily W. Bush, Ben W. Drew Jr.
Emily Walker Bush, the librarian of the Thetford (Vt.) Elementary School, was married yesterday at St.
Barnabas Church in Norwich, Vt., to Ben Warren Drew Jr., a private real estate investor in North Adams, Mass.
The Rev.
Sarah Horton, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony, and the bridegroom's sister, the Rev.
Sarah Drew Reeves, a Congregational minister, took part in it.
Mrs.
Drew, 56, graduated from Wheaton College and received a master's degree in library and information science from Simmons College and a master's degree in arts and liberal studies from Dartmouth College.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Philip Walker.


Michigan Makes It Look Easy, Even Without Wheatley
Over breakfast at the team's hotel this morning, Boston College's Dan Henning told quarterback Mark Hartsell that he wanted to open the game against Michigan with a play called the speed pump, a bomb that he hoped would go for a touchdown.
Both Henning and Hartsell were making their respective debuts, Henning as the Eagles' head coach and Hartsell as the starting quarterback.


Another Service Delay In the Channel Tunnel
THE pattern is starting to sound familiar.
As a milestone approaches in the opening of the Channel Tunnel between England and France, yet another delay is announced.
The most recent is postponement of nonstop passenger rail service between London and Paris and London and Brussels.
Originally scheduled to begin on a limited basis this summer, the train service is now not expected to get under way until Oct. 23 at the earliest, with further delays until the end of the year possible.
The delay in the express train service, called Eurostar, came on top of the earlier postponement of the start of the tunnel's other passenger service, known as Le Shuttle.
On Le Shuttle, passengers will drive their cars onto specially designed carriages that will be pulled through the 31-mile undersea tunnel by locomotives.


Sunny Disposition
As the slant of the sun begins to shift, the urge to capture its flavor is primordial.
Before recorded history, indigenous peoples hung meat and fish out to dry, hoping for the warm breeze and low humidity that would preserve their dinner for the months to come.
Of course, refrigeration and the global pantry have obliterated the need for sun-dried food, but the taste for it remains.
The popularity of sun-dried tomatoes is one sign of the universal appetite for summer.
So is the proliferation of dried fruits and fruit leathers, their soft, chewy texture and sweet, satisfying flavor so reassuring as summer breezes begin to billow up into nasty little gusts.


A Rooftop Jungle Moves Indoors for the Winter
VICTOR NELSON is standing in the middle of a small, friendly jungle overlooking West 82d Street, battening down the hatches for winter.
He is in his 15-by-30-foot terrace garden, surrounded by 350 pots of varying size that are filled with about 1,500 plants.
I call it a jungle because so many of the plants intertwine: some pots have four or five, all growing together.


Seminoles Display Old Flair For Victory
So much for Bobby Bowden's preseason prediction that his Florida State Seminoles would emphasize a running attack early in the season to give the first-year starter, Danny Kanell, a smoother transition at quarterback.
And so much for any concerns that the defending national champion Seminoles may have been thrown out of sync by an off season marked by the revelation that up to 11 players accepted money or gifts from agents.


The Look Turns Casual
A salute to 40 artists at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton, L.I., Aug. 27.


Judith de Barany, John R. Prout
Judith de Barany, the president of Barany Capital Management, portfolio managers in Paris, was married there on Friday to John Rackus Prout, a senior vice president and the international treasurer of Credit Commercial de France, also in Paris.
Mayor Frederic DuPont of the 7th arrondissement officiated at the 7th district town hall.
Mrs.
Prout graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Cornelius de Barany of Ibiza, Spain.
The bride's father, now retired, was a pharmaceutical and chemical manufacturers' representative in Venezuela.


Trail of Promises at Snug Harbor Center
THE scene is the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Staten Island, and the attraction is "Thresholds and Transitions." This is the latest in a series of annual outdoor sculpture exhibitions, and a sorry affair it turns out to be.
Still, if the works are taken in order of appearance, the trail begins promisingly enough -- with "Totem," a pylon some 20 feet tall that stands on the grass in front of the Newhouse Center for Contemporary Art.


Biggest Winners and Loses in N.F.L.'s Version of Musical Chairs
BIG WINNERS  ARIZONA KEY LOSSES Quarterback Chris Chandler (L.A. Rams), punter Chris Camarillo (Oilers), linebacker Ken Harvey (Redskins).


William Hurt Resurfaces, as a Character Actor
JUST BEFORE "BODY HEAT" opened in 1981, the film's star William Hurt, then 31 years old, described himself to Judy Klemesrud of The New York Times as a character actor trapped "in a leading man's body."
Reminded of the comment 13 years later, Mr.
Hurt smiles and says, "Well, I'm not so trapped anymore."


The American Mob
To the Editor:
While applauding "Loyalty and Betrayal: The Story of the American Mob" (In Short, Aug. 21), Charles Salzberg does a little shooting at me.
I should know better, he says, than to write a "banal and overheated" line like this: "On Oct. 23, 1935, Charles (The Bug) Workman strode into a Newark chophouse and ventilated the 33-year-old Schultz with hot lead."


National Football Conference
Teams are listed in order of predicted finish.
N.F.C.
EAST DALLAS COWBOYS 1993: Super Bowl champions, finished 12-4, defeated Buffalo, 30-13, in Super Bowl.
STRENGTHS: Potent offense and talented at all the skill positions with quarterback Troy Aikman, running back Emmitt Smith and receiver Michael Irvin.
Defensive line brings a great deal of pressure and stays fresh with a constant rotation system.


Remember When?
To the Sports Editor:
After reading the post-Travers comments of Wayne Lukas regarding Holy Bull's 17-length victory over his horse, I am sorry that he has not learned the art of losing gracefully.
Lukas says that some other horse may have a rightful claim to be Horse of the Year if victorious in the Jockey Club and/or Breeder's Cup Classic (races in which Holy Bull will not run) and that no honors should be given out just yet.


When's a River not a River? When It's the Hudson
To the Editor:
Not only is the East River not a river, as stated in the Aug. 28 F.Y.I. column, but the Hudson River is not a river.
It's a fiord, whose bed was ground out by glaciers -- technically, an arm of the sea.
The action of tides can be seen in the Hudson and affects its flow as far north as Albany.
GREG OTIS  Brooklyn


Manager's Profile
John Horseman
Fund: GAM International, $135 million in assets.
Manager since 1990. (Sponsor: Global Asset Management-U.S. Inc., New York.)


The Sounds and Sights of Summer's End
ARRIVAL of the Labor Day weekend signals the end of summertime.
Chrysanthemums, asters and goldenrods begin to bloom, overtaking the black-eyed susans.
The shorter days mean fewer hours to work outdoors and it would seem that the season is all but over.
Even the children have gone, returning to school.
It is not yet time to cancel things out, however.
There are glorious weeks ahead, weeks in which to enjoy the sounds of the season as well as some of its sights.


New Tourist Lure: Dolphin Watching
IT was a show that almost seemed to be choreographed by Sea World in California, but these leaping, tumbling dolphins, only 10 feet from the bow of Capt.
Rich George's excursion boat, Princess, were local performers just being themselves.
They are part of New Jersey's latest tourism splash -- dolphin watching.
On a cruise along the shoreline of Ocean City, north of here, the boat came upon two pods of the bottle-nosed dolphins.
For 40 minutes, the two dozen or so mammals cavorted along a mile-long strip of the beachfront to the delight of about a thousand people gathered at the water's edge.


Kids Just Want to Have Fun, Don't They?
To the Editor:
Your article clearly makes the point, whether intentionally or not, that the overriding objective of shows like "The Puzzleworks" has more to do with lucrative merchandising deals than any genuine concern for the intellectual well-being of children.
All of which makes particularly ironic the closing comment by Lancit Media's Cecily Truett that "to be able to make television that nutures kids' humanity is a wonderful way to make a living."


Job Openings in the East: The Best of Divisions Has Newest of Coaches
Philadelphia's Rich Kotite looks around the National Football League East division and chuckles to himself.
Kotite finds it amusing that he is now the elder statesman among head coaches in the division that once seemed steady as a rock with Tom Landry at Dallas and Joe Gibbs at Washington and Bills Parcells in New York.
Kotite has been on the job for four years.
"I think it's funny," Kotite said.
"I look around and it seems amazing. But this is a very difficult business. There are always going to be changes. The most important thing is to concentrate on your own team and make sure you're doing everything you need to do to be successful."


It May be the Name Game, but They're All Business
IN the days of Bazooka Joe and Ivory Soap, advertising agencies did it all, giving life to products through dependable names, catchy packaging and unforgettable slogans.
But with the age of specialization businesses are stopping at a new breed of consulting firm before heading to ad agencies.
Staffed by full-time linguists and trademark researchers, naming companies have found a solid market by steering new products through the shoals of trademark law, international double-entendres and other hazards -- plus, of course, coming up with catchy names.
Labels like Zima, Acura and Compaq are the products of such companies.


What Did the C.E.O. Have for Breakfast?
LOTS of money managers have big corner offices high above midtown.
But Laura J. Sloate may be the only one whose carpet is covered with dog hair.
The shedding is the work of Quartz, her 19-month-old German shepherd, who is a finicky eater and her guide dog as of July.
But the rest of the trappings -- the computers, the piles of research material, the elegant Eisenstadt photographs decorating one wall -- are the doing of Ms.
Sloate.
Though she has been blind since the age of 6, she has built up a successful firm that bears her name and manages $600 million in assets for wealthy individuals and institutional investors.


The Latest in Security: Spoke and Sprocket Patrol
The city police do it.
So do the housing police.
And as of last week, so do four private security officers in Co-op City: patrol on bikes.
Co-op City is hoping to draw the same benefits from the bicycle patrols reported by the larger police forces -- increased visibility, mobility and interaction.
Co-op City, a sprawling community of high-rises and town houses, with its own shopping centers and schools, is the first private force in the Bronx to try bicycle patrols.
Stuyvesant Town in Manhattan is thought to be the only other development in the city with a private force on bikes.


Leslie A. Scheidt, Thomas H. Redd
Leslie Ann Scheidt, a daughter of Andrea and Dr.
Stephen Scheidt of New York, is to be married today to Thomas Hancock Redd, a son of James and Barbara Redd of Albuquerque, N.M.
Rabbi Charles Lippman is to officiate at the Palace Hotel in New York.
The bride, 27, is a project coordinator at Cascade Center for Public Service, a public policy institute at the University of Washington in Seattle.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is director of cardiology training at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Her mother is an associate at Kenyon &amp; Kenyon, a New York law firm.


Natural Born Tormenters And Sunny Dispositions
DOWNTOWN -- Meet Jake, the super-smart-alecky 15-year-old host of a public-access cable-television show called "Squirt TV." He doesn't give out his last name because, he says, there are too many psychos out there.
Nonetheless, he has a growing number of fans, including Eric Bogosian and Jason Weinberg, a publicist who is representing him pro bono.
Jake was home in his downtown loft with his mother and father, Murphy and Bob, on Aug. 25, watching the angst-ridden premiere of the ABC teen-age drama, "My So-Called Life." It wasn't doing much for him.


The Private Wars of Men and Women
CELIA, having set the table for four, and Miles are on the patio drinking lots of sherry.
She is waiting for her husband, Toby; he is waiting for his wife, Rowena, the dinner guests who won't show up.
Miles, knowing that, is finding ways to proposition Celia.
Celia doesn't mind.
But Toby appears after all.
What else is new?
Cyberspace and microchips, sure.
But not the mandates of marriages, the aloneness of aging, the absurdities of assumptions.
The fearsomely prolific English playwright Alan Ayckbourn, who writes dismissively of the technologically new (like the business Miles is in and hardly fathoms), keeps going deeper and more darkly -- 46 plays at last count -- into what Beckett wrote of as "the nothing new."


In Toronto, Food From Practically Everywhere
TORONTO reminds me of Ray Bolger in "Where's Charley?" -- Canada's largest metropolis (and like New York, the country's intellectual and cultural capital) comes on like a staid and slightly boring maiden aunt.
But just when she seems most set in her ways, she suddenly breaks into a racy grin, lights up a cigarette and sashays her way front and center.
Toronto's lively ethnic mix includes large populations of West Indians, Chinese, Japanese, Southeast Asians, Indians and Pakistanis, Italians, Greeks, Portuguese and others.
Governing all is a uniquely Canadian idea, what a Toronto friend of mine calls "the notion that we can all live in each other's worlds."


For Moon, It's First and 11 In Minnesota
During his 10 years as Houston's starting quarterback, Warren Moon caught much of the brunt of each Oilers' controversy.
There were many.
And Moon always served as spokesman, statesman and, in the end, it was hoped, he would always be part of the solution.
A sampling:


Wall Street; Sometimes a Great Notion Goes Nowhere -- Fast
SOMETIMES there are synergistic deals whose lofty goals never get tested.
Shareholders of Nextel Communications Inc. endured some nasty bumps last week after MCI canceled the plans it had announced in February to invest $1.3 billion in the wireless communications company.
Nextel's stock plunged $5.25 to $25.25 on Monday on news that MCI would not be taking the 17 percent stake.
By Thursday, MCI said that efforts to renegotiate had been trashed completely because Motorola Inc., a large investor in Nextel that had veto power on the deal, was being difficult.
Nextel closed at $22.875, down $2.8125 on Friday.


The Ultimate Volunteers
IN the taxonomy of urban dwellers, there can be found one especially hardy species -- one that responds to the infinite aggravation of city living not by perpetually plotting escape but by sticking around to fight.
These are those creatures who make a business of minding the public's business -- feisty, freelance crusaders for clean government and tidy streets, for public toilets, soup kitchens, community gardens, a handbill-free New York.


Anne Calabresi, Robert Oldshue
Dr.
Anne Gordon Audubon Calabresi, a resident in the Harvard Longwood Psychiatric Residency program in Boston, and Dr.
Robert Wayne Oldshue, a pediatrician and an internist at Northend Community Health Center in Boston, are to be married today.
The Rev.
Katherine Latimer, a minister of United Church of Christ, is to officiate at the home of the bride and her parents in Woodbridge, Conn.
The bride, 29, graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She and the bridegroom received medical degrees from Case Western Reserve University.
She is a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Guido Calabresi of Woodbridge.
Her father, who was the dean and the Sterling Professor of Law at the Yale University Law School in New Haven, is now a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York.
Her mother, Anne G. A. Tyler, is a freelance writer.


Political Notes; Statistics Cast Doubts On Pataki's Job-Loss Ads
State Senator George E. Pataki, Republican candidate for governor, seems to be relentless in his politically motivated reading of job losses in New York.
Mr.
Pataki has repeatedly said in speeches that New York lost more jobs than any other state in the recession.
A television advertisement for him last month maintained that the state was "No. 1 in lost jobs."


N.F.L. '94
Bye, Bye
Each team now has one bye week instead of two open dates, which were unpopular with fans and clubs alike last year.
But remaining is the traditional two-week break between the conference championships (Jan. 15, 1995) and the Super Bowl (Jan. 29, 1995).


Mary H. Rubloff, Lewis M. Schott
Mary Hilem Rubloff, the widow of the Chicago real-estate developer Arthur Rubloff, was married on Thursday to Lewis M. Schott, an investor.
Both live in Palm Beach, Fla.
Judge James T. Nelson, a retired chief judge of the Court of Volusia County, Fla., performed the ceremony at Mr.
Schott's home.
Mrs. Schott is a daughter of the late Dr. Henry and Dorothy Hilem..


Rosalind Kelley, Jeffery W. Bak
Rosalind Kay Kelley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph B. Kelley of Darien, Conn., is to be married today to Jeffery William Bak, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Bak of Tewksbury, N.J.
The Rev.
Frank McGrath is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Assumption Church in Westport, Conn.
The bride, 28, is an associate at Cummings &amp; Lockwood, a law firm in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received her law degree from the Dickinson School of Law.
Her father is a partner in Gilbert, Segall &amp; Young, a law firm in New York.


'Acceptable' New York City Foster Families: A Survivor's Story
To the Editor:
Allow me to add a postscript to the discussion of foster care.
My younger brother and I were placed in the New York City foster care program more than 40 years ago.
With our mother ill and hospitalized and our father working three jobs, I had at first been placed as a 2-year-old with loving friends of our family.
In their home I was appropriately clothed, fed and nurtured.


Outdoors Secret
Flannel pajamas.
Thermal underwear.
Ski parkas.
Timberland boots.
Has Victoria's Secret changed stylists?
Philosophies?
In an effort to compete with L. L. Bean, J. Crew and other haute rural catalogues, Victoria's Secret, a mail-order company known for its sexy lingerie and vampy models, has added a Country Collection line.
In its premier issue, the catalogue, 47 pages long, takes the models out of the boudoir and places them in the great outdoors, where they can be seen fly fishing and skiing.


Lithuania Opens KGB Prison Museum
One section of the former KGB headquarters in Vilnius, Lithuania, has been turned into a museum documenting the treatment of political prisoners under the KGB.
The Victims of Genocide Museum includes 20 former holding cells, among them an interrogation cell with padded walls and a totally dark isolation cell about two feet square.
Guided tours in Lithuanian, Russian or German are given by former inmates.
Fact sheets and a plan of the museum have been translated into English.


J. B. McCandlish, Edward Glaeser
Jennifer Brantlee McCandlish, a daughter of Diane Wasserman-Jolley of Nipomo, Calif., and the late Dr.
Charles D. McCandlish, is to be married today to Edward Ludwig Glaeser, the son of Elizabeth Glaeser of Washington and Ludwig Glaeser of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad is to officiate at the Terrace Restaurant in New York.
The bride, 26, graduated from Smith College.
She is taking music theory and composition classes at Stanford University.
Her father was a dentist in Los Angeles.


For Reneberg, It's a Grand Slam Indeed
Richey Reneberg was asked yesterday if he had any preference as to whom he will play in the fourth round of the United States Open.
"No," he said with a smile. "I'm just happy to be here."


A Life in the Theater


Jessica A. Trimble, Andrew R. Fone
Jessica Ann Trimble, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David C. Trimble of Holmdel, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Ronald Fone, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald W. Fone of Sherborn, Mass.
The Rev.
Beulah Koulouris, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Church in Osterville, Mass.
Mrs.
Fone graduated from Lehigh University.
She is the director of retail operations in New York for Chanel, the fashion house.
Her father is the director of research and design quality at AT&amp;T's General Business Communications Systems in Middletown, N.J.


THE NATION: The Arbiters of TV Style; How to Fashion a Character
DETECTIVE ROSE (PHIL) PHILLIPS is in a quandary.
The fictional centerpiece of "Under Suspicion," a new fall series on CBS, she is the only woman in a squad room infested with sexist clods.
To make matters worse, her partner and mentor Frank Fusco has disappeared from the face of the earth.
Frank left behind a wallet stuffed with an incriminating wad of greenbacks; Mrs.
Fusco suspects Phil had been having an affair with her missing (and presumed bumped-off) husband; the chief of police wants to transfer her to a dead-end desk job.
So: what to wear?
Drop-dead miniskirted fitted suits, of course: custom-made, most of them, augmented by off-the-rack items from Donna Karan and Bebe.


Banks Give 70% To Funds for Housing
I write in regard to the article concerning the response of Long Island banks to Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations ("Banks Revise Credit Access for Low-Income Borrowers," Aug. 21.)
The story read, "Banks contribute 7 percent of the money for Housing Partnership development. . . ." In fact, on average, 70 percent of funding for Housing Partnership Programs is private bank financing with the remaining 30 percent coming from public sources.


The Sounds and Sights of Summer's End
ARRIVAL of the Labor Day weekend signals the end of summertime.
Chrysanthemums, asters and goldenrods begin to bloom, overtaking the black-eyed susans.
The shorter days mean fewer hours to work outdoors and it would seem that the season is all but over.
Even the children have gone, returning to school.
It is not yet time to cancel things out, however.
There are glorious weeks ahead, weeks in which to enjoy the sounds of the season as well as some of its sights.


Dara L. Halper, Michael Krauss
Dara Lynn Halper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Halper of Mountainside, N.J., is to be married today to Michael David Krauss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Armin Krauss of Whitestone, Queens.
Rabbi Perry Rank is to officiate at the Marriott at Glenpointe in Teaneck, N.J.
The bride, 33, was until recently an executive recruiter in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received an M.B.A. degree from American University.


Mary W. Fritz, Thomas J. Flocco
Mary Wyle Fritz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Fritz of Winnetka, Ill., is to be married today to Thomas Joseph Flocco, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Flocco of Weston, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Ferrigan is to officiate at St.
Clement Roman Catholic Church in Chicago.
The Rev.
Wilson Reed, an Episcopal priest, will take part in the ceremony.


Fast Games and $5 Bets: a Day in the Life


WHILE MANNY'S LOCKED UP
I read with increasing rage and dismay Adrian Nicole LeBlanc's article "While Manny's Locked Up" (Aug. 14).
The tragedy of the brutal and squalid existence endured by Tamika and her friends is matched only by the folly of their equally brutal and squalid response to it.


Women Sound Great, Too
To the Editor:
It is curious that the radio-airplay overthrow of country music's legends for a new, telegenic generation of performers concentrates almost entirely on young male singers  [ "Country Graybeards Get the Boot," Aug. 21 ] .


Economists Know About Bias in Lending
To the Editor:
"Redlining Under Attack" (Business Day, Aug. 30) leaves the impression that most informed economists do not believe there is any discrimination in mortgage lending.
This impression is wildly inaccurate.
The Boston Fed study is highly respected by most experts.
Although a couple of studies, such as you cite, have found ways to manipulate away the Boston Fed's findings, the most careful re-examination to date of the Boston Fed data by Carr and Megbolugbe in the Journal of Housing Research (1993) confirms the conclusion of bias.
Moreover, the Boston Fed study addresses only discrimination in mortgage acceptance.
Other studies provide clear evidence of discrimination in applications procedures, branch office locations and other aspects of lender behavior.


A Fruitful Goddess?
To the Editor:
Having read Vicki Goldberg's article "In Search of Diana of Ephesus"  [ Aug. 21 ] , I should like to point out that the Ephesian Diana's multiple breasts may not have been breasts or even bulls' testicles.
According to James Hall's Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Art, early statues of Diana may have been adorned with large dates, which in time were misinterpreted as breasts.


A Diplomatic Question: Embargo or Embrace?
NO wonder foreign policy debates these days seem so dull and muddled.
"Hawks" and "doves" are out.
All anyone wants to know is whether you are an "embargoer" or an "embracer" -- whether you think the way to deal with Bosnia, China, Haiti, Iraq or Cuba is by embargoing them into better behavior or embracing them with trade and tourism until they evolve into good citizens.
But let's face it, it's hard to get excited about denouncing your opponent as a "lily-livered embracer," or as a "neo-conservative embargoer." When one school in a foreign policy debate sounds like an aftershave and the other sounds like a service offered by Fedex, you know you've got trouble.


Debut of Rutgers Stadium Is Flashier Than the Game
Everything functioned, including the football team, as Rutgers opened its new $26 million stadium today in a twilight game against Kent State.
A crowd of 33,279, the largest for a home game here in 125 years of football, turned out to test the gaudy new facility and to check out the latest edition of the Scarlet Knights.
Against an opponent from Ohio and the Mid-American Conference that had won only 5 games of its last 55 and none last season, Rutgers scored three touchdowns in the second period and went on to win, 28-6.
The debut of the stadium turned out to be far more compelling than an uneven game that dragged in the second half.


Yonkers Officials Argue Over How Strong a 'Strong Mayor' Should Be
Five years after Yonkers voters decided to replace their city manager with a "strong mayor," political leaders here are having second thoughts.
At issue, they say, is just how strong the mayor should be.
City Council members believe that Mayor Terence M. Zaleski has taken the term too literally, and they have called for changes in the city charter to limit his power while increasing their own.


A Peek at the Season Of Smaller Ensembles
LEADING off chamber and solo performances in the new season is a free 8 P.M. recital by the Wesleyan University organist, Ronald Ebrecht, on Sept. 17 at the Wesleyan Center for the Arts.
Then, from Sept. 21 through Sept. 25, the university is host to the annual Navaratri Festival of music from North and South India.
All manner of student, faculty and guest artist events dot the school calendar, but Wesleyan's two main cycles, the Crowell Concert Series and the Keyboard Series (also at Crowell Hall) have October starts.
On Oct. 1, the Brave Old World Ensemble delves into Klezmer music, while a week later the Mondrian String Quartet arrives in Middletown from the Netherlands, its program including a new piano quintet by -- and with -- the Wesleyan professor Neely Bruce.


Aviation Bill Encourages Manufacturers
A new law that protects the makers of small aircraft from being sued over accidents involving planes more than 18 years old was touted by its backers as emergency treatment for a hemorrhaging industry.
But the measure has taken on a far greater symbolic importance on both sides of the often bitter, decades-old battle between manufacturers and consumer advocates over product liability lawsuits.
"It could be the camel's nose under the tent," said Representative Dan Glickman, Democrat of Kansas, a sponsor of the bill.


A in Sociology Earns An A at Belmont Park
For hunch players, just in time for going back to school, the Belmont Breeders' Cup was won yesterday by a horse named A in Sociology, a 4-year-old colt who is relentlessly earning an A in turf racing.
It was the fourth victory in seven starts on the grass this year for the colt, who is owned by Barbara Ronca and trained by Phil Johnson, and the 12th time in 17 starts that he ran in the money in the last three years.


POSTINGS: Progress at Metrotech; An Earlier Move-in Date for City Agencies
For decades, living lofts -- those cavernous, often one-room spaces in old warehouses that are preferred by many artists, bohemians and large families -- have been associated mainly with downtown Manhattan, generally below Houston Street in neighborhoods like SoHo and TriBeCa and the surrounding environs.
Loft chic is gradually moving uptown, however, or at least into midtown Manhattan.


HOW A PILGRIM PROGRESSES
Jack Hitt understates the danger of his exposure to lightning in "How a Pilgrim Progresses" (Aug. 14).
His father taught him, properly, to count the seconds, "thousand one, thousand two," etc. between the lightning flash and the thunder.
However, Mr.
Hitt must have forgotten that it is 1,000 feet, not one mile, per second between flash and sound.
Sound travels in air at approximately 1,000 feet per second.
There are 5,280 feet per mile.
Hence, the thunder from a lightning stroke arrives in about five seconds from a mile away, or one second for each 1,000 feet.
Mr.
Hitt's reaction to a bolt with simultaneous sound was correct, i.e., Get out of here.


The Lady Is a Pitcher (and a Prosecutor)
When Gina Satriano returns to work on Tuesday, it will be the first day in four months that she has not warmed up by running and stretching, the first day that she starts her job early in the morning, instead of mostly at night, and the first day that she is not signing autographs after hours, no matter how spectacularly she has performed.
Ms.
Satriano is going back to Compton, Calif., just south of downtown Los Angeles, to the Deputy District Attorney's post she accepted in February 1993 and left a year later so she could pitch for the Colorado Silver Bullets.
The team, all of whose members are women, is owned by Whittle Communications of Knoxville, Tenn., and sponsored by the Coors Brewing Company, which produces a light beer nicknamed the Silver Bullet.


Bradley Combs Jersey Shore for Voters' Opinions
Each summer Senator Bill Bradley shakes the dust of Washington from his shoes, then kicks them off and dons an old pair of sneakers for a long walk along the New Jersey shore.
Most of the four days of walking this week on beaches from Cape May at the state's southern tip to Sandy Hook in the north was spent shaking hands, making small talk and signing autographs on every size, shape and color of ball and baseball cap.


4 Years Later, The Avenue Of the Tie-Ups Is Finally Done
On Avenue of the Americas, where the din of jackhammers and the sight of construction barricades have become a way of life, there is good news.
More than four years of street work was completed last week, and all that remains are minor sidewalk repairs.
For merchants, cabdrivers and many others who rely on the avenue for their livelihoods, the long-delayed roadwork will be remembered not just as a prolonged annoyance, but also as one of the many mysteries in the life of New York.


Mildred McAfee Horton Dies; First Head of WAVES Was 94
Mildred McAfee Horton, who helped revolutionize the role of women in the military as the first director of the WAVES, died on Friday at the St.
Vincent DePaul Nursing Home in Berlin, N.H.
She was 94.
Under her stewardship of the WAVES (an acronym for Women Accepted for Voluntary Emergency Service), navy women in World War II worked as flight instructors, weather observers, truck drivers and air traffic controllers.
The service paved the way for the expanding role of women in the armed services.


SUNDAY, September 4, 1994; Junior Rodeo Is Wild and Woolly
Kids out West are knee-high to a grasshopper when they see their first rodeo.
And some can't wait to get in the ring.
But it's mighty hard to ride and rope when you're three feet tall.
No problem for the kids who take part in the dozen or so events sponsored every summer across New Mexico by the Indian Junior Rodeo Association. (The next one is Sept. 24.) Kids 6 and under, competing in the Midget Division (rodeos have no truck with political correctness), ride a "woolly" -- in other words, a sheep -- instead of a bucking bronco.
The goal is to stay on for at least six seconds.


China's Rush to Riches
Before many more years go by, China is likely to surpass the United States as the world's biggest economy.
It already is the fastest-growing economy, one of the consequences of a new Chinese revolution.
Sheryl WuDunn and Nicholas D. Kristof watched that revolution from the inside as The Times's correspondents in Beijing from 1988 to 1993 and won a Pulitzer Prize for journalism in 1990.
In a new book, "China Wakes" (Times Books), they describe a society that is at once politically repressive and economically freewheeling.
The regime still allows a prisoner to be asphyxiated by the fumes from his own uncollected excrement, turns the family members of imprisoned human rights campaigners out on the streets, forces young women to undergo sterilization and abortion.
At the same time, the Government is overseeing a breathtaking transformation of individual lives and institutions that is rapidly making China richer than ever before.
The following excerpts, written like their book in alternate chapters by the two authors, portray today's moneymaking frenzy -- and China's future as a global economic giant.


North Cascades
To the Editor: Daniel Lewis's article on the North Cascades ("Mellow Hiking in the North Cascades," July 3) brought back memories of my trip to the park several years ago.
At that time, you could rent a spartan but functional cabin at Diablo Lake Resort for about $40.
The resort was ideally situated, about 20 miles from Marblemount and 30 miles from Rainy Pass.
It has since closed, but nearby Ross Lake Resort offers similar accommodations.
Cabins cost from $51 to $100 a night, depending on the number of people.
You have to take a boat to reach the resort or hike two miles from Highway 20.


State Senate District Sees Brawl Within the G.O.P.
At first glance it's just a nasty local brawl for a State Senate seat in a politically atypical corner of New York City.
But scratch the surface, and the Republican primary in the 23d Senate District, covering slices of Brooklyn and Staten Island, emerges as a battle with broader stakes -- and one reflecting divisiveness roiling Republican ranks from New York City to Albany.


New Glimpses of Barber's Intimate Side
AMPLE ATTENTION HAS been paid to the music of Samuel Barber in recent years, in concert, on rec ords and in print, and it is easy to understand why.
His musical merits include an unabashed Romanticism underpinned by firm Classical forms; a wonderful ear for instrumental combinations; a deft sense of text-setting, and a melodic gift rare in this century of angular, abrasive modernism.
But that prevalent modernism also explains why it took Barber's music so long to gain currency in record stores.
Barber was born in 1910.
The golden boy of American composition in his youth, he withdrew into an increasingly reclusive maturity.
His "Hermit Songs," set to texts of medieval Irish monks and first performed in 1953, clearly reflected his own feelings of sweet, sad isolation.
And this was long before the critical and public rejection of his opera "Antony and Cleopatra," commissioned for the opening of the new Metropolitan Opera House in 1966.
Having hardly composed at all in the last decade of his life, Barber died in 1981.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
BLOW: How a Small-Town Boy Made $100 Million With the Medellin Cocaine Cartel and Lost It All By Bruce Porter.
Harper, $5.99.
George Jung was a low-level American marijuana dealer when he met a Colombian drug lord in prison in 1974.
This book chronicles his rise as the Medellin cartel's ambassador to the United States criminal market and his eventual fall: he's now an ex-con delivering fresh fish instead of cocaine.
Last year our reviewer, Joe Queenan, said the author "has done an excellent job telling the tale of a very unusual entrepreneur."


No Headline
"You tell kids that there are plenty of good reasons to stay in a small town -- lack of crime, the friendliness, lower cost of living -- and they look at you like you've got rocks in your head." -- LOUIS STITHEM, elementary-school principal in Broken Bow, Neb.  [ 8:5. ]


Bills Try to Figure Out Just What Went Wrong
Jim Kelly, the Bills' quarterback, has always been a stand-up person, more likely to choose his words honestly rather than carefully.
So his analysis of today's surprising 23-3 victory by the Jets over the Bills was not surprising.
"Why should you make excuses," he said, "when you get your butts kicked?"


New Cuomo Ad Hits Pataki In Person on Gun Position
Stepping up its attacks on the integrity of the leading Republican candidate for Governor, the campaign of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has released a new television commercial that questions State Senator George E. Pataki's position on banning assault weapons.
The commercial, which is running on television stations across the state, marks the first time the Cuomo campaign has mentioned Mr.
Pataki in its advertising.
The two are running virtually neck-and-neck in most polls.


If There Was Ever a Place for Big Hair, It's Wigstock
The men wore gold lame, pink chiffon and an occasional piece of plastic fruit.
There was a dress fashioned out of the orange warning lights and pylons used by road crews, an accessory or two made from black leather, and plenty of gingham.
But despite the usual outrageousness that distinguishes Wigstock, the annual Labor Day festival of men in drag, the celebration has grown up.


Sampras, Brought to His Knees, Has a Leg Up
While Roger Smith, rally cap in place and golden earrings dangling, raised his fists in mock triumph and blew kisses at the crowd that he had enchanted, Pete Sampras, the defending United States Open champion and the player Smith came close to enchanting, paced the Stadium Court's baseline and wondered if he was going to end up providing the happy ending to the Bahamian's fairy tale outing here.
There was Smith, the qualifier, prancing from point to point.
There was Sampras, the top dog, his serve and his shoulders at half-mast, providing a hangdog counterpoint to the giddy proceedings.


Jefferson Also Had His Christian Allies
To the Editor:
Isaac Kramnick ("Jefferson vs. the Religious Right," Op-Ed, Aug. 29) reminds us that religious attacks on American political leaders, as well as on constitutional arrangements for disentangling religion and government, have deep historical roots.
There is, as he says, continuity between charges of godlessness leveled against Jefferson and the framers of the Constitution in the 18th century and similar charges aimed at some modern proponents of the "separation of church and state."


As Trade Unions Struggle, Their Sports Cousins Thrive
As more traditional unions scramble to retain some vestige of power and influence against inroads made by union-busting law firms and replacement-worker tactics, the Major League Baseball Players Association and its cousins in the other three major professional sports have gained a recognition and a power reminiscent of the once-mighty steelworkers, mine workers and auto workers.
But on this day that once celebrated a flourishing labor movement in the United States, sports unions have also encountered an unparalleled degree of unrest as their members' employers try to regain control of an escalating salary structure.


A TRY AT A TRUCE OVER POPULATION
A day before the start of the United Nations population conference, United States and European officials said today that new language was being prepared to assuage Vatican and Islamic fears that the gathering will enshrine abortion as an international right or as a means of family planning.
The European Union has formulated "reinterpretive language" on the use of the word "right" in the conference's preparatory documents because of Vatican complaints that proposals using the word were intended to impart a binding international right to abortion, said Timothy E. Wirth, the Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs and a dominant voice for the United States in preparations for the conference.


Sri Lankan Rebels and New Government Agree to Talks
The Tamil Tiger rebels and the Government in Sri Lanka have agreed in principle to open talks two weeks after the Government took office with a pledge to seek an end to an 11-year-old civil war that has cost at least 30,000 lives and ruined the economy in large parts of the country.
But diplomats remain cautious about the revival of talks that collapsed in 1991, noting that so far the two sides appear to be addressing each other only through public statements.


Rapid Microbial Test
To the Editor:
The Aug. 26 Editorial Notebook by Dorothy J. Samuels expresses concern about an antiquated meat and poultry inspection system, fails to note that Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy has announced development of a rapid microbial test.


What? Mean-Spirited? Dabney Coleman Defends His Persona
The blessing and the bane of Dabney Coleman's durable career as a comic actor is The Dabney Coleman Character.
In films like "Tootsie" and "9 to 5," and in the handful of television series that have featured him, Mr.
Coleman has played variations of The Character: vain, irascible and unabashedly self-involved.
It is a sort of role that has brought him critical acclaim and steady work for 20 years.
But none of the series in which Mr.
Coleman has starred have been hits, and many television analysts and number crunchers have concluded that The Dabney Coleman Character is simply too mean-spirited and unlikable to be invited into America's living rooms each week.


Helping Video Makers To Find Their Niches
At National Video Resources, they are eager for the future, and wary of it, too.
Set up by the Rockefeller Foundation in 1990, N.V.R., as it is known to independent film and video makers across the country, helps the little guys to produce and market their videotapes.
To appreciate that challenge, imagine trying to land a documentary about the Eskimo Olympics on the shelf between "Aladdin" and "Sleepless in Seattle."
N.V.R. works with alternative video: the films and tapes of artists, educators, members of all kinds of minorities and advocates of all sorts of causes.
Those kinds of things are not found in video stores.
"Of all the entertainment media, video has the narrowest selection," Timothy Gunn, executive director of N.V.R., said.
"It's 90 percent movies."


Edberg Has a Downfall As a New Swede Rises
Never a night owl, when fifth-seeded Stefan Edberg faced the cold, the dark and 71st-ranked Jonas Bjorkman last night at the United States Open, suddenly the Swedish underling who had never seemed particularly threatening as a practice partner was transformed into a veritable bogeyman.
Edberg, the six-time Grand Slam champion who prevailed here in 1991 and 1992 only to be ousted last year in the second round, bowed to Bjorkman, 6-4, 6-4, 6-0, in their surprisingly brief third-round encounter on the wind-swept Stadium Court.


After a Year on the Job, Cortines Emerges as a Contradictory Pilot
When Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines paid a surprise visit to Public School 146 in East Harlem last week, the freshly buffed blackboards and gleam of newly waxed floors made his day.
He strode the hallways until he found the man wielding the mop, Tony Roselli.
"This school is just beautiful," Mr.
Cortines said, pumping Mr.
Roselli's hand.
"Thank you for keeping it so clean!"


Boat With Cuban Refugees Makes It to U.S.
After a 90-mile dash to Florida from Cuba this weekend, one Cuban family landed on United States soil, slipping past the cordon of American ships in the Straits of Florida, while two other groups were captured on the high seas despite the aid of people suspected of being smugglers.
The ones who made it to the United States did so by landing a homemade motorboat at Fort Jefferson, a 19th-century fort in the Gulf of Mexico 68 miles west of Key West, in the remote Dry Tortugas National Park.
The fort is where Dr.
Samuel Mudd was imprisoned for setting the broken leg of Lincoln's assassin, John Wilkes Booth.


Holiday Today
Labor Day is observed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Jersey Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Holiday schedule Traffic Alert TODAY WEST INDIAN DAY PARADE: The following streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.: Buffalo Avenue between New York Avenue and Eastern Parkway; Rochester Avenue between New York Avenue and Eastern Parkway; Eastern Parkway between Utica Avenue and Grand Army Plaza.
The parade begins at 11 A.M.


Man Held in Attempt to Hire Arsonist
Disregarding the lives of hundreds of people who live above a fabric store in Upper Manhattan, the owner of the business tried to hire a man to set fire to the shop, apparently to collect on his insurance, fire officials said.
Luis M. Martinez's arson scheme was thwarted when fire officials, who had been tipped off about his plans, sent an undercover fire marshal to meet with him, posing as an arsonist, said Elbert Washington, a Fire Department spokesman.
Mr.
Martinez, 53, of Sherman Avenue in Manhattan, was arrested yesterday and charged with attempted arson and conspiracy to commit arson and insurance fraud.


Home-Grown Business News in Asia
Richard Li, an aspiring tycoon and the son of one of the world's richest men, Li Ka-shing, keeps a bank of seven television sets constantly glowing in his Hong Kong office.
One of them is tuned to the latest entrant in the region's warming satellite television wars: Asia Business News, or ABN.
"It's a channel for Asia only," Mr. Li said, "and it gives me what I need."


A Degree's Shrinking Returns
Despite the creation of more than four million jobs since President Clinton took office, many of them for college graduates, the wages of men with bachelor's degrees have continued to deteriorate, a study by a Washington research organization has found.
Administration officials say the findings are probably accurate.
The study, by the Economic Policy Institute, is the first to find that the hourly wages of the college-educated lost ground to inflation even after the economy began to recover from recession in the spring of 1991.
The deterioration continued at least into 1993, despite an increasingly robust economy.
Previous studies had found that wages of college-educated men -- but not women -- slipped during the economic stagnation from 1989 to 1991.
A Lingering Pattern
"I don't see any reason why this trend should have changed since 1993 or will change in the near future," said Lawrence Mishel, research director of the Economic Policy Institute.


Corrections
An article by Bloomberg Business News yesterday about devices intended to help women perform breast self-examinations incorrectly described the panel that recommended further clinical studies of the devices.
The panel was an independent advisory committee of outside scientists and doctors, not a Food and Drug Administration panel.
The F.D.A. still has to decide whether to accept the panel's recommendation.


The Smithsonian and the Bomb
One troubling legacy of the Reagan and Bush Administrations was the so-called "culture wars," in which members of Congress tried to throttle scholarly and artistic expression by politicizing Government support for the arts and humanities.
The National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities were both severely damaged by the partisan tampering.
A hangover from this period is the presumption that Congress should decide what art is hung on gallery walls and what versions of history are depicted in Government-funded films and museum exhibitions.
Some Congressmen threaten to withdraw Government funding for cultural activity that becomes controversial or offends a given constituency's point of view.


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE: Sanitation; Counting on Help From the Union
The performance of perhaps no other agency will be more immediately apparent to New Yorkers as that of the Department of Sanitation, which collects residential garbage and cleans the streets.
Yet while Mr.
Giuliani has cut its budget by $73 million, or 12 percent, and proposed trimming more than 2,000 of the department's 10,568 civilian and uniformed workers, the effect has been outwardly negligible.


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE: Parks; Getting It Done, But a Little Dirtier
The Parks Department has its smallest staff in more than a decade, a condition that officials acknowledge means dirtier parks and playgrounds and longer waits for repairs.
Mr.
Giuliani's budget provides for 2,548 employees, down from 4,950 in 1986 and 3,219 last year.
Park employment never sank so low in the fiscal crisis of the mid-70's because of Federal employment programs.


Serbs Drive 800 More Muslims From Homes
Bosnian Serb militiamen stepped up the pace of "ethniccleansing" in Bijeljina today, driving about 800 Muslims, mostly women, children and elderly persons, across a battle-front, a Red Cross spokeswoman said.
"They were forced to walk through a no man's land, about two kilometers of woods and fields," said Lisa Jones, the Sarajevo spokeswoman for the International Committee of the Red Cross, adding that the refugees crossed into Government-controlled territory near the village of Djokici, in northeastern Bosnia.


Hebron Journal; Where Arabs Died at Prayer, Praying Is Banished
More than half a year after the Hebron massacre, religious mistrust and nationalist tension still shroud the site of the killings, the shuttered shrine commonly known as the Cave of the Patriarchs.
If anything, suspicions run deeper than usual, on all sides, as Israelis prepare for Rosh ha-Shanah, the two-day Jewish New Year holiday, which begins Monday evening.


Curtain Call For Brothers
The Jensen brothers' version of their own peculiar Magical Mystery Tour has been canceled -- at least at the United States Open.
Luke and Murphy Jensen brought their unique brand of rock-and-roll tennis to the Grandstand Court yesterday afternoon before a national television audience and a packed house of approximately 6,000 inside (and at least as many standing in line outside waiting to get in).


Making Electronics Mimic Biology
Brainmakers  How Scientists Are Moving Beyond Computers to Create a Rival to the Human Brain By David Freedman  214 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


For Giants and Jets, Opening Victories
One game into the National Football League season, the Giants and the Jets are perfect.
Behind Dave Meggett's 68-yard punt return, the Giants defeated Philadelphia, 28-23, yesterday in East Rutherford, N.J.


David Wright, 74, South African Poet
David Wright, an acclaimed South African-born poet, died on Aug. 28 at his stepdaughter's home in Waldron, East Sussex, England.
He was 74 and had homes in Cumbria in northern England and in Portugal.
The cause was cancer, The Times of London reported.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about an investigation by the Federal Communications Commission into recent auctions of radio licenses for interactive video services misstated the name of a trade association.
It is the Interactive Television Association in Washington, not the Interactive Video Services Association.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  TURNING POINT ON ULSTER
A meeting between two Catholic politicians, one a man of peace and one a man of war, may have been the turning point that led to the declaration of a cease-fire by the Irish Republican Army.  1


Labor Day Meets Rosh Ha-Shanah; When Holidays Collide, Many Worship in the Country
With the Jewish High Holy Days arriving this year on the heels of the Labor Day weekend, some rabbis suspect that in religion, as in real estate, location may be everything.
Many people are looking forward to a five-day weekend, and some rabbis of urban congregations fear they will be preaching to empty seats on Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, which begins on Monday evening.
Their counterparts in vacation communities, meanwhile, are readying for an overflow of worshipers who are lingering to savor the last few rays of summer.


Longevity at Interior
To the Editor:
Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt says that he is "determined to become one of the first Interior secretaries to finish a four-year term" (The Week in Review, Aug. 28).
In fact, the group is large.
Of the 46 Interior secretaries before Mr.
Babbitt, 14 served full terms.
These included 9 in this century.
One of these, Harold L. Ickes, served three full terms (1933-46).
Another, Stewart L. Udall, served two full terms (1961-69).
PERRY R. HAGENSTEIN  Wayland, Mass., Aug. 29, 1994


Physicians Who Follow Clinical Guidelines Provide Better Care; Malpractice Death Toll
To the Editor:
Richard L. Lubman (letter, Aug. 26) writes in response to Sidney Zion's Aug. 19 letter: "his figure of 80,000 deaths annually in American hospitals as a result of malpractice is unsubstantiated."


Packers' Sharpe Shows Up In Time
On Friday, Green Bay receiver Sterling Sharpe declared himself out of the lineup until the Packers renegotiated his 10-year, $15 million salary.
On Saturday night, after reaching an agreement with the team, he was back in the fold.
This afternoon, he caught a 14-yard touchdown pass from quarterback Brett Favre, who disagreed with Sharpe's actions on Friday, to help lead the Packers to a 16-10 victory over Minnesota.
The season-opening triumph spoiled Warren Moon's debut as the Vikings' quarterback.
He three threw interceptions, while Minnesota managed just 48 yards rushing.


Sports of The Times; Brown Obeys Phil Simms's Golden Rule
AS a boy growing up in nearby Westfield, N.J., Dave Brown attended only one Giants game at Giants Stadium.
"I was 9 years old," he remembered.
"The Giants were playing the Cardinals in 1979 when Phil Simms was a rookie for the Giants and O. J. Anderson was a rookie for the Cardinals."


In Brazil, Slip of the Tongue Makes Campaign Slip
A few minutes of frank chat accidentally relayed to satellite dishes across Brazil has cost the Finance Minister his job, and President Itamar Franco struggled today to contain a scandal only a month before the presidential election here.
The campaign of the leading centrist candidate, a former Finance Minister who has soared in the polls on the success of the Government's anti-inflation program, was shaken by the unvarnished comments made by Rubens Ricupero, who resigned Saturday.


Physicians Who Follow Clinical Guidelines Provide Better Care
To the Editor:
Robert Carlen's Aug. 29 letter about clinical practice guidelines demonstrates misunderstanding of what these guidelines are and how they can improve care.
Dr.
Carlen asserts that because a guideline may conflict with a doctor's best judgment, for doctors to follow guidelines rather than clinical judgment constitutes a "conflict of interest."


Mischievous Boys, a Stolen Gun and the Loss of a Life
Along the quiet, leafy streets of High Bridge, N.J., they remembered the 13-year-old as a troubled boy from a broken home, a blusterer with a wiry arm who befriended younger, smaller boys he could dominate.
The victim, Jacob Tracy, was only 11, by all accounts a polite, shy, compliant boy whose working parents left him home alone on summer weekdays.
In the strange, perilous crucible of boyhood friendships, the two appear to have been alter egos, leader and follower, sharing secrets, plotting mischief, courting danger that included a fateful break-in and guns.
In retrospect, it was perhaps not a healthy relationship, though hardly an extraordinary one.


Sports of The Times; Carroll Wins His First Against a Super Team
PETE CARROLL doesn't remember the exact moment somebody handed him a 1994 National Football League schedule with the notation: Sept. 4, Jets at Buffalo.
He does remember his general reaction: "Look what we have to do."
The Bills have merely set the standard for prolonged excellence and sheer cussedness by appearing in four straight Super Bowls -- winning none of them, but refusing to apologize for that oversight.
Pete Carroll would begin his career as a head coach against those Bills.


Passer Cannot Do It All Anymore
Near the end of the game, Randall Cunningham sat quietly on the bench, shaking his head in apparent frustration.
Then Zeke Bratkowski, the Philadelphia Eagles' offensive coordinator, kneeled in front of him with a clipboard in hand, and added a few consoling words.
There were 12 minutes 9 seconds left, and the Eagles had botched their third opportunity inside the Giants' 20-yard line and had settled for their third field goal.
They trailed by 23-16.


Fire Destroys Brooklyn Apartment Building


4 Candidates: Crime Issue May Not Rule In This Race
For all the talk about crime, for all the ads featuring victims' testimonials, shiny bullets, and smoking fingers, the crowded Democratic primary for Attorney General may ultimately be decided -- like many New York elections -- by the political demographics of sex, geography, ethnicity and race.
It is a primary in which none of the four candidates are widely known, and all are residents of New York City, where 60 percent of the vote may be cast.
It is a race in which the candidate who has spent the least money and may have the least name recognition is considered a possible winner because she is the only woman.


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE: Housing; Less Incentive To Aid Homeless
One of the first cuts the Giuliani administration made was to the financial incentives to landlords who rent apartments to homeless families.
Six months after the city cut the payments by at least half, housing advocates and others say the supply of such apartments is shrinking fast.
If the trend continues, they contend, the city's shelters could soon be overflowing with families waiting for permanent homes.
In fact, according to the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, the cutbacks in the incentive program have caused a backlog at a Bronx emergency assistance office where more than 150 families are sleeping each night.


CHRONICLE
The pop star WHITNEY HOUSTON has obtained a restraining order against a man accused of stalking her and her family.
The man, Charles Gilberg, is barred from contacting Ms.
Houston; her daughter, Bobbi Kristina Brown; her mother, Emily Houston, and her sister-in-law, Donna Houston, The Associated Press reported.


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE: Social Services; Longer Waits For Child Welfare
New York City officials say they will cut thousands of jobs from the social services bureaucracy without seriously damaging services to the poor.
Shirley Davis says it cannot be done.
Ms.
Davis, who supervises more than 1,100 family welfare cases in the Bronx, said the load of each of the five workers in her unit had grown to 220 families from 180 since hundreds of workers took the city's severance offer and left in May and June.


Hollis B. Chenery Dies at 77; Economist for the World Bank
Hollis B. Chenery, an economist who served the World Bank and the Agency for International Development and was a Harvard professor, died on Thursday at his home in Santa Fe, N.M.
He was 77.
The cause was pneumonia, and he had been suffering from Parkinson's disease, said his daughter Teresa Seamster.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on Thursday, about a plan under which the Castle Energy Corporation will sever its ties with its German parent, Metallgesellschaft A.G., misstated a detail of the plan.
Metallgesellschaft will cancel some Castle debt and take on other Castle debt under the plan, but it will not cancel the entire $375 million debt.


In a 'Game,' Boy Shoots His Cousin Handgun Seemed Just Like a Toy
Eight-year-old Kashif Johnson and his 3-year-old cousin, Lorenzo Johnson, were watching their favorite Saturday morning cartoons in their Yonker's apartment when Kashif found a handgun atop the television set.
He pointed the .38-caliber gun at his cousin, just like they do in the cartoons, and shot him in the head.
The force of the impact of the bullet knocked Lorenzo off his aunt's bed and onto the floor, according to accounts by the Yonkers police and the boys' family and friends.
The bullet, which entered just beneath his right eye, is lodged in Lorenzo's brain.
He remained in critical condition yesterday.


Markets Closed
All financial markets in the United States and Canada will be closed today for the Labor Day holiday.
Government offices, banks and many business will also be closed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Despite the creation of more than four million jobs since President Clinton took office, the wages of men with bachelor's degrees have continued to deteriorate, a research organization has found.
The study, by the Economic Policy Institute in Washington, is the first to determine that wages of the college-educated lost ground to inflation even after the United States economy began to recover from recession.  [ Page 33. ]


Patents
ONCE widely used by industry, polychlorinated biphenyls suspected carcinogens better known as PCB's -- have long been banned in the United States.
But because the compound breaks down extremely slowly, PCB's persist as a costly, difficult cleanup headache.
Now two Princeton University chemists say they have come up with an elegant and inexpensive way to render soil contaminated by PCB's harmless.
The Patent Office has notified them that a patent for the process will be issued on Sept. 6.


In Ex-Workers' Paradise, It's a Bleak Labor Day
To the Editor:
Having just returned from a two-month stay in Russia, during which I spent much of my time with ordinary Russian working people and their families, I am dismayed by reports that the situation has stabilized.


Getting Ready for the Pope


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE: Transportation; Biggest Collapses Hidden at First
More potholes, fewer repairs to sidewalks, longer delays in getting new signals installed and more hassles getting permits for digging up a street.
Those are among the consequences that Transportation Department officials foresee from losing about 1,000 jobs.
"When you whittle away like this, you take away our ability to do things," said one senior transportation official, who, like most in the department, insisted on anonymity.
"It's not like the ferry is going to look any dirtier, but it's not going to look any cleaner."


'We've Won!' the Orangemen Say. Not So Fast.
The crowd in the Carrier Dome celebrated Saturday, and so did the Syracuse players after Marvin Harrison caught Kevin Mason's pass for a 48-yard touchdown that completed a comeback from 24-0 and put the Orange ahead of Oklahoma, 29-27, with 61 seconds left.
The conversion kick for the 30th point? Sean Reali missed it.


Mass Killings by Rwandan Rebels Are Reported
There is the stench of decaying bodies, a skeleton still partly draped in clothes, the rib cage of one victim poking through the dirt of a mass grave.
It is the evidence of another massacre in this country.
But this time, the killing was not the work of the militia or soldiers of the former Rwandan Government in their pogrom against the Tutsi.
This massacre was the work of troops with the rebel army, the Rwandan Patriotic Front, villagers say.
It happened in mid-June, they say, when the Front was on a major military sweep through the hills in the south of the country in the final weeks of the war.


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE: Schools; Teacher Cutbacks Overstated So Far
When the Mayor first proposed cutting $358 million from the Board of Education's budget in May, school officials cried foul, saying that the cuts went too far and predicting that thousands of teachers would have to be laid off, while other programs would be crippled.
Ultimately, though, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines agreed to cut 2,500 administrative positions from the board's central office by the end of June.
And the most dire warnings did not materialize.


Essay; Vatican vs. V.P.: Papal Population Politics
If there has been one unequivocal campaign promise the Clinton-Gore Administration has kept from the start, it is on a woman's right to choose abortion.
That applies abroad, too: Clintonites have reversed 12 years of Reagan-Bush policies denying aid dollars to countries where abortion is included in birth control.
They promised and delivered; that's democracy.
But then, in the run-up to the U.N. population conference in Cairo, advocates of abortion rights went a bridge too far.
Trickily avoiding the A-word, U.S. sherpas espoused a U.N. statement calling for governments to provide "reproductive rights" including 'fertility regulation" and "pregnancy termination" throughout the world -- as if new verbal compounds could conceal the abortion deed.
The Vatican wasn't fooled by these euphemisms, and cunningly enlisted Muslim fundamentalists to reject imposing "a current life style of certain opulent societies" (that's satanic Uncle Sam) on third-world nations.
Fine; brings the battle out in the open.
But then the Vatican went too far: not only did the Pope's spokesman condescendingly refer to the U.S.
Government as "this Administration," but he publicly attacked Vice President Al Gore by name.
The Pope's representative impugned the sincerity of Gore's conciliatory assertion that the U.S. did not seek an international right to abortion.
In delivering that shot, the papal spokesman seemed to suggest that the second-highest official elected by Americans was a hypocrite.
That was a personal insult issued in the Pope's name.
Unless corrected, it will stand as unprecedented papal meddling in U.S. politics.
It's overreaching enough for a U.S. bishop to predict the political behavior of co-religionists, as Bishop James McHugh did yesterday with his warning of a "powerful incentive to American Catholics to walk away from the Democratic Party." For the Pope himself to permit his official spokesman to rail against any specific American political figure demeans the Vatican -- or "this papacy," as spokesman Joaquin Navarro-Valls might put it.
Reached by phone in Cairo yesterday, Gore played it cool: "In dealing with those who are actually negotiating at this conference," he soothed, "I've found people to be constructive and conciliatory on both sides."
He found Bishop McHugh "statesmanlike in saying, even though they will not accept the view that contraception is all right, nevertheless signaling they fully understand that if other organizations wish to make condoms available, they won't strenuously object."
Understandably, after feminists, greens and redistributionists got carried away, Gore has been shifting the focus away from abortion to contraception, and then to a wider area of agreement: education and equality for women.
Let's hope he can; Perdita Huston's seminal 1979 book, "Third World Women Speak Out," showed that to be a key to family stability.
My objection to the new Malthusians is their insistence that crowding is the obstacle to economic growth and individual advancement.
Hong Kong and Taiwan show that to be as untrue as Thomas Malthus's predictions of world starvation two centuries ago.
As nations get richer and people get educated, families get smaller.
"Yeah, I've heard that 'Development is the best contraceptive' for 20 years," counters Gore.
"We're adopting a more holistic approach here in Cairo. Availability of contraception; increase of child survival to encourage smaller families; education and empowerment of women; and the economic development to make it easier to establish the others."
Conservatives who put individual freedom first can embrace that quartet.
The danger comes from the gender-agenda coercionaries overpopulating global conferences who would make governments the levelers of nations and bureaucrats the makers of family decisions.
A "right to develop" is not an entitlement to a handout.
The Vatican did well to blow the whistle on the power grab of the new Malthusians; the result is the creative tension of open debate.
And moral instruction by preachers has a traditional place in politics.
But the Pope should tell his arrogant spokesman that he harmed the anti-abortion cause by getting politically mean.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BUDGET CUTS BEGIN TO BITE (OR NIBBLE?)
Eight months after Mayor Giuliani took office pledging to cut the budget and run government more efficiently, his administration has managed to cut 7,000 jobs from a work force of 216,000 without cataclysm -- despite dire warnings during the spring's budget fight between the Mayor and the City Council.


Montana Redux: Chiefs Look Sharp
Chiefs 30, Saints 17
Joe Montana, who usually sizzles in the Superdome, passed for 315 yards and 2 touchdowns as the Kansas City Chiefs beat the New Orleans Saints, 30-17, in the dome yesterday.


Herbert Haft Removed From Post at Company
Only three months after reaching a settlement with his eldest son and his former wife, Herbert Haft, the patriarch of a sprawling retailing and real estate empire here, is feuding again.
The plot of the latest battle is about as peculiar as one in any novel stocked by Crown Books, one of the companies controlled by the family.


Age Cannot Wither the Magic of Theater
A small, soft-voiced woman of 80-odd years, cautiously bundled in a winter coat on a summer night, Hannah Smepvangers ignored the rain that fell in broken lines over the Delacorte Theater on Wednesday.
Isabella Leniz disregarded the fatigue from holding a finger to her hearing aid, the only way to stop its strange tendency to whistle "Jingle Bells" and let her hear the rapid-fire parries of Shakespeare's Verona.
Catherine O'Regan leaned closer in her front-row wheelchair, defying the arthritis that had been plaguing her 79-year-old bones all week long, to be captivated by a recalcitrant pup and dubious nuns parading before her.
Not all of them noticed the nudity or the mustaches on the nuns, or even the motor scooter that the director Adrian Hall dropped on "The Two Gentlemen of Verona." The next day, some did not even remember having been at the performance.
But art's power to cheat time, to transport the spirit from earthly aches, was perhaps never so starkly demonstrated as by the elderly and infirm seizing what they could from this outdoor stage.


The Scrambling Is On For Off-Season Tourism
With the summer vacation season ending today, many tourist spots that used to board up for the year are no longer content to hibernate.
Instead, in what travel officials describe as making applesauce out of apples, many cities and states are trying to lure tourists in the off-season.
Alaska is selling itself as a winter wonderland, tempting tourists with the Northern Lights and trips by dog sled.
Ocean City, N.J., a seaside resort, is about to start a campaign marketing the city as a year-round destination, complete with performances of "The Nutcracker" in late November.
Coastal towns in Oregon and Washington, which draw sports fishermen in the summer, are urging tourists to come enjoy the thunder and lightning storms that batter their beaches in the fall and winter.


A Slow Rise In Magazines On CD-ROM
The circulation figures are low to minuscule and the ad pages are almost nonexistent, but that has not stopped a number of magazine publishers from diving into the interactive CD-ROM market.
Nearly a dozen companies are or soon will be publishing multimedia magazines that exist only in the CD-ROM format.
Multimedia -- the combination of text, graphics, full-motion video, audio and animation -- is viewed by many computer industry analysts as the growth market of the future, especially for print publishers with material that can be repackaged and sold to a different audience.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Elliott Is Winner of Southern 500 Race  Bill Elliott ended an improbable string of Nascar futility, sweeping past Dale Earnhardt to win the Southern 500 at Darlington Raceway in South Carolina yesterday.
Elliott passed Earnhardt, the Winston Cup points leader and acknowledged master of the circuit's oldest super speedway, 13 laps from the finish and crossed the line nearly a quarter-mile in front.
It was Elliott's third Southern 500 triumph and his first Winston Cup victory since Nov. 15, 1992, at Atlanta Motor Speedway.
Elliott won $68,330 as his Ford Thunderbird finished with an average speed of speed of 127.915 miles an hour.
Earnhardt was second. (AP)


Battle for Mitchell's Maine Seat Reveals Democrats' Senate Woes
Maine was supposed to be a pushover for the Democrats in a year full of electoral travail.
Though several of his colleagues around the country were clearly vulnerable, Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, looked like a stainless-steel sure thing for re-election, having won with 81 percent of the vote in 1988.


Paris After Sundown: With Gallic Subtlety, Even More Light
Paris calls itself the City of Light.
In the daytime, despite subtle shifts caused by pollution and worldwide weather patterns, the diffuse northern sunlight has remained fairly constant over the centuries.
Or so paintings, photographs and novelistic descriptions suggest.
But nighttime is different, and the notion of a city of light, a slogan adopted with the widespread electrification of Paris in the late 19th century, has meant different things in different decades.


It's Not Hip to Stay, Say Small-Town Youth
The city boy visiting this little central Nebraska town had delivered the insult with a laugh.
"You're a hick," he told Tressa Baxter.
Growing up on Rural Route 3, on a farm embraced by wheat fields and cattle rangelands, Miss Baxter, 18, had spent many blue-sky mornings galloping in the saddle atop her paint mare, Angel.
She had also played trumpet in the high school marching band and french horn in the concert band.
She was a member of the Spanish club, the volleyball team, the track and field team and, when she had time, the cheerleading squad.


Marino Silences All Doubters
With a vintage display of offensive prowess, Miami Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino today gave a definitive answer to any lingering questions about whether or not he has recovered from the Achilles' tendon tear that had threatened his career.
The answer: no question. He's back.


Surprise in Idaho Governor's Race: Leader Is a Democrat and an Indian
To be a Democrat in this state, where Bill Clinton barely nudged Ross Perot for second place in the 1992 election with just 29 percent of the vote, is to be intimate with the word underdog.
And to be anything other than a white candidate in Idaho, where racial minorities make up only about 7 percent of the population, would seem a challenge to a politician of any party.
So it comes as a surprise to many people that Larry EchoHawk, a Pawnee Indian and Democrat who counts President Clinton as a friend, is holding a steady double-digit lead in the polls in the race to become Idaho's next governor.


Another Slaying in Chicago, Another 11-Year-Old Suspect
For nearly a year, the police here have searched the city's Southwest Side for a killer who beat an 84-year-old woman over the head with her cane and then slashed her throat with a kitchen knife, leaving her to die on her cold bathroom floor, her hands bound.
Investigators interviewed dozens of witnesses, including a 10-year-old boy nicknamed Frog, who lived next door to the woman and told the police about a mysterious homeless man lurking in her backyard.


In Ex-Workers' Paradise, It's a Bleak Labor Day; Women Learn Skills
To the Editor:
My experiences as president of a nonprofit organization working with Russian women during our three years in that country has made three things clear: Russian people are as intelligent, capable and diligent as we have imagined they can be since Sputnik; given the resources needed, they will make the painful and difficult transition to a market economy, and things have changed so rapidly over the recent past that a still photograph of any given moment is dangerous and misleading.


Pause to Consider An Unsung Centennial
To the Editor:
Labor's struggle is only one aspect of our past that does not mesh with the fairy-tale American history taught by public schools.
Like me, you may not have learned that President Grover Cleveland made Labor Day a national holiday on June 28, 1894, or that six days later he sent Federal troops into Chicago to crush one of the largest and best organized efforts by labor to redress grievances, the Pullman strike.


Calling Shelter Food Inedible, Men Dine at a Deli in Protest
Complaining about what they said was substandard and sometimes spoiled food in the city's shelters, nearly 200 working homeless men boycotted their regular lunches yesterday at the Sumner Avenue Men's Shelter in Brooklyn and lined up instead to eat at a delicatessen across the street.
The Coalition for the Homeless, the advocacy group that staged the boycott, said it was to be the first of similar food strikes at 14 shelters in September to try to convince the city that it is wasting millions of dollars on food bought from the Maramont Corporation of Brooklyn.
Many homeless men said they had long refused to eat the meals.


How Much Is Keenan's Signature Worth, Anyway? $15
The room was relatively calm, some 20 people waiting patiently on line to get posters or newspaper clippings or hockey pucks autographed by Mike Keenan, the former coach of the Stanley Cup champion Rangers.
It was a sunny Sunday afternoon on the weekend before Ranger training camp is scheduled to open, and those gathered in the gymnasium-like room at Our Lady of Miracles Church in Brooklyn did not seem all that upset that Keenan will not be behind the Ranger bench this year.


Meggett Doesn't Miss a Beat As Giants Zip to a Victory
On a cool, crisp afternoon at Giants Stadium, when seemingly every eye and television camera here was focused on quarterback Dave Brown, someone almost a foot shorter stole the show.
One blazing punt return by one of the smallest men in the National Football League -- not a great pass by Phil Simms's successor or a huge hit by a hulking linebacker on the scrambled defense -- began the Giants' second season under Dan Reeves on an winning note.


Rethinking a Model Incentive Plan
For two decades the Lincoln Electric Company, the nation's largest maker of arc welders and welding supplies, has been studied by Harvard Business School students as a model of how to motivate workers.
Each year thousands of managers from other companies, even some rivals, journey to Lincoln's modest headquarters and huge factory complex in this blue-collar Cleveland suburb for free seminars on the company's incentive system.


Quebec Police Briefly Seize Town's Force
The tranquillity of this town near the Richelieu River was shattered early Thursday morning when Capt.
Paul Quirion of the provincial police walked into the single-story redbrick police station here and ordered the duty officer to call in all his patrols.
At that moment, at 6 A.M., more than 350 of Captain Quirion's provincial police officers were raiding the homes of 142 people throughout Quebec, including those of all 24 uniformed members of the local police force in Chambly, population 16,000.
The raids, conducted throughout Quebec, culminated a five-month undercover investigation into drug trafficking, protection rackets, the receiving of stolen goods, prostitution, the sale of contraband liquor, tobacco and steroids, and even the filing of false income tax returns.


Yet Another Purpose for the Handy Umbrella


Parents Take Less of a Role As Pupils Age
A nationwide study of families and schools released today shows that many parents, consumed by making ends meet, are far less involved in the high schools than in the elementary schools, leaving their children with less guidance in the face of a destructive peer culture.
A private research organization in Washington, Child Trends Inc., conducted the study, "Running in Place: How American Families Are Faring in a Changing Economy and an Individualistic Society." It highlights several facts about American families in the 1990's.
Among them are these:


Bridge
Readers who have already inspected the bidding diagram and are reaching for indignant pens may put them down again and read on.
The deal was played July 6 in London, during a celebration of the centenary of the arrival of bridge at the Portland Club in 1894.
Some 60 members and guests dressed in Victorian clothes, gathered at the club for drinks, journeyed by horse-drawn omnibus to the Cafe Royal in Regent Street, dined and played a short bridge match: the Portland Club against England.
The game they were playing was not contract bridge, nor even auction bridge, but the original "bridge." This had long been played in Constantinople and other parts of the Turkish Empire, perhaps as far back as the Crimean War.
It reached one of London's whist clubs in 1892, and was in New York a year later.
The innovation reached the Portland Club by a roundabout route: Lord Brougham took it there from India.


New Works for a Square but Hip Instrument
The American Accordionists' Association, which has been fighting the good fight in behalf of its chosen instrument since 1938, presented an unusual variety show on Saturday evening at Playhouse 91.
The first part of the program was given over to new works, a conventional display piece by William Schimmel and an avant-garde essay by David Soldier.
The second part was a showcase for the Air New Zealand Accordion Orchestra, which played everything from Mozart and Rossini to Buddy Holly and Bob Seger.
Mr.
Schimmel, who was the evening's host, began by explaining that the association's two missions are to develop an American virtuoso school and to commission new works.
He went on to describe "the built-in ironic duality of the accordion," which he said was both "hip and square, beautiful and ugly." Perhaps one had to be a player to appreciate the full picture.
But Mr.
Schimmel seemed not to be preaching only to the choir.
An unscientific poll of the audience revealed that quite a few listeners were not accordionists.


U.S. Rejects Proposal by Havana to Admit 100,000 Cubans
The Cuban Government proposed yesterday that the United States grant entry to at least 100,000 Cubans if Washington wanted Havana to clamp down on the flow of boat people, Administration officials said.
The United States delegation quickly rejected that demand, made at bilateral talks in New York, and began cautioning that an agreement on how to stop the exodus might be impossible.


A Holiday Ode to A.C.
On this Labor Day, let us consider the condition of America around, say, the 1920's.
America was, in a word, hot and had been for a long time.
When it came to the average home, science was only just beginning to wrestle with the problem of taking water and turning it into ice, rather than leaving it to the householder to acquire ice and watch it turn into water inside a box in the kitchen.
In 1925, only 75,000 refrigerators were sold in the entire U.S.
If cooling water was in its infancy, you can imagine where the country stood in regard to the much more voluminous problem of cooling air that dependably got unbearable around Memorial Day and stayed that way until Labor Day. (As a technical matter, Labor Day did not come onto the scene as a marker in the annual hotness cycle until 1894 when it became a Federal holiday, but the last week of summer was already well established as a time of sweating and had been since Colonial days.)


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE: Health; Public Paperwork: Condition Critical
There is probably no better measure of the budget cuts' impact on the Health Department than this: A supervisor was recently charged with taking bribes to speed up the delivery of copies of death certificates.
It used to be a routine matter that took a couple of weeks at most, but after the department's Vital Records Division lost 12 of its 90 workers, it can take up to five months to obtain a copy of a birth or death certificate, officials said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Ad Bonanza Has Networks Feeling Flush
The broadcast networks may or may not be changing hands, but their hands are certainly filling with change -- and every other form of currency -- as a new television season is set to begin.
One subplot to last week's churning rumors about the possible sale of one or more networks was the remarkable financial comeback of the network television business.
Advance sales of commercial time for the prime-time season, known as the upfront market, reached a record high of $4.4 billion this summer.


Another Easy Romp For Heavenly Prize
Her name, appropriately, is Heavenly Prize.
She is the filly who outran the great Lakeway by seven lengths at Saratoga three weeks ago.
And for an encore, she gave another outrageous performance yesterday at Belmont Park, rocketing around three bunched rivals in the homestretch and winning the Gazelle Handicap by 6 1/2 lengths.
Is she the queen of the fillies in 1994?
Until she upset Lakeway, she was 0 for 4 this year, but always close.
Now she has won two straight stakes by runaway margins, and she has run in the money in all eight starts in a career that will take her to the Breeders' Cup Distaff on Nov. 5 for the ultimate showdown against Sky Beauty, Hollywood Wildcat and, yes, Lakeway one more time.


Letter: On Governing Arkansas; Mr. Clinton Moved the State Forward
To the Editor:
Before coming to the United States Senate, we each served two terms as Governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton's immediate predecessors.
We have become increasingly exasperated with those who write that Mr.
Clinton's years in the governor's office were a kind of wasteland, during which a hollow man played it slick and safe to insure a certain path to the Presidency.
Governor Clinton demonstrated the courage, tenacity and other leadership qualities that caused the people of Arkansas to elect him time and again.


World Economies


CHRONICLE
A decade ago, before aphorisms by the artist JENNY HOLZER became familiar sights in museums and galleries, she won a fellowship from Art Matters, an organization that often supports artists whose work is controversial.
Back then she was told her work was "interesting" -- "a word I came to hate," she said.
In a recent fund-raising letter to benefactors of Art Matters, Ms.
Holzer recalled that the grant "gave me a psychological and financial vote of confidence at a time when I needed help." Now she has given something back: Included in each letter are 10 stamps emblazoned with Holzerisms like a "A Lot of Professionals Are Crackpots" and "Boredom Makes You Do Crazy Things."


Caution Is Urged in Judging Police in Subway Shooting
The head of the transit police union urged the public yesterday to withhold judgment of an undercover transit officer's statements that his partner was shot by a New York City police officer who looked angry and intent on killing.
Ronald W. Reale, the president of the Transit Police Benevolent Association, said that remarks by Officer David Thompson of the transit police should be weighed in context with the accounts of 50 other witnesses to the subway station shooting.
He said that no judgment should be made until the investigation was completed.


They Talk the Talk And Walk the Walk
Fox Sports came to breathing, blood-pumping life yesterday.
The world survived, Fox proved it could succeed CBS, and the only appearance of Bart Simpson, Al Bundy or M.A.N.T.I.S. came in commercials.
"I've been living on caffeine and nerves since 3 in the morning," said David Hill, the president of Fox Sports.


Labors Lost, and Won; Pink Slip
When they say, "The bottom's fallen out," what they mean is Fry's face gone tight as shoe leather


What Strike Needs Is a Designated Hero
In Hollywood, this would be about the time the guy on the white horse rides in and saves the damsel in distress.
In baseball, it would be the time a commissioner rides in and saves everyone's face.
But not in this day and age.
In a cruel irony, no one is playing major league baseball on Labor Day for the first time in over a century because a war of attrition between owners and players has disrupted the game for the eighth time in 22 years.


Turning Point: The I.R.A. Cease-Fire -- A special report; 2 Irish Foes Journey From Deeds to Words
On an April Saturday in 1993, a journalist was hawking The Socialist Worker along Shipquay Street in Londonderry when a neighbor sidled up and said, "Here, you'll never guess who I just saw going into John Hume's house."
The journalist pricked up his ears.
John Hume, a large bear of a man of uncertain health at 56, a former French teacher turned politician, was the most respected and influential Catholic leader in Northern Ireland.


In Ex-Workers' Paradise, It's a Bleak Labor Day; Safety Net Mess
To the Editor:
Russian workers face two key problems: unpaid wages and erosion of the factory-based social safety net.
Indeed, this is true not only of Russian workers, but of workers in most of the former Soviet Union.


Another Slaying in Chicago, Another 11-Year-Old Suspect
For nearly a year, the police here have searched the city's Southwest Side for a killer who beat an 84-year-old woman over the head with her cane and then slashed her throat with a kitchen knife, leaving her to die on her cold bathroom floor, her hands bound.
Investigators interviewed dozens of witnesses, including a 10-year-old boy nicknamed Frog, who lived next door to the woman and told the police about a mysterious homeless man lurking in her backyard.


GIULIANI JOB CUTS STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT ON SERVICE
Eight months after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani took office pledging to cut the budget and run government more efficiently, his efforts to reduce New York City's spending have begun to erode services for thousands of New Yorkers, but not in the catastrophic way many critics had predicted.
While the cuts have not devastated public services, their impact is starting to affect people's lives in small ways.
For instance, the number of crews that repair fences and benches at parks and playgrounds has been cut from 46 to 25.
The Department of Sanitation has canceled collections of household hazardous wastes.


Yes, Cowboys Will Play For Coach Switzer, Too
At first glance, the Dallas-Pittsburgh match up was one of running backs, of Emmitt Smith versus Barry Foster, of which team could run first and run last and eventually trample the opposing defense.
But as the game unfolded this afternoon before 60,156 fans at Three Rivers Stadium, it was clear that this duel would offer so much more.
It gave Barry Switzer his first victory as the Cowboys' head coach.
It confirmed the notion that when faced with a stiff challenge, the Dallas players are capable, once again, of turning a test into a joke.
And it showed that the Dallas defense may not be as full of leaks as predicted.


Once Upon a Time, in Orchard Park, N.Y. . . .
It kept building, this feeling that the Jets were serious today, while almost 80,000 fans sat in disbelief.
Surely, any moment, any play, the Super Bowl Bills would launch into their quick-as-a-flash offense and set things right in Western New York.


INSIDE
Standoff in Cuba Talks
Cuba said the United States should accept at least 100,000 new immigrants, but the Administration rejected the proposal.
Page 3.
Trapping an Abductor
After plotting and cajoling, a California woman got her reward: her 2-year-old son.
Her estranged husband had abducted him to Iraq.
Page 6.
Comeback for the Networks
As a new television season begins, one of the biggest story linesis the financial turnaround of the network television business.
Page 33.
2 Arts
Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.
SportsMonday begins on page 25, Business Day on page 33.


Major Lance, 55, Soul Singer in 60's
Major Lance, a Chicago-born soul singer whose biggest hits were in the 1960's, died on Saturday at his home in Decatur, Ga.
He was 55.
The cause was heart disease, The Associated Press reported.


Trap for Iraqi Husband Aids Recovery of Son
On the telephone to Iraq, Michelle Al-Naserri, a California legal secretary, often sang to her 2-year-old son, Laith-Adam, to remind him of home, fearing that she might never see him again.
To her estranged husband, who had abducted Laith to Baghdad, she spoke of love and reconciliation.


People With 401(k)'s Still Need to Plan
To the Editor:
There is good cause to beware of corporate America's plans for its retirees.
When overfunded pension plans were a juicy reward for an in-house raid, officers and boards were happy with traditional pensions.


Top Mexican Airline Executive Quits
The chairman of Mexico's two largest airlines, Aeromexico and Mexicana, has resigned, the latest victim in the price war created by the two-year-old deregulation of the nation's airline industry.
The official, Gerardo de Prevoisin, handed in his resignation at a board meeting on Friday.
The airlines declined to comment.
But in paid announcements in several Mexican newspapers over the weekend, they said they were cooperating "with banks and other creditors in an attempt to begin a restructuring process."


Postal Service Says Troubles In Chicago Are Being Resolved
In May, firefighters responding to a blaze in a suburban condominium found more than a ton of mail inside dating back nearly seven years.
The letter carrier who lived there, Robert K. Beverly, has since pleaded guilty to stealing and delaying mail and was recently sentenced to 21 months in prison.
It was one in a string of cases since February that led to Chicago's postal service being rated the worst in the country, but officials there now say the things are getting better.


Jews Usher in the New Year of 5755


Observer; No, Not A Hit Child
Small problems first: What do you call an 11-year-old hit man?
Not a hit child surely.
That makes him sound like a Hollywood moppet who's dynamite at the box office.
Those cute "Home Alone" movies, chewing gum for the brain, spring to mind.
Eleven-year-old Robert Sandifer (height: 4 feet 8 inches) was a real-life instance of what can happen when you leave a kid home alone.


Washington Public Schools Set to Open One Week Late
The District of Columbia decided today to delay the start of school by five days, until Sept. 12, after a judge turned down a stopgap plan to put fire patrols in the hallways at dozens of schools that do not meet fire codes.
Most of the District's schools are in compliance with the codes, but education officials have said it would be too confusing to keep some schools closed while opening others as scheduled on Wednesday.
The school board ordered the officials to draw up plans to accommodate the students whose schools will remain closed next Monday.


Russian Troops On Full Alert In the Caucasus
Russian troops stationed near the border of the secessionist Chechen republic were put on top alert today after dozens of people died in the worst fighting yet between the Chechen government and troops opposed to secession.
Russia, which refused to recognize the secession three years ago, last month began backing an opposition group, but promised that Russian troops would not intervene.


Can Rwanda's Gorillas Survive?
To the Editor:
In "Gorillas, Still in Rwanda's Mist" (editorial, Aug. 31), you write about the mountain gorillas: "Having lost their fear of people, they are a cruelly easy mark for poachers, who covet their skins and hands, which they sell as grisly souvenirs." Fortunately, your information is a full decade out of date.


Developers Seek Profits in Polluted Land
If the 166-acre tract of scraggly, garbage-strewn undergrowth here seems an unlikely place for a new shopping mall, consider what lies beneath its scarred topsoil.
For decades, almost all of this city's trash was buried here.
In the parlance of environmentalists, the site is a brown field -- something less polluted than a toxic waste dump, but still needing more extensive cleanup than the undeveloped greenery of the nation's suburbs and rural areas.


Visions of Ryan Blitzing in the Giants' Heads
Buddy Ball is not a new adventure ride at Disneyland. It's blitzing.
And more blitzing.


Jets Are in a Bubble Too Pleasant to Burst
Slow down, fans, Boomer Esiason cautioned today.
Esiason's Jets teammates are already being instructed by Coach Pete Carroll to keep in perspective their stunning 23-3 opening-day rout of the Bills.
But while Esiason said that Jets fans should remember that next Sunday the John Elway-led Denver Broncos loom, he still sounded excited about what happened against the Bills.


Studies Raise Doubts About Need to Lower Home Radon Levels
SEVERAL new studies of radon, the radioactive gas known to cause cancer and found to be seeping into millions of homes across the country, have uncovered little evidence linking household exposure to disease, raising questions about how much risk radon poses to humans at very low levels.
Researchers say these studies have in most cases failed to show an association between lung cancer and household radon levels at or even slightly higher than the level at which the Environmental Protection Agency recommends taking corrective measures.


Though Desperate, Most Cubans Are Not Ready to Take to Rafts
There are no rafts in the quiet gulf that presses up to this small town on Cuba's western end, only children splashing around under the hot late-summer sun and fishing boats tethered to the shore.
Though some hungry townspeople have taken to stealing food from their neighbors' homes, no one has yet tried to steal any of the boats.
In a town whose name translates as Faith, no one seems to have turned decisively against the Revolution.


Now It's Laughter And Fun For Pierce
Mary Pierce lost the point, and she laughed.
She lunged too late for a hard-hit ball to her left, missed, and flashed a smile.
She shared high-fives with her doubles partner, Murphy Jensen, and bounced around the tennis court as if she were at a weekend party in the country rather than in a quarterfinal match at the United States Open.


Q&amp;A
Raindrops and Sheets
Q.  Why does rain fall as drops and not sheets?


Forgive and Regret?
Who couldn't go for a good amnesty?
Cheaters repent, taxes are paid, library books are returned.
But is forgiveness cost-effective?
Page B1.


How a Flu Molecule Stands on Its Head To Infect Human Cells
SHEDDING light on the inner workings of the flu virus, researchers say they have determined how a protein on the surface of the virus undergoes a radical transformation to help infect human cells.
Their findings may also prove useful in understanding other viruses, including the one that causes AIDS, they said.
The protein, called hemagglutinin, is a triple-stranded molecule with identical subunits.
In its neutral state, the molecule is shaped a bit like a broccoli floret.
Three globular heads containing receptor-binding sites are mounted on three connected stalks that protrude from the membrane surrounding the virus, said Dr.
Don C. Wiley, a researcher with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Harvard University.
The stalks are helical.


CBS Turns Down Tennis Commercial
CBS has refused to run a 30-second television commercial for Prince tennis racquets that features an actor portraying God taking part in a grueling tennis match.
The spot, created by Chiat/Day in New York, was intended to appear during CBS's coverage of the United States Open tennis tournament.
"We think that using God to sell tennis racquets is inappropriate" because it might offend viewers and affiliates, Matthew Margo, vice president of program practices at CBS in New York, said last week.
"Using God to sell any product is inappropriate."


Steel Mill Is Shadow Of What It Once Was
It was a symbol of America's industrial might, one of the world's biggest, most sophisticated, most expensive steel mills, employing thousands of workers and producing 2.3 million tons of high-grade carbon steel a year when it went on line in 1979.
But almost immediately, the 23-story-high Kaiser Steel Corporation plant, built at a cost of $287 million, became a symbol of wrenching changes in the economy, its roaring furnaces burdened by international competition, environmental regulations, labor disputes and the encroachments of corporate raiders.


Politicians Still Courting Perot's Leaderless Army
At the height of the bitter battle over ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement, Ross Perot held a Washington news conference to denounce the pact.
Representative Olympia J. Snowe was right there beside him.
And when Mr.
Perot's organization, United We Stand, holds a candidate forum this fall, Ms.
Snowe, a nine-term Republican from northern Maine now running for the Senate, will be there as well.


Chess
Trench warfare was the keynote of the International Chess Federation's quarterfinal matches in Sanghi-Nagar, India.
No one produced glamorous feats of tactical wizardry.
It was all stubborn, hand-to-hand wrestling.
There were no grand plans or large, sparkling strategical ideas.
Everyone was grubbing for whatever he got, and persistence and patience paid the greatest dividends.
This is not cause for consternation.
No one came up with the surprise that confuses the opponent and sets up a brilliant kill.
At the top level, the players are great at anticipating danger and sidestepping it.
But in the business of grinding along flawlessly throughout the game, most players can be worn down.


Patterns
Outfoxing the Editors
When Martin Margiela decided to forgo the March runway shows in Paris and present his collection for the first time when it is already in the stores, he missed out on an important part of fashion process -- the part when editors view collections and decide what trends to focus on in their magazines.


Prenup Wins Jerome In Wire-to-Wire Drive
Prenup, the colt who missed the Triple Crown series because of knee surgery, kept streaking through the second half of the racing season yesterday afternoon, when he went wire to wire to win the 126th running of the Jerome Handicap at Belmont Park by four lengths over Ulises.
Although he scored a personal success, he didn't do much to clarify the rankings among horses headed for the landmark races that will decide the year's championships.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Tuesday Auto Sales August


Five Agencies Work For Rwandan Relief
Five agencies are among those teaming up with celebrities to create a series of public service announcements aimed at raising money for the American Red Cross's Rwandan relief drive.
The agencies, all based in New York, are: Grey Advertising; Korey, Kay &amp; Partners; Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG; Partners &amp; Shevack, and Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
They have joined forces with celebrities like Richard Gere, Jodie Foster, Vanessa Williams and Hakeem Olajuwon, as well as D &amp; H MacGuffin Films, a commercial production company, and Brillstein/Grey Entertainment, a talent management and production company.


CHRONICLE
During a rare public appearance on Sunday, actress LUISE RAINER expressed regret about the abrupt end of her film career in the late 1930's.
Ms.
Rainer, 84, won Oscars for best actress in successive years, for "The Great Ziegfeld" in 1936 and "The Good Earth" in 1937.
But she disappeared from the movie screen soon afterward.
Accepting an award from the Society for Cinephiles in Hollywood, Ms.
Rainer said she stopped acting because she didn't like any of the roles she was offered after her early successes, The Associated Press reported.


Not Letting an Amnesty Turn Into a Travesty; Bucks or Books, It's a Short Shelf Life
Who couldn't go for a good amnesty?
Cheaters repent, authorities forgive, the slate gets wiped clean.
Some are good for the state's bank balance, others get missing books back on library shelves, still others eliminate the backlog on unpaid parking tickets.
And they're all good P.R.
In New York, some state legislators were so happy with the state's first tax amnesty in the mid-1980's that they began promoting a second, which finally went into effect Thursday for the next three months.


Labor Day: When Summer Wanes and the Race for Governor Begins to Heat Up
In raucous parades in Rochester and Crown Heights, on blustery boardwalks in the Rockaways, and in 30-second attack ads aired from Long Island to Buffalo, New York's gubernatorial candidates yesterday kicked off the traditional start to the fall campaign that this year will determine whether Mario M. Cuomo is written into the state's political lore for winning a fourth term.
Within nine weeks, as New York voters resolve whether to keep or dump Mr.
Cuomo, a one-time Democratic Presidential aspirant, they could also set the state on the path toward radical changes in its policies on taxation, welfare and the death penalty.
In the process, they may send a message, along with voters in California, Texas, Florida and other large states, about the health of President Clinton's coalition and his own prospects for re-election in 1996.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the removal of Herbert Haft as chairman of Combined Properties Inc. was omitted in some copies and a duplicate article about problems in a Canadian town's police force was printed in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the omitted article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about talks between the United States and Cuba described a Cuban proposal on immigration incorrectly in some editions.
The proposal was for the United States to accept 100,000 Cuban immigrants in total, not 100,000 per year.


Some Sweet Fruits of Their Labor


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Library's Gay Show Is an Eye-Opener, Even for Its Subjects
The snowy marble walls and carved oak ceilings of the Gottesman Exhibition Hall at the New York Public Library do not commonly echo with sounds of sobbing and shouts of glee.
But "Becoming Visible: The Legacy of Stonewall," a history of New York's lesbian and gay life, has prompted many such reactions -- and flashes of anger and disgust -- since its opening in June, when it broke attendance records for a show at the library.


Population Meeting Opens With Challenge to the Right
World leaders opened the United Nations Conference on Population and Development today with unexpectedly sharp attacks on religious conservatives who have tried to block an international agreement on curbing population because it contains references to abortion and women's rights.
The responses of many of the delegations to the speeches was surprisingly enthusiastic, dealing at least a temporary psychological setback to the Vatican and Islamic religious scholars who have led the opposition to the agreement.
At the end of the day, Vatican officials said that they were still far from agreement on several issues, despite a European effort to revise some of the language of an accord intended to establish guidelines for population stabilization over the next two decades.


Beijing Journal; City's Healthy Flush Begins to Look Like Fever
"Get out of the way, bread box!"
"How do you expect people to get through?" yelled Wei Qinghai, 73, as he powered his pedal-driven cab through a busy intersection in central Beijing.


An Electronic Coach for Computer Slide Talks
AT every moment of the working day, people are giving business presentations.
A presentation may be as simple as making an oral proposal to a superior; it may involve standing before the board of directors with pie charts, or even running a "slide show," which these days is as likely to be done with a computer as with a slide projector.
That computer slide show may have been prepared with Microsoft Powerpoint, Harvard Graphics, Lotus Freelance Graphics or another program.
But it does not, and should not, run by itself.
Someone still has to stand there, making comments, changing slides, perhaps even editing on the fly to speed things up or slow them down to suit a particular audience.


On Bolshoi Hiring, Yeltsin Decides for Innovation
Striding into one of his country's most painful cultural disputes, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia ordered a major change today in the way the Bolshoi Theater hires its employees.
Starting today, all 2,100 Bolshoi staff members -- from cleaning workers to artistic directors and prima ballerinas -- will be hired only on a contractual basis, as is common with most Western ballets, operas and orchestras.


I.O.C. Names a Second American to Its Ruling Body
The International Olympic Committee today elected James L. Easton, president of the International Archery Federation, to the second American seat on the Olympic movement's powerful ruling body.
Easton was named to the post vacated in 1991 when Robert Helmick was forced to resign amid charges of conflict of interest.
Anita DeFrantz, a former Olympic rower, had been the sole American member on the I.O.C. since Helmick's resignation.


Black Culture Is Theme In Lyons Dance Biennial
The Lyons Dance Biennial, a French festival established in 1984, will focus this month on the international impact of black culture.
Six American dance troupes will be featured among the 20 companies and musicians and singers who are also from Brazil, Africa, the Caribbean and France.
Unlike other European dance festivals, the Biennial is based thematically on dance in one country or in related cultures.
This year's event, which runs from next Tuesday through Oct. 1, is called "Mama Africa" and will include traditional and experimental companies "from Africa to Harlem," said the festival's artistic director, Guy Darmet.


Entrepreneurial Company Defies Singapore Model
Sim Wong Hoo, white-shirted, bespectacled and voluble, is something of a rare species in this corporate city-state -- he is a high-tech entrepreneur.
"I guess I stick out like a sore thumb," laughed Mr.
Sim, who at the age of 39 pilots a billion-dollar company, Creative Technology Ltd.
His company has brought music to the personal computers of America and the world in the form of the Sound Blaster, a stereo soundboard that is inserted in the computers.


How Minority Tutsi Won the War
At first glance, it seems a bit incredible that the guerrilla forces of the Rwandan Patriotic Front routed the Rwandan Army.
After all, the rebels, made up largely of ethnic Tutsi refugees, represented at most 15 percent of the population, while the governing Hutu accounted for nearly 85 percent and had been trained by the French and equipped with modern weapons by several countries over the years.


METRO DIGEST
TIFFANY'S COSTLIEST ROBBERY: $1 MILLION
With trickery, threats, precision timing and a dash of bravado, two armed robbers invaded Tiffany's fabled emporium in midtown Manhattan while it was closed and, after binding four guards and defeating alarm systems, made off with more than $1 million in jewelry -- and videotapes that had recorded the whole operation.
No shots were fired, and no one was injured.
But it was the costliest robbery in the 157-year history of Tiffany &amp; Company.
A1.


INSIDE
Rwandan Rebels' Strength
The rebels who won in Rwanda succeeded through leadership, discipline and commitment, as personified in their military leader.
Page A6.
The Case for Selling Kidder
Wall Street's big question is not whether Kidder, Peabody will be sold by General Electric, but when and how.
News analysis, page D1.
Disputed Research
Federal guidelines are expected later this month on the controversial use of human embryos in scientific research.
Science Times, page C1.
Rice!
Touchdown!
The 49ers' Jerry Rice scored his 127th touchdown to surpass the N.F.L. record held by Jim Brown.
Page B9.


A Good Spot for a Little Reading


On My Mind; A Victory in Cairo
In all the talk, hope and fury about the Cairo conference, one agreed sentence has received almost no public or press attention.
That is a pity.
The sentence is of importance to women specifically but it touches every man because it is an achievement for human rights and human decency.


Elementary School Must Start Building Math and Science Skills
To the Editor:
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines and his staff are to be commended for their interest and efforts in raising standards in New York City high school mathematics and science (news article, Aug. 30).


New Limits Are Seen to Freer Trade
In El Paso and across the Mexican border in Juarez, they call it the milk war.
As soon as the North American Free Trade Agreement took effect on Jan. 1, American milk, freed from Mexican licensing requirements, flooded across the Rio Grande.
It was competitive in price, and unlike most Mexican milk, it was date-stamped for freshness.
Angry dairymen in the Mexican state of Chihuahua won a 9 percent tax on milk imports in the border region.
But 9 percent proved too small to deter local consumers.
Now the Mexican milk producers, complaining that health rules in the United States block them from sending their milk across the border, are pushing to require stores selling American milk to sell theirs, too.
Dispute Becomes Nastier
In recent weeks, the struggle has intensified.
Trucks delivering milk from El Paso to Juarez have been trashed and torched, their drivers beaten.


The Case for a Sale of Kidder
If General Electric is trying to sell NBC, can Kidder, Peabody, the company's troubled investment bank, be far behind?
Like the television network, Kidder is a G.E. acquisition that never really worked.
And even as reports of G.E.'s efforts to shed NBC trickled out last week, the conventional wisdom on Wall Street was that G.E. would not or could not keep Kidder.
There are at least four reasons:


Cuomo: The First Nod Towards Pataki
CANDIDATE: Gov. Mario M. Cuomo PRODUCER: The Garth Group, New York


U.S. Again Offers More Visas for Cuban Refugees
The Clinton Administration made a new offer to Cuba over immigration yesterday, saying that if Havana clamped down on the exodus of boat people, the United States might take more than the 20,000 refugees it offered to admit each year when talks between the two sides opened here five days ago.
But Administration officials refused to provide details, saying only that they were prepared to show flexibility and that they considered the offer "a serious attempt to meet the immigration needs of both sides," as one put it.


An End to the 'Nightmare' of Cash?
The relentless march of technology into the smallest details of everyday life may be reaching the final frontier: the advent of the electronic penny.
Banks, credit card companies and even the governments of some countries are racing to introduce "electronic purses," wallet-size cards embedded with rechargeable microchips that store sums of money for people to use instead of cash for everything from buying fast food to paying highway tolls.


The Most Rev. Bill Burnett, Anglican Archbishop in Africa, 77
The Most Rev.
Bill Burnett, who headed the Anglican Church in southern Africa from 1974 to 1981, died on Aug. 23 in Grahamstown in the Cape Province of South Africa.
He was 77 and lived in Grahamstown.
From 1974 to 1981, he was concurrently Archbishop of Cape Town, South Africa.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a campaign advertisement for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo misstated his position on assault weapons.
Mr.
Cuomo is a long-time supporter of banning the weapons.


Refugees Crowding Navy 'Paradise'
They call it "paradise," the Navy's best-kept secret.
"The weather, things to do -- snorkeling, fishing, scuba diving," said Petty Officer Lynn Rodriguez, 22 years old, listing what is nice about this military outpost on the Caribbean, in the southeast corner of Cuba.


Just Another Season Opener for Area Hero Worshipers


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Will Whitman's promote its straight-talking chocolates? And is Rollerblade a verb?
THOUGH chocolates have rarely been known to talk, a new television commercial for M&amp;M's features candies that speak lines like "When are you going to stop asking so many questions?"
The answer, you annoying anthropomorphic ad characters, is never!
So that means it's time to ask another 20 questions about advertising, marketing and media.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: TUESDAY


By Design; High Heels Teeter In
Leaf through any fashion magazine and what do you see on the models' feet?
Staggeringly high heels.
Designers brought back stiletto heels for day and evening in their fall shows, and the footwear is now drifting into the stores.
Whether the shoes will walk out again depends on whether a generation that grew up in sneakers can balance on four-inch heels.
But nothing spells nighttime glamour better than spike-heeled satin slippers.


The Facts Stand Out, Except to the Owners
As the days dwindle down to a precious few and negotiators for baseball's owners and players can't even find an excuse to meet, maybe the owners should go wild and revisit Roger Noll.
Now there is a chap the owners wouldn't invite for a Labor Day barbecue.
To them, Roger Noll is a member-in-bad-standing of their Hall of Infamy, right alongside Marvin Miller, Richard Moss, Peter Seitz, Thomas Roberts, George Nicolau, Peter Ueberroth, Fay Vincent and George Steinbrenner.


President Begins a Campaign to Avoid Losses for the Democratic Party in November
President Clinton opened a campaign today to fend off heavy losses in the November elections with a Labor Day address that called attention to what the White House hopes will save Democrats: the creation of jobs.
At the huge shipyard here that is Maine's largest employer, Mr.
Clinton pointed to the 4.1 million jobs by which the nation's economy has grown since he became President and called that a measure of a vitality that his critics have overlooked.


Henning Gets Fast Start In Shaping Up the Isles
Lorne Henning skated off the ice after his first practice session as head coach of the Islanders and said he liked what he saw.
"I thought the guys looked great," said Henning, who was named to the post on June 20, 19 days after Al Arbour announced his retirement.
"We had a good tempo today, and everyone looks in good shape."


Lead Team's Mayhem
To the Editor:
The carefully collected and mounted autumn leaves are gone.
The fall pictures saved and displayed for the last 30 years are missing.
The paints, paper, crayons and math manipulatives no longer exist.
Puzzle pieces are missing, and books are destroyed.


Chinese Women Continue to Pile Up the Medals and Suspicions
If you did not swim for the world's most populous nation, it was a day for looking up reluctantly and often bitterly at the times on the scoreboard; a day for looking up at the top step of the Foro Italico medals stand; a day for becoming increasingly familiar with "March of the Volunteers."
"I'm getting sick of that song," said the American swimmer Jenny Thompson.


Mental Hospitals Aren't for Criminals
To the Editor:
Committing criminals to mental hospitals, as New Jersey plans to do, is a bad idea.
The state's plan to put violent criminals, including sex offenders, into state mental hospitals if they are still dangerous by the end of their prison terms is the wrong solution to the serious problem of how to protect society from these criminals.


In Capital's Streets and Halls, Dogged Voice for the Disabled
Receptionists in the Senate often recognize Stephen Sellows as he approaches, a small man who shuffles from office to office and speaks unclearly.
Some aides exchange knowing glances as they prepare to brush him off with metallic courtesy.
On one of his recent weekly visits to Congress, Mr.
Sellows occasionally barged into offices and haltingly demanded to see the person in charge of "the D.C. budget." Lacking the polish of lobbyists who represent business, he would then try to plead on behalf of statehood for the District of Columbia and aid to people with disabilities.


Officer Is Slain By Brother, Also on Force
After an afternoon at a family barbecue spent drinking and arguing over plans for his bachelor party, a New York City police sergeant was shot and killed by his older brother, himself a police officer, in the older brother's home late Saturday night, the police said.
Sgt.
Douglas Soorko, 32, was shot by Officer Steven Soorko, 39, in the officer's home about 11 P.M.
Saturday, the police said.
The younger brother, who was to be married Sept. 17, had gone to the officer's house to continue a heated argument over the wedding when the shooting occurred, said Sgt.
John Clifford, a Police Department spokesman.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Saturday about a donation of $10,000 to help a boy with brain cancer misstated the first name of the donor, who is the president of the Loew's Corporation and an owner of the New York Giants.
He is Preston Robert Tisch.


Rosenbaum: Fighting as an Outsider
CANDIDATE: Richard M. Rosenbaum PRODUCER: Sandler-Innocenzi, Alexandria, Va.


A Lunch Date Proves Costly As Friends Pinch His Picasso
When Crawford Greenleaf returned from a lunch date with a dear friend to find his apartment burglarized and his valuable Picasso sketch among the missing items, he did not have a clue, the police say, that his friend was in on the job.
But the police say that Mr.
Greenleaf's friend for 20 years, Barbara Joslyn, 45, of West Hollywood, Calif., had lured him to a lunch date on Saturday so that her companion, Ian Pringle, a film producer, could make off with two paintings, the Picasso sketch, a clock and jewelry, with an estimated total value of $800,000.


CHRONICLE
The Red Hot Chili Peppers, a hard-rock band worshiped by the grunge generation, are trying to tap into a new audience: the Sesame Street set.
The group's lead singer, ANTHONY KIEDIS , recently told Melody Maker magazine that the band has wanted to perform on Sesame Street for a long time.
But the Children's Television Workshop, which produces the show, has nixed the idea.


U.S. to Sell Bills Today
The schedule of Treasury financings this week is confined to today's weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.54 percent, and for the six-month bill, 4.82 percent.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Arcturus Pharmaceuticals Corp., Woburn, Mass., an initial public offering of 2 million shares.
D.
Blech &amp; Co.


Game's Ultimate Strikeout Is Hanging in the Balance
Whether or not this Friday is a firm deadline for a season-saving labor agreement could be immaterial if the two sides don't meet in the near future.
The striking players and owners have not met since Aug. 25 and have no bargaining sessions scheduled.
Asked yesterday whether Friday could come and go without a meeting, Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, who last Friday set the date as more or less a deadline, said: "I don't know. One would hope and think not, but we'll see how each day plays out."


Woman Is Killed in Attack By Son's Pit Bulls in Bronx
Two pit bull terriers left with a Bronx man's parents mauled the couple Sunday night, killing the mother and injuring the father, the police said.
The attack was one of three unrelated violent incidents in the city involving pit bulls in less than 24 hours.
Police officers in Brooklyn killed two that had chased a 13-year-old boy and then turned on the officers, and an officer in Manhattan was bitten by another one of the dogs.


Market Place; Pummeling A Warrior of Video Games
Street Fighter is taking a beating -- on the stock market.
That could be an indication that one of the most successful video game fads ever has at last run its course.
The Capcom Company, based in Osaka, Japan, spawned a new genre of entertainment and soared to more than $800 million in sales on the strength of the Street Fighter II series of games for arcades and home video game machines.


TRANSACTIONS
HOLIDAY Baseball  National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Announced a four-year extension of their player development contract with Daytona of the Florida State League.


It Takes a Big Push
To the Editor:
A postscript to your exhaustive post-mortem of the health-care bill, "For Health Care, Time Was a Killer" (front page, Aug. 29):


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Wall Street's big question is not whether Kidder will be sold, but when and how.
Wall Street is now convinced that General Electric will let its troubled brokerage firm go -- either by shutting it down, selling it or spinning it off to shareholders -- even as the company works to fix up the firm.
News Analysis.  [ Page D1. ]


Gay Neighborhoods Adding Life to Cities
As American cities continue to shrink, urban planners say the neighborhoods molded by homosexuals in the last few decades are taking on a new importance as examples of once-decaying areas that have been revived and that are bastions against further deterioration.


Black-Tights Era Is Giving Way To Variety
One fashion decision a woman hasn't had to make in the last few years is what to wear on her legs.
Black opaque tights have been the right choice with just about any skirt length.
But those carefree days may be over.
There are signs of anarchy in the hosiery area, with designers suggesting sheer nude or sheer black pantyhose, opaque white tights, over-the-knee stockings and even knee-highs with a skirt.
Women with an interest in fashion have already started experimenting, going barelegged in the summer or wearing thigh-high stockings with mini-dresses or white tights with dark skirts.
Now that fall merchandise has been in the stores for a month, retailers have noticed a change in what women are buying.


Sonic Device for Blind May Aid Navigation
THE other day Dr.
Reginald Golledge, who is blind, took a remarkable stroll through the campus of the University of California at Santa Barbara.
As Dr.
Golledge walked along, places and impediments in his path seemed to call out their names to him -- "library here, library here," "bench here, bench here" -- guiding him through a Disney-esque landscape of talking objects.
Dr.
Golledge, a geographer at the university, was testing a prototype navigation system for the blind that announced the whereabouts of the objects through stereo headphones mounted to a computer in his backpack, creating a virtual reality landscape.
The information came not from some miniature radar but from the signals broadcast by the military's network of global positioning satellites.
One day, its developers hope, miniaturized versions of this navigation device, which now weighs 28 pounds, will help the blind navigate unfamiliar neighborhoods.


Lead Team's Mayhem
To the Editor:
The carefully collected and mounted autumn leaves are gone.
The fall pictures saved and displayed for the last 30 years are missing.
The paints, paper, crayons and math manipulatives no longer exist.
Puzzle pieces are missing, and books are destroyed.


Sports of The Times; Unseeded, Undaunted, Unpredictable
HE appears to be as much undaunted as he is unseeded.
Andre Agassi is saying that he has never in his life hit the ball this well, this confidently, this special time of year.
He is saying that he is ready to embrace his immense tennis talent, right here in New York City, right now when professional tennis needs him the most.
Agassi won a five-set match yesterday from Michael Chang, the last person you would expect Agassi to outlast on Labor Day at the United States Open.
Chang is the world's foremost grinder.
Agassi has been known as one of the tour's great unravelers.


No Headline
"Morality becomes hypocrisy if it means accepting mothers' suffering or dying in connection with unwanted pregnancies and illegal abortions and unwanted children." -- GRO HARLEM BRUNDTLAND, Prime Minister of Norway, at the United Nations Conference on Population and Development.  [ A1:4. ]


U.S. Status Wars: Agassi Puts Chang in His Place
This was a match about power and pecking order, an all-American affair played out before a wave-minded holiday crowd beneath a cerulean holiday sky.
There was tension, there was theater and there wasn't an empty or impartial seat in the house yesterday at the United States Open when Andre Agassi, who managed to play the roles of hotdog and underdog simultaneously, squared off against the always dogged Michael Chang.
"Whenever we play each other, it doesn't matter where, doesn't matter what surface, it brings out an intensity," Chang said.
"There's something about a pecking order there."


The Good, the Bad and the Truly Ugly Faces of Electronic Mail
IT is part of the American culture to identify heroes, front-runners and other No. 1 people, places or things, and the computer industry is no exception.
Ever since the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet was annointed a decade ago as the first so-called killer application -- the software that justified the purchase of the personal computer needed to operate it -- people have been asking, "What's the next killer app?"
In my mind, there is no doubt: electronic mail is the killer app for the 1990's, ahead of word processing and far ahead of the runners-up: Mosaic, a software tool for browsing the Internet, and Doom, an addictive shoot-'em-up game that involves separating an opponent's gray matter from his, her or its cranium.


Robbers Tie Up Tiffany Guards And Take $1 Million in Jewelry
With trickery, threats, precision timing and a dash of bravado, two armed robbers invaded Tiffany's fabled emporium in midtown Manhattan late Sunday, the police said, and, after binding four guards and defeating alarm systems, made off with more than $1 million in jewelry -- and videotapes that had recorded the whole escapade.
No shots were fired and no one was injured.
But it was the costliest robbery in the 157-year history of Tiffany &amp; Company, which had been victimized nine times previously by ambitious shoplifters, smash-and-grab thugs, con artists with elaborate tales and, once, by a man who shot a hole in a sidewalk display window and tried to snare a diamond-and-ruby necklace with a wire.


Love, Found and Lost, Amid Sharp Turns of Fate
Open Secrets  By Alice Munro  294 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
In "A Real Life," one of the strongest tales in this sparkling new collection by Alice Munro, we are introduced to a woman named Dorrie, a woman whose life in the Ontario countryside seems completely set, frozen in ritual and routine.
For years, Dorrie has led a frugal, marginal existence, trapping muskrats for their fur, collecting walnuts to mark the change of seasons.
This is the life she led with her brother Albert, and this is the life she has continued to lead since his death.
Then, suddenly, unexpectedly, everything changes: a visitor from Australia is charmed by Dorrie's eccentricity; the two begin to correspond; he proposes and after a small crisis of confidence, she marries him and moves to his plantation in Queensland.
There, we are told, she embraces a very different sort of life: riding horses, flying airplanes, shooting crocodiles.


GROWING ECONOMY PRODUCES SURPLUS IN STATE BUDGETS
In a fiscal turnaround that would have been all but unthinkable in the nation's statehouses just a few years ago, state budgets are swelling with revenue and nearly half the states have enacted election-year tax cuts in recent months.
In state capitals from Boston to Phoenix, lawmakers who fought in 1991 and 1992 over how to fill huge, painful budget gaps instead battled this year over how to divide unexpected wealth.
A growing national economy has largely been responsible, and not only for the surge in revenue: it has also helped to ease recession-era strains on the budgets, like welfare spending and Medicaid.


Film Ratings Under Attack From More Than One Angle
Movie ratings seem like taxes: necessary but a source of irritation and anger.
Within the last few days, debate over the 26-year-old film rating system has taken a particularly nasty turn.
"I've had a Maalox moment on this latest go-round," said Jack Valenti, chairman of the Motion Picture Association of America, the movie industry's lobbying arm, which controls the ratings classification board and is now locked in an angry dispute with the creators of a new film, "Jason's Lyric," about black teen-agers in Houston.


Latest Killing in Gaza Strip Adds to Israelis' Unease
The killing of an Israeli soldier in the Gaza Strip overnight reinforced for Israelis today that neither their Government nor the new Palestinian Authority has been able to stop recurring attacks by armed Palestinians opposed to peace talks.
After the latest incident, a drive-by shooting that left one soldier dead and two others wounded, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin cautioned that violence -- and the failure of Palestinian leaders to stop it -- could endanger future negotiations on extending Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.


Doyle to Merge With Berlin Wright
Doyle Advertising and Design Group, an agency in Boston with billings of $15 million from clients like Puma athletic shoes, is merging with Berlin Wright Cameron in New York.
Terms of the agreement, announced last week, were not disclosed.
John Doyle, president of Doyle, will become an equity owner in the New York agency, which is being renamed Berlin Wright Cameron Doyle.
He will also become joint chief creative director with Scott Burns, previously the executive creative director of Berlin Wright.
Alan Zorfas, client services director at Doyle, will fill the new position of general manager at Berlin Wright.


Microsoft Is Bringing Out Its First Computer Keyboard
Making its second foray into the computer hardware business, the Microsoft Corporation will begin shipping a keyboard on Tuesday with a suggested retail price of $99.
Microsoft said the keyboard would be broadly available through computer retailers in early October.


People
*
James Hood, executive vice president and director of new business at Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising, New York, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president of corporate development at the parent Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.
Linda J. Srere will succeed Mr.
Hood with the title of executive vice president and director of business development; she was previously chairwoman at Earle Palmer Brown/New York.


Serbian Church Blocking Pope's Visit to Belgrade
The Serbian Orthodox Church, unforgiving of what it sees as the complicity of some Roman Catholic bishops in the mass killings of Serbs during World War II, has quietly blocked plans for Pope John Paul II to visit Belgrade as part of the trip he plans this week to Sarajevo in Bosnia and Zagreb in Croatia.
Politicians and church officials involved in the negotiations said the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, and the Vatican were both in favor of the Belgrade visit.


In Belfast, Prosperity Eases Catholic Nationalism
During Sunday morning Mass, the Volvos and Mercedeses belonging to worshipers at St.
Brigid's spill up and down the fashionable streets along Malone Road, once a privileged redoubt of Northern Ireland's moneyed Protestants.
Built more than a hundred years ago to serve the servants who worked in the area, St.
Brigid's is now Belfast's fastest-growing and most prosperous Roman Catholic parish.
These days Catholic teachers, lawyers and business people fill nearly half the houses in this leafy enclave, and in a muddy lot next door to the old red-brick church, a new $2.3 million sanctuary is rising against the sky.


India's Dirty Little War
A relentless, deadly struggle goes on and on in India's mainly Muslim state of Kashmir, where New Delhi is trying to crush forces seeking independence or union with Pakistan.
The violence comes from both sides, but India's obdurate insistence on resolving a political problem by force has increasingly enmeshed it in a campaign of lawless state terrorism.
The ugly results are documented in a new study by Human Rights Watch/Asia.
Regrettably, Washington, instead of raising its voice to defend human rights, has lowered it in an effort to improve commercial and diplomatic ties.
The U.S. may have little power to deter India from repression.
But the Clinton Administration should assert American disapproval more forthrightly.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  A POPULATION OFFENSIVE  The United Nations conference on world population opened with sharp attacks by delegates on Catholic and Muslim conservatives who have tried to block proposals that refer to abortion and women's rights.
A1


Rice Reigns as Touchdown King
The touchdowns usually come by air.
They are often a thing a beauty.
Jerry Rice races downfield, speeds past his defender, soars through the air and makes the grab.
Rice jukes and shakes and runs past the defense into the end zone.
But the touchdown that Rice made here tonight to tie Jim Brown's National Football League career touchdown mark was on a 23-yard reverse.
That score made it San Francisco 37, Raiders 14, with 12 minutes 15 seconds to play.


Debate May Force A Redrawing Of Flying Reptile From the Jurassic
DISAGREEMENT over the wing structure of extinct flying reptiles has led to a lacerating scientific debate between paleontologists, the outcome of which could oblige artists and film makers to begin redrawing the terrible pterosaurs of fact and fancy.
Important issues, including the precise relationships between dinosaurs, pterosaurs and birds, could eventually be affected by the debate.
But for the moment, attention centers on the fossil remnant of a single reptile about the size of a crow that flew over what is now Kazakhstan 156 million years ago.


Elementary School Must Start Building Math and Science Skills; Set the Goals High
To the Editor:
I am a product of New York City public schools in the South Bronx.
Among other courses, I now teach statistics to undergraduate students.
I would not have been successful in math had I not had to meet the high expectations that were set by my teachers and myself.


Rules Due on Disputed Embryo Research
JUST when it seemed that the bitter argument over fetal tissue transplants had faded, the Federal agency that is the lifeline of American biomedical research has stepped into another debate centered on discordant opinions about when human life begins and how science can best explore the forces that usher it into being.
At the end of the month, an advisory panel is expected to recommend to the National Institutes of Health guidelines on the use of human embryos for scientific research.


G.O.P. Strangled Health Care Reform
To the Editor:
Your call to President Clinton to break the Congressional logjam on health-care reform (editorial, Aug. 28) is in line with your past carping, and ignores the despicable role the Republicans played in the strangulation of universal health care.


Gay Presence Leads Revival Of Declining Neighborhoods
As cities around the country continue to shrink, urban planners say the neighborhoods molded by homosexuals in recent decades are taking on a new importance as bastions against further decay.
Although there are no authoritative statistics to track the migration of homosexuals to various urban neighborhoods, their presence -- and with it their economic power -- has become increasingly visible.


Police Arrest Man In Hit-and-Run Case
After a hit-and-run accident yesterday in the Bronx that left a pedestrian dead, the police arrested a man whose driver's license had been suspended 40 times and finally revoked.
Mario Chavez, 41, of 537 West 133d Street in Manhattan, was charged with leaving the scene of an accident and aggravated unlicensed driving.
The police said last night that it was not clear exactly how the accident occurred or who was to blame.


Alexander L. Levine, Developer And Philanthropist, Dies at 82
Alexander Louis Levine, a commercial real-estate developer and philanthropist who gave $5 million to the Metropolitan Museum of Art last year, died on Saturday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 82 and lived in Verona, N.J., and Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said his daughter Peggy Tagliarino.


Arriving at Richard III After Years of Imagining
Asked if he were going to have a hump as Richard III, Richard Thomas said, "You think I waited 30 years to play this role and I'm going to do it without a hump?" He laughed, and added: "Two humps! And a patch over my eye -- and a hook. I've been pretty long enough."
It was in 1964 that Mr.
Thomas first acted in "Richard III," as the young Prince Edward, at the American Shakespeare Festival in Stratford, Conn.
Two years after that, he played the other young prince, the Duke of York, for the New York Shakespeare Festival in Central Park.
Now he is preparing to play the title role at Hartford Stage in a production that starts previews on Sept. 24.


An Immigration Puzzle; Crises in Cuba and Haiti Resurrect Debate About Newcomers and Employment in U.S.
With Cubans piling up at Guantanamo and an invasion of Haiti seeming inevitable, the United States is once again facing the prospect of a tide of huddled masses -- only this time many Americans seem decidedly uneasy.
And while their feelings are a product of everything from racism to fears of cultural change to the end of the cold war, economics surely plays a big part.


Editorial Notebook: Ireland's Real Lawmakers; The Songs and Poems Make Its Destiny
"It's Over!" proclaimed a headline in The Belfast Telegraph when the Irish Republican Army announced a complete cessation of its 25-year war against British rule in Northern Ireland.
This time, it may be so.
But you can be sure there will be no cease-fire in Ireland's truly abiding conflict, the war of words.
Other disputes between kindred peoples may have lasted longer and involved bigger pieces of territory.
However, no quarrel I can think of has generated more eloquent speeches, songs, novels and plays, and more reams of poetry, than that in the Emerald Isle.
Here if nowhere else, in Shelley's memorable phrase, poets have been the unacknowledged legislators of mankind.


Relentless Faith Awaits Visions in a Parking Lot
TRUE, Mary Ann Schram agreed.
The parking lot at the Marlboro Mall does not make the ideal place to pray.
But it will do.
In fact, after a year, it seems almost cozy.
Eyeballed by curious locals on their way to the pizza parlor and by police officers in dark cars that shout "undercover," Ms.
Schram and about 100 other pilgrims who meet at the strip mall the first Sunday of every month take the situation in stride.


Pataki: Honing a Mantra Against Cuomo
CANDIDATE George E. Pataki PRODUCER Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Sacramento, Calif., and Alexandria, Va.


Arafat Allows Paper To Publish Again After Loyalty Pledge
Five weeks after it was banned by the Palestinian Authority because of its pro-Jordanian stance, the Palestinian newspaper An Nahar returned to newsstands today, declaring its loyalty to the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Today's issue carried little news from Jordan.
Instead, an editorial declared the paper to be "Palestinian to the bone" and pledged allegiance to the "national line." Another ended with the P.L.O. slogan: "Revolution until victory." Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, was described as "The Brother, The Leader, The Symbol."


Douglas Kendrick, Army Surgeon, 87
Maj.
Gen.
Douglas B. Kendrick, a doctor and retired Army officer who once headed Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, died on Friday at Watauga Hospital in Boone, N.C.
He was 87 and had homes in Blowing Rock, N.C., and Tampa, Fla.
His family said he had been in declining health.


Still Riding Playoff Wave, Devils Get Down to Business
Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire had the voice and look of a sage Sunday as his team opened training camp.
Last season?
The playoffs?
Let him tell you about that.
As his thick eyebrows arched, his eyes flickered at the thought of the Eastern Conference finals with the Rangers.
It was great hockey, Lemaire said, the greatest kind of hockey there is.


East German Spy Chief on Trial for Manslaughter
The longtime chief of East Germany's secret police, Erich Mielke, went on trial here today for manslaughter, but the trial was quickly recessed after defense lawyers challenged the judge's conduct.
The charges allege that Mr.
Mielke, 86, was among those responsible for ordering border guards to shoot East Germans who tried to flee westward.
He is already serving a six-year prison term for the murder of two Berlin police officers in 1931.


Keep Pushing on Gun Control
Supporters of gun control should not take excessive comfort from the inclusion of a limited ban on assault weapons in the 1994 crime bill.
The ban covers only 19 kinds of rapid-fire weapons.
There are 600 similar weapons still on the market.
Also, guns have long lives.
The gun linked to the slaying of an NBC stagehand in midtown Manhattan last week was a Chinese assault rifle that can no longer be imported.
But this weapon, a version of the AK-47, was still around to fulfill the deadly business for which it was specifically designed.
All this means the road to firearms sanity is a long one, and the partial ban was worth passing for tactical and symbolic reasons.
It was another step in getting Congress in the habit of responding to the broad public demand for gun-free streets.
It was also the second big defeat in less than a year for the National Rifle Association, which lost its battle against the Brady bill last November.


Woodstock '94 Becomes Myth Before Our Eyes
To the Editor:
That good old Woodstock amnesia seems to be setting in early, even among reliable reporters.


1 Killed, 1 Wounded in Dispute With an Off-Duty Rookie Officer
An off-duty rookie police officer shot two men, killing one of them, during an altercation on the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge late Sunday night, the police said.
Officer David Velez, 23, was driving toward the Bronx around 11 P.M. when he saw a white Acura speeding up behind him.
He changed lanes, but the car soon sped up to pull abreast, and its passengers began yelling at the officer before speeding ahead to cut him off, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Accounts
*
Tutti U.S.A., Coconut Grove, Fla., to West Advertising &amp; Marketing, Miami, as the first agency to handle advertising and direct marketing in North America introducing a series of classical music compact disks and magazines sent monthly to subscribers.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
The Mail on Sunday, London, to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, to handle its advertising and promotion account, previously at Lowe Howard-Spink, London.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million.


Son's Pit Bulls Kill His Mother and Injure His Father


Markets Closed
All financil markets in the United States and Canada were closed yesterday in observance of the Labor Day holiday.
Government offices and banks were also closed.
Financial Markets overseas were open.


Formula One Disputes Will Go On
Michael Schumacher has driven his Benetton-Ford across the finish line first in 8 of the 11 Formula One races so far this season.
That would seem to be a dominance by both man and machine worthy of the 1994 world championship.
Yes, Schumacher sure looks like Germany's first world champion.
But who are you going to believe in this tempestuous 1994 season: the people running this show or your lying eyes?


Touchdown! Scoreboards Can Barely Keep Up
The National Football League craved more scoring, and this past weekend it got it.
The N.F.L. opened its 1994 season with a 70-touchdown barrage, including 4 games in which 8 or more touchdowns were scored.
Just 56 touchdowns were scored on the opening Sunday last season.


Parade Shows Off West Indian Political Clout
The West Indian American Day Parade, the largest annual street celebration in New York City, was an explosion of colorful costumes, a haze of spiced food and a thunder of steel-band music yesterday, flowing down Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn.
But first came the politicians, strutting for support from one of the city's burgeoning immigrant groups.
The Caribbean festival drew state and local politicians by the dozens, demonstrating the infusion of new and potential voters represented by immigrants, including those from the Caribbean islands.


Injury Forces Reneberg Out
Richey Reneberg, an unseeded long shot, seemed on his way to the quarterfinals of the United States Open last night when he beat the No. 9 seeded Todd Martin, 6-3, in the first set.
But Reneberg, who upset seventh-seeded Boris Becker in the first round, felt a pop in the upper part of his left leg in the last game of that set, got treatment from a trainer at courtside twice, then retired after losing the first three games of the second set.


To Economists, Managed Care Is No Cure-All
Advocates of managed health care say the way to slow the growth in the nation's medical spending is to move most Americans into health maintenance organizations and similar groups.
But many economists say that any savings would largely disappear if everybody had managed-care coverage.
In large part, these economists say, the savings of managed care -- which come from steering patients to doctors and hospitals that accept lower fees and cost-saving rules -- are illusory for the country as a whole.
That is because when a managed-care group negotiates a lower group rate with a hospital, say, the hospital does not simply absorb the loss of revenue.
Instead, it makes up the difference from patients with traditional fee-for-service coverage, a tactic called cost-shifting.


Green Revolution Is Not Enough, Study Finds
CONFOUNDING both doomsayers and optimists, a new study has found that the much-admired "green revolution" in agriculture, coupled with a quadrupling of the rate at which contraceptives are used, has enabled India to do little more than mark time in per capita food production for the last 20 years.
While food production kept pace with India's swelling population, the study by Indian, American and European collaborators found, there is no assurance it can continue.
Furthermore, agriculture's monumental achievement of feeding a population that nearly doubled over the two decades has come at a stiff price in environmental degradation and impoverishment of the soil, the study found.


Corrections
A map with an article on Aug. 26 about a reunion of survivors of the Lodz ghetto in Poland located Chelmno, site of a Nazi death camp, incorrectly.
It is on the Ner River about 35 miles northwest of Lodz, not farther to the northwest as shown on the map.


Football Ratings Up for Fox
Fox's overnight rating for its first Sunday of regular-season National Football League coverage was 18 percent higher than CBS's rating for the first weekend of the 1993 season.
Sunday's games on Fox got a 13.0 overnight rating and a 32 share, Nielsen Media Research said yesterday.
The rating is the percentage of television households tuned in from 32 major markets and the share is the percentage watching among televisions in those markets that are on at the time.
National ratings will be released later this week.


A Boom, for the Few -- A special report.; Latin Economic Speedup Leaves Poor in the Dust
The much-hailed economic recovery in almost all of Latin America has politicians and Government economists preaching the benefits of open markets, privatization, fiscal discipline and deregulation.
It would seem they have good reason.
Having put aside the politics of protected markets and nationalism, and welcomed vast new foreign investment, the region's economies are expected to grow an estimated 3 percent this year.
That would be the fourth consecutive year of such growth, the most robust economic expansion in Latin America in decades.


With Washington Schools Delayed for Week, Officials and Parents Look for Alternatives
A day after the District of Columbia school board postponed the opening of schools because of fire code violations, school officials scrambled to find alternatives for the schools that would not be ready by the scheduled opening on Monday.
At the same time, parents searched frantically for day care.
The delay came after Judge Kaye K. Christian on Monday refused to accept an interim plan to open 47 school buildings that had failed to meet fire codes.
Education officials said it would be too confusing to open some schools as scheduled on Wednesday while others were closed.


Young &amp; Rubicam Selected by AT&amp;T
The AT&amp;T Corporation said yesterday that it had selected Young &amp; Rubicam to handle its global brand accounts in Latin America and Asia, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather.
Though combined billings were not disclosed, Adweek listed them at $100 million.
Andrew B. Myers, a spokesman for AT&amp;T in New York, said Y.&amp; R.'s excellent presentation and experience in Latin America and Asia were crucial.
"The fact that they're well established and have a good track record was certainly a factor," he said.


2 World Records: One Complicated, One Straightforward
For Tom Dolan, the tall drink of water from the University of Michigan, his world record in the men's 400-meter individual medley was a relatively straightforward affair.
The 19-year-old Dolan swam well in the preliminaries; he swam even better in the final, covering the distance in 4 minutes 12.30 seconds, bettering the old mark by six-tenths of a second.
For Franziska Van Almsick, 16, the other teen-ager who broke a world record today at the world swimming championships in the Foro Italico, the story was not nearly so simple.


Corrections
The dateline of a sports article on Aug. 27 about the United States Amateur golf tournament misidentified the site.
Ponte Vedra is in Florida, not California.


Spreckels Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Third-World Effort on Family Planning
Challenging the notion that birth control is a Western idea out of keeping with traditional cultures, 10 developing nations with successful family planning programs will announce here this week a new international partnership to share their skills and experience with other third-world countries.
The 10 nations -- Bangladesh, Colombia, Egypt, Indonesia, Kenya, Mexico, Morocco, Thailand, Tunisia and Zimbabwe -- include Muslim, Buddhist and Christian lands, some poor and some newly richer.
Because they prove that family planning can work in diverse settings, they are in a sense models for the United Nations International Conference on Population and Development now in session here.


Can Siberia Teach Us About Heating?
To the Editor:
"Verkhoyansk Journal: A Siberian Icebox That Holds a Thousand People" (news article, Sept. 3) has important information about home heating in very cold weather.
You state that it takes seven truckloads of wood costing $1,650 to heat a modest house each winter in Verkhoyansk, Russia, where temperatures drop to as low as -90 degrees Fahrenheit.


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Aug 7


Treasuries Fall in Price, Hurt by a Weak Dollar
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday, weighed down in part by the continuing weakness in the dollar.
Investors also continued to be worried that some new hints of possible inflation might appear.


Yes, What's Past Is Past; Hextall Hopes It Isn't Goals
Ron Hextall isn't one to make excuses.
"Last year was probably my worst year ever," Hextall, the Islander goalie, said today at training camp.
"But I think I learned from it. It keeps you on your toes a little more when you're not as successful as you have been."


Ohio Casualty Corp.(OCAS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
A.&amp; P. SUPERMARKETS Montvale, N.J., named Gerald Good executive vice president of corporate marketing and merchandising.
COOPER INDUSTRIES Houston, named A. Peter Held president of the Cooper Power Tools division.


Spicy Lamb, Cool Cucumbers
IN Indian cooking, the combination of cauliflower and peas is common.
The vegetables are seasoned with traditional Indian spices and cooked quickly.
In typical fashion, Americans have turned this medley into a dish for carnivores by adding lamb.
It works like a charm.


Manhattan Restaurants That Like (Yes, Like) Children
ALTHOUGH Manhattan is not known for restaurants that welcome children, there are a number that are relatively cheerful in greeting and feeding young customers.
What follows is a selective listing of restaurants, suggested by food writers and critics at The New York Times, that are justifiably popular with children and their parents.
Although they are child-friendly, most serve alcohol, so babies can tug on their bottles of formula, older children on bottles of soda pop and parents on bottles of beer.
Upper East Side BARKING DOG LUNCHEONETTE 1678 Third Avenue (94th Street), (212) 831-1800.
Dogs -- warm, soft and fuzzy, cold, hard and porcelain -- are the leitmotif at this child-and-canine-friendly place.
Outside, there is a blue tile water fountain for dogs.
Children do their slurping inside.
Breakfast is served all day because "kids at 8 o'clock in the evening want Rice Krispies," said John Hawkins, the owner.
On a Sunday afternoon, Sabrina Correa, 5, who lives in Manhattan, ordered her favorite meal -- a single pancake.
"Plain," she said, "with maple syrup."
LEXINGTON CANDY SHOP 1226 Lexington Avenue (83d Street), (212) 288-0057.
Some places never change.
In 1925, Soterios Philis opened this candy shop with a soda fountain shop and sold burgers, ice cream, and stuffed animals.
Today it is run by John Philis, his grandson, and Robert C. Karcher.
Thomas Hughes, who grew up on the Upper East Side, ate breakfast here once a week as a boy and came around even more often as a teen-ager.
Recently, on a hot Sunday, he brought his son, Philip, 2, to the same counter, for a coffee milkshake.
The milkshake was a legacy, passed from father to son.
DALLAS BBQ 1265 Third Avenue (73d Street), (212) 772-9393.
While parents wait for their tables, their children play outside on the steps and roller-skate on the sidewalk.
Inside, waiters arrive promptly, bring drinks quickly and even apologize if the food will take longer than 15 minutes or so.
Small children can split a platter of baby back ribs with french fries ($8.95), but an older child can devour an entire platter.
Be forewarned that the tab for children's drinks can total more than the food, especially if they inhale the nonalcoholic strawberry daiquiris ($4.50).
PEPPERMINT PARK 1225 First Avenue (66th Street), (212) 288-5054.
Here the decor is intensely pink and green, from the striped awning out front to the flowered print on the chairs inside.
There's even ice cream in pink (strawberry) and green (pistachio).
But there are also selections that are not pink or green: hot dogs ($2.95), tuna melts ($6.25) and plump Belgian waffles ($4.25).
Upper West Side
BOULEVARD 2398 Broadway (88th Street), (212) 874-7400.
Outside, at Boulevard's sidewalk cafe, Daniel Fisher, who is 15 months old and lives in Brooklyn, was perched in a highchair and with his hands was rocking the table back and forth, back and forth.
But there was no need to panic.
When Daniel arrived, the waitress had brought a highchair immediately, then moments later a plastic cup full of orange juice and three plastic stirrers -- an orange flamingo, a green palm tree and a yellow giraffe.
Inside, each table was covered with drawing paper and set with a plastic cup full of crayons.
A children's menu offers seven entrees for $5.95, each served with milk or soda and ice cream for dessert.
Unlike most restaurants, Boulevard allows adults with birdlike appetites to order from the children's menu, too.
EJ's LUNCHEONETTE 447 Amsterdam Avenue (81st Street), (212) 873-3444.
In this 50's-style luncheonette, the banquettes are turquoise vinyl, and the walls are festooned with pictures of pink flamingos.
Hannah Elliott-Higgins, 1, who lives in Manhattan, has already been here twice, mainly because her parents liked the fact that the waiter asked them immediately if Hannah wanted a child seat or would rather stay in her stroller.
"It's welcoming," Julia Elliott said. "And that's rare."
Hannah was a low-ticket customer.
She had an apple juice and some of her father's jumbo pancakes ($4.75).
MAIN STREET 446 Columbus Avenue (81st Street), (212) 873-5025.
All the signs of a child-friendly restaurant are here.
There are huge sheets of brown paper covering the tables, and the requisite crayons.
A highchair or booster seat is produced as soon as a small child is sighted, and drinks arrive with a straw.
Parents don't even have to ask.
Both the architecture and the food, which is served family-style, are gargantuan.
Light streams in from a huge vaulted skylight 35 feet high.
The meatloaf dinner ($19) will serve a family of four (two large appetites, two small).
LA CARIDAD LUNCHEONETTE 2199 Broadway (78th Street), (212) 874-2780.
This is 2-year-old Audrey Augenbraum's favorite restaurant.
She comes in with her parents, Carla Scheele and Harold Augenbraum of Manhattan, once or twice a week.
So what's the appeal?
"Beans!" Audrey said.
The family had been seated at their table for only three minutes when a heaping platter of yellow rice and black beans ($2.80) arrived.
Mr.
Augenbraum spooned some onto his daughter's plate, and Audrey grabbed her spoon and tucked in.
"I don't think they want to be child-friendly," Mr.
Augenbraum said.
"It just happens that their service is so fast, it works for children."
The restaurant lacks one amenity: there are no booster seats, so Audrey's plate of beans was at nose level.
Midtown HARD ROCK CAFE 221 West 57th Street, (212) 459-9320.
Cosette Decoste, 10, of North Attleboro, Mass., was grateful for small favors.
She and her family were told they had to wait 30 minutes.
"It wound up being 20," she said, happily.
Cosette liked the nachos ($6.25) well enough, but the real appeal was the icons.
Elvis Presley's suit studded with hundreds of glittery stones is displayed in the middle of the main dining room.
And generally, the staff is accommodating.
For teen-agers from Camp Shane, a weight-loss camp in Ferndale, N.Y., the restaurant served a low-calorie meal -- the bottom of a burger bun; a burger; zucchini, broccoli and cauliflower; a salad, and a fruit cup.
The meal required a week's advance notice and cost $15.60 a person, including tax and tip.
PLANET HOLLYWOOD 140 West 57th Street, (212) 333-7827.
From 5 to 7 on a Friday evening, there appeared to be a happy child at every other table.
They gawked at Slimer, the green ghost from "Ghostbusters" who was suspended from the ceiling.
They stared at a huge movie screen, where there was a fast-moving film made from clips of movie stars feeding each other.
Jennifer Hebbel, 4, from Seminole, Fla., had ordered chicken crunch, breaded pieces of chicken ($5.95).
She found no fault with the service.
"They smile at you," she said of the waiters.
BENIHANA WEST 47 West 56th Street, (212) 581-0930.
It was showtime at Benihana.
At one table a chef was slicing the tails off the shrimp on the hot grill, tossing them into the concave top of his red toque, and Robert Heller, 8, and his brother, Mark, 6, of Vineland, N.J., were oohing and ahing.
Mainly oohing.
At another table, where Giovanni Colantonio, 5, of Medfield, Mass., sat with his family, a chef took two pepper mills and used them as drumsticks, rat-a-tat-tatting on the grill in the middle of the table.
Then came Giovanni's shrimp.
As the chef tossed the shrimp tails into his shirt pocket, a child sitting nearby asked her mother, "Wouldn't you hate to be his laundryman and find tails in his shirt?" As the shrimp sizzled, the chef sliced them and, with his knife, flicked them, one at a time, onto Giovanni's plate.
Downtown
CHAT 'N' CHEW 10 East 16th Street, (212) 243-1616.
Sloppy children, the baggier the jeans the better, will probably feel at home in this funky evocation of a 40's all-American cafe, furnished with Formica tables and old tin signs that say, "Drink Coca-Cola." The restaurant looks old, although it opened only last January.
Tables -- some round, some square -- don't match.
The pinball machine doesn't work, and the popcorn machine doesn't pop.
The menu is quintessentially American with good choices for children, like Macaroni and cheese topped with toasted bread crumbs ($2.95 for a half portion).
COWGIRL HALL OF FAME 519 Hudson Street (10th Street), (212) 633-1133.
Shades of Dale Evans.
In the windows are lariats and cowgirl hats and boots.
Inside, the tables are covered with checked cloths, the mirrors framed with horns, the walls bedecked with pictures of cowgirls.
When children come in, they get a present: a paper headband printed with feathers, so they can immediately get into the silly, informal spirit that pervades this place.
And what do children order there?
Corn dogs ($4.25), said Paulette Merlino, one of the eight owners
ANGLERS AND WRITERS 420 Hudson Street (St. Luke's Place), (212) 675-0810.
A bouquet of white stock and blue delphiniums were in the window.
Roses in tiny vases sat on tables.
Fishermen's baskets hung from the moldings.
All was pretty and serene at this oasis for people who like to take tea with their children.
Michela Vinton, 3, of Brooklyn, was shy and silent.
But her father, Thomas Vinton, who had shared the high tea ($12.50) with his daughter, said that she had eaten the sweet stuff -- the scone, the strawberries and the peaches.
And he ate the finger sandwiches.
JOHN'S PIZZA 278 Bleecker Street (Jones Street), (212) 243-1680.
People of all ages line up in the street for the pizza, which is baked in a coal-fired brick oven, the crust thin and blistered, the cheese bubbling ($10.50 for a large plain pizza).
Toppings are old-fashioned: mushrooms, anchovies, onions, garlic, sausage, peppers.
No smoked salmon.
No clams.
"Nothing like that," said Bob Vittoria, who with Peter Castellotti owns the restaurant.
Tristan de Fontenay, 4, who lives in Newark, is a regular here.
Since he was a toddler, he has been coming here about once a month.
And if he spills his milk, no matter.
"They don't mind," said his mother, Celeste de Fontenay.
Tristan eats his pizza plain.
"Nothing on it but cheese," he said, forgetting about the tomatoes that were lurking beneath.
TWO BOOTS 37 Avenue A (Second Street), (212) 505-2276.
Lights in the shape of red, orange and yellow chili peppers are strung across the bar.
Colors are hot.
Music rocks.
Children eat and draw in the coloring books that are dispensed to young customers.
Last week, on a Tuesday night, every third table had a child or two.
Two of them were Danielle Buckley, 8, and her brother, Andrew, 6, from Clovis, Calif.
They liked the pizza ($4.95) but not the music.
"It's rock-and-roll," Danielle said, her brow furrowing, her voice dismissive.
If she were the deejay, she said, she would have played folk music.
ARTURO'S RESTAURANT-PIZZERIA 106 West Houston Street (Thompson Street), (212) 677-3820.
Will Morris, whose son Keaton is 2, lives in Smithtown, L.I., and on a recent Sunday, he explained why this dim restaurant, famous for its coal-fired pizzas, was child-friendly.
"They offered the booster seat right away, they brought the orange juice right away, and they kept everything out of his reach," he said.
So how's the food?
The plain pizza ($10) got Keaton's vote.
He waved it in the air like a moist red-and-white flag.
Arturo's has waiters who, when a child spills a drink, mop it up without batting an eye or glaring at the mess.
"More waiters spill stuff than kids," said Jennifer Hirsch, a hostess.
What more could any parent want?
JERRY'S 101 Prince Street (Mercer Street), (212) 966-9464.
Adolescents seem to think that Jerry's, with its red leatherette banquettes, is cool.
It's SoHo.
People wear black and have hennaed hair.
Some adolescents order crisp, greaseless shoestring potatoes ($3.50), and the Caesar salad ($7.50), hold the anchovies.
Stephanie Goureau, 11, of Manhattan, was eating eggs Benedict.
She liked the food, she said, but best of all she liked the waiters and waitresses.
"They listen to everything we say," she said.
MEZZOGIORNO 195 Spring Street (Sullivan Street), (212) 334-2112.
The waiters radiate warmth to children (and adults).
They bring paper-thin pizzas ($13 for a four-cheese pizza) within 6 to 10 minutes.
For the more sophisticated youthful palate, they offer gossamer-thin raviolo wrapped around spinach or eggplant ($14) or shrimp ($15).
Casey Lynn Sweeney, 5, of Selingsgrove, Pa., liked the food (penne with tomato sauce, $12), but especially, she liked the atmosphere.
The bartender said hi to her, she said, and she didn't have to sit on her seat.
She could perch in the open window next to her table and dangle her legs onto the street.
MANDARIN COURT 61 Mott Street (Bayard Street), (212) 608-3838.
At least once a month, Brian Dutt, 13, and his brother, Michael, 11, travel with their parents from Riverdale in the Bronx to this restaurant in Chinatown.
The boys have their favorite dishes -- pan-fried noodles ($6.95) and shrimp dumplings ($1.75).
As befits regular customers, they occasionally get a dispensation.
"Sometimes we get free soda," Brian said.
Drop a chopstick, and the waiters will replace it -- amiably.


Berman to Theismann: ESPN Is Still Scoring the Biggest Pre-Game Points
Before "Fox N.F.L. Sunday" is anointed as the mother of all pre-game shows because it is one hour long and boasts the only bald host, let us now praise ESPN's "N.F.L. Gameday" as the best of its breed.
Against Fox's program and NBC's one-week-only expansion of "The N.F.L. Live" to 60 minutes, "Gameday" showed it is the one to follow for information, pacing and mirth.
"Gameday" -- one hour long -- is in its 10th season; "Fox N.F.L. Sunday" is merely one week old.
"Gameday" has enviable chemistry with the host, Chris Berman, Joe Theismann, Tom Jackson and Chris Mortensen.
Phil Simms, added this season, fit in quickly.


Inquiries in Two Shootings
Two cases in which off-duty New York City police officers shot people to death on Monday are to be presented to grand juries soon, according to Mary deBourbon, spokeswoman for the Queens District Attorney.
In one case, an officer killed his younger brother, a sergeant on the force; in the other, a civilian was killed and another wounded.


LaFontaine Signs for Some Big Money
Buffalo Sabre center PAT LaFONTAINE, who was the National Hockey League's second-leading scorer two seasons ago but who was injured most of last season, has agreed to a contract that will reportedly make him one of the highest-paid players in the sport.


Soon, School Starts -- And This Will Be Your Room


Citing Security, Pope Defers Sarajevo Trip
Citing security concerns, Pope John Paul II called off a visit to Sarajevo that had been scheduled for Thursday.
The Vatican said the Pope acted out of concern for the safety of people who would flock to see him in the devastated city, which is still encircled by Serbian siege forces.
The Bosnian Serbs had warned for weeks that they could not even promise that the Pope's plane would land safely.
Sniper fire was reported in the stadium where the Pope was to offer Mass in Sarajevo, and planes at the airport have been hit by small arms fire in the last two days.


Elliott Plans His Own Racing Team
BILL ELLIOTT, a former Winston Cup champion, made his split with JUNIOR JOHNSON's racing team official yesterday and said he planned to form his own racing team with his brothers, ERNIE and DAN.
Elliott, winner of 40 Winston Cup races and the 1985 points championship, will be sponsored by McDonald's, which also backs a Johnson car driven by JIMMY SPENCER.
"I want to go back home," Elliott said at a news conference in Charlotte, N.C.
He is from Dawsonville, Ga.


System Software Associates Inc.(SSAX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Not 'War Sex,' but Rape
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 1 report on Korean protests over a Japanese financial offer to atone for women forced into brothels for Japanese troops in World War II mentions "forced sex" numerous times, but "rape" not once.


Don't Call Unemployment a Jobs Plan; Meanwhile at the Fed
To the Editor:
"Jobs Versus Inflation at the Fed" (editorial, Aug. 30) states that I "called last week for the Fed to use monetary policy to bring down unemployment from temporary high levels." Not so.
I even voted to raise the discount rate on Aug. 16.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  PANAMA TAKES IN CUBANS  The first of 10,000 Cubans arrived in Panama from the Guantanamo Bay naval base in Cuba, opening a new holding area for refugees and giving some breathing room to the Clinton Administration in its standoff with Fidel Castro.
A1  Cuban children cling to hope despite detention camp chaos.
A14


Remembering the 60's The Living Theater Way
About 10 minutes into the Living Theater's 30th-anniversary production of "Mysteries and Smaller Pieces," at the Theater for the New City (155 First Avenue, East Village), the catcalls begin.
"Next!," shouts one man.
Another yells: "Go ahead! Move! I dare you!"
Are the voices coming from the audience or from members of the classically iconoclastic troupe?
No matter.
Tom Walker, the actor who has been standing immobile since the stage lights came up, doesn't stir.
Yes, he blinks from time to time.
But he remains as resonantly silent as a statue in a church, even when other actors swarm around him in a mock military drill.


Vatican Rejects Compromise On Abortion at U.N. Meeting
After a day of tortuous closed-door talks that pitted Vatican diplomats against many other delegates, the United Nations population conference failed tonight to reach a compromise on the contentious issue of abortion.
Standing alone, Vatican diplomats blocked a consensus on a formula sponsored by Pakistan, saying they found it unacceptable.
The proposed formula itself took five hours of haggling among 15 countries.


Lots of Pain, Little Gain: Sampras Upset by Yzaga
Pete Sampras, his physical condition deteriorating as the match wore on, was dethroned from his position as the defending champion of the United States Open yesterday by a merciless five-set challenge from Jaime Yzaga of Peru, a scrapper who exploited the fact that the champion was perilously sore.
"I really saw that he was getting tired, more tired every time, and I congratulate him because he never really gave up and obviously he wasn't feeling well, but that's what makes a champion, he kept fighting until the end," observed Yzaga, who saved his admiration of Sampras's mettle until the upset was complete.


Simpson Team Taking Aim at DNA Laboratory
When prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson trial present DNA results implicating him in the slashing deaths of his former wife and her friend, defense lawyers will probably counterattack with evidence that the laboratory that did the tests has made errors in two proficiency tests and has had problems in court cases.
In court papers, Mr.
Simpson's defense team has disclosed that in two independent proficiency tests, the company, Cellmark Diagnostics, found DNA in one of 50 mock crime scene samples when none was present.
It was the type of mistake, the defense team has said, that could send an innocent person to jail.


U.S. Auto Sales Rose In August
Calming fears on Wall Street that weak July results signaled an end to the economic recovery, sales of cars and light trucks in the United States resumed their vigorous pace in August, rising 10.3 percent over the comparable month a year ago.
The results released today suggested that the auto makers were correct in attributing the July slowdown to production shortfalls, rather than to a drop in demand.
As investors hurriedly bid up auto stocks late in the day, auto executives clearly felt vindicated.


Devils Seem to Sport Their Same Smart Look
With the exception of Bernie Nicholls, who signed with the Chicago Blackhawks, and Slava Fetisov, an unrestricted free agent who was not invited to training camp, the Devils have returned to the ice with the same cast that brought them the second-best point total in the National Hockey League last season.
Jacques Lemaire, in his second season as coach, said he didn't know whether an established newcomer -- he cited Steve Yzerman of the Detroit Red Wings as an example -- would provide the ingredient to take the Devils beyond the heights they reached last season, when they lost to the Rangers in double overtime in Game 7 of the Stanley Cup semifinals.


Health Net Takes Interactive Plunge
When -- if -- the interactive television future arrives, what might viewers do besides order movies and pizzas?
How about researching the symptoms of gallstones?
That is the idea with Health Net, an interactive television system demonstrated here today by a start-up company with technical assistance from the Microsoft Corporation and financial backing from the David Sarnoff Research Center.
The Sarnoff center, formerly the research arm of the RCA electronics and broadcasting empire, is now an independent laboratory that conducts commercial research in telecommunications and computer technologies.
Data Base Building
Although the system is still only a rough prototype, the developer, Interactive Health Network Inc. of Princeton, N.J., has compiled a computerized data base of text and videos on health topics for consumers: information about diseases and injuries, fitness and nutrition, preventive medicine and mental health.


Pro Bono Accounts
* Dancing in the Streets, New York, to Borejko Leibler, New York.


Esterline Technologies (ESL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Clinton Has Opportunity to Act Wisely on Cuba
To the Editor:
Clinton Administration officials insist that Fidel Castro is directing the flow of refugees fleeing Cuba.
They, and much of the United States media, portray President Castro as the dictator in control of the floodgates, which he cynically opens and closes at will, forcing out thousands of unhappy Cubans.
Such a distorted picture has plunged President Clinton into a policy quagmire.
Mr.
Castro cannot now stop the exodus; only a change in United States policy will stem the human tide.


Rwanda's Leaders Vow to Build a Multiparty State for Both Hutu and Tutsi
Rwanda's new Government is committed to building a multiparty democracy in which ethnic origin is no longer an issue, according to Paul Kagame, the country's new Vice President and the man who led a rebel army to victory in the civil war here.
Five months after the most recent burst of heavy fighting, which killed countless thousands and forced thousands of others to flee, international human rights organizations are present, and Mr.
Kagame said in an interview that others were welcome to join them and the United Nations observers posted here to help protect returning refugees.


Elliot Liebow, Anthropologist And Sociologist, Is Dead at 69
Elliot Liebow, an anthropologist and sociologist whose acclaimed books dealt with homeless women and street-corner society, died on Sunday at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Md., the community in which he lived.
He was 69.
The cause of death was cancer, his daughter Elisabeth Liebow-Feeser said.


Clinton Staff Shows Jitters As Shake-Up Is Expected
As President Clinton wraps up his vacation here and heads back to Washington, some of his top aides are awaiting his return on Wednesday with more than a little apprehension, expecting him to make the first of a series of staff changes as the White House gets back to business.
For two months, Leon E. Panetta, the new White House chief of staff, has quietly been weighing big changes in Mr.
Clinton's team.
Now, White House officials say that Mr.
Panetta is getting ready to present those recommendations to Mr.
Clinton and that an overhaul of the lineup could be announced next week.


Romance Author Tells of a Real-Life Crime
If the crime sounded as if it had been dreamed up by a romance-novel writer, listen to the confession:
"My life was effectively at an end," wrote Barbara Josyln, the love-story author, trying to explain the despair and financial hardship that induced her to act as a decoy, taking a friend to lunch on Saturday while a male accomplice robbed the friend's Park Avenue apartment of a Picasso sketch and other valuables worth $800,000, the police said.


Toward Saner Football
The grim sight of Napoleon McCallum's knee being wrenched from its socket on "Monday Night Football" reminds us that the season of mayhem and misplaced values is upon us again.
To be sure, it is delusional to think that football is going to disappear.
For one thing, it is too deeply intertwined with the fabric of national life and America's social and historical consciousness.
Consider what football represents.
By one analysis, the drive for the end zone represents a re-enactment of the frontier experience: the offensive drive as manifest destiny.
By another account, the training of a boy to play an obedient role as one-eleventh of The Team is the way the nation prepares him to fit into the modern corporation.


Massachusetts Governor Cruises Election Road
Mark Roosevelt, the front-runner in the Democratic primary for governor, was introducing himself to the men at the Eire Pub in Dorchester, a staunchly Democratic neighborhood in Boston.
Dennis Farrell, a lifelong Democrat, hardly took his eyes off the television.
He seemed surprised that Mr.
Roosevelt, a 38-year-old state representative, was campaigning.
"Seems like a shoo-in for Weld," Mr.
Farrell, who manages a post office, told a reporter.


Flyers Name Lindros Their Captain
The Philadelphia Flyers yesterday named 21-year-old center ERIC LINDROS their team captain.
In 1992, the Flyers traded six players, two first-round draft choices and $15 million for the rights to Lindros, who refused to sign with the Quebec Nordiques after they made him the first overall selection in the 1991 draft. (AP)


Fitzpatrick Visits His New Daughter
Florida Panther goalie MARK FITZPATRICK, facing a charge of aggravated domestic battery against his wife, SUSAN, became a father when she gave birth to a baby girl.
Fitzpatrick, who has a restraining order against him, visited the baby at a Miami hospital but said he was not allowed contact with his wife or any member of her immediate family.
The girl, ALEXANDRA ELIZABETH, was born Friday night.
Fitzpatrick's pretrial hearing on the battery charge is scheduled for Oct. 4. (AP)


Market Place; Investors have yet to applaud Mellon's addition of Dreyfus.
THE Mellon Bank Corporation finally completed its purchase of the Dreyfus mutual fund empire late last month after taking nearly nine months to receive the required approval from regulators.
The Pittsburgh bank has yet to receive approval from investors, however.
Its stock is selling for 9 times earnings, less than even the average regional bank, which sells for 10.5 times earnings.
Mellon's shares closed yesterday at $59, down 25 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Stich Allows Kafelnikov Hardly a Shred of Hope
Confronted last night at the United States Open by the ominous prospect of facing 14th-seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov, the 20-year-old Russian whose rise through the ranks has been swift and fearless, fourth-seeded Michael Stich refused to buckle under to the towheaded upstart who seems to have made a habit of upsetting him.
Instead of allowing Kafelnikov to notch a fifth consecutive victory against him, Stich poured on the power, used his superior Grand Slam experience and dealt the Russian a 7-6 (10-8), 6-3, 6-2 dressing-down.


Ailing Maker of Clothing Hires a Chief
Bernard Chaus Inc., a money-losing manufacturer of women's clothing, said yesterday that it had hired Andrew Grossman, the president of the Jones Apparel Company, as its chief executive.
Josephine Chaus, who took over managing the company after her husband, Bernard, died in 1991, and who controls a majority of the company's stock, will remain chairwoman.


Food Notes
More Kosher Products
This week and next, as Jewish families sit down to dinners to celebrate the High Holy Days, more kosher food than ever will be available.
An estimated 26,000 manufactured food products are now kosher, with thousands of new ones added each year.
While sales of regular food in retail stores were flat last year, sales of kosher products increased 12 percent, according to Lubicom, a market research company in New York.
Jars of gefilte fish and boxes of gelatin desserts as well as mainstream products like Tropicana orange juice and Coca-Cola now bear kosher certification.
And recently, kosher foods intended for the fancy-food market have been added.


Oxford Resources Corp.(OXFD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For its outside voice in a radio campaign, the Metropolitan Museum of Art looks inside.
IT is a sonorous sound, this voice on a radio commercial posing a question as if it were a work of art: "Have you ever experienced the special beauty of the Metropolitan Museum of Art on a summer's evening?"
Soon, the voice gets to the pitch: "This is Philippe de Montebello inviting you to experience for yourself the magic of the Metropolitan at night."


GREAT COOKS: Linda McCartney; Lots of Smidgens, But Hold the Meat
"ARE you a veggie?" is the usual salutation of Linda McCartney, cookbook author, photographer, musician and wife of Paul McCartney, the songwriter and performer.
Mrs.
McCartney recently went to the East Hampton, L.I., home of the chef Pierre Franey to discuss her passion for vegetarian cooking and to prepare a meal from her cookbook, "Linda McCartney's Home Cooking" (Arcade Publishing, 1989).
Traipsing behind her was her vegetable-loving husband, wearing baggy plaid shorts, sandals and a blue sweatshirt and carrying a guitar.


In Any Case, Unfair Punishment
Three months after accusing O. J. Simpson of double murder and only weeks before the trial, Los Angeles prosecutors have yet to say whether they will seek the death penalty.
Their hesitation is understandable, but the delay constitutes an indictment of capital punishment and exposes the arbitrary rules that haunt its use.
Whoever slashed the throat of Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Nicole, and stabbed her friend Ronald Goldman to death is surely eligible for California's death penalty in every legal sense.
But the same can be said of multitudes of convicted murderers, while only a few hundred have been executed since 1976 under court-approved guidelines.
The selection from those technically eligible, as even advocates of the death penalty understand, is warped by unwritten standards and social forces.


Sanderson Farms Inc.(SAFM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


American Express Offers New Card
The American Express Company, making a long-awaited drive for a market far larger than globe-trotters and executives on the town, introduced a new credit card yesterday, its first with no annual fee.
The new mass-market challenge to banks that issue Visa and Mastercard reflects a change of strategy at American Express.
Under Harvey Golub, its chairman for the last year and a half, the company has chosen to play down the trademark green and gold charge cards, which require payment in full and carry a high annual fee.


ON THE RUN WITH: Roy Hargrove; Have Trumpet, Will Frolic
"I LOVE being on the road," Roy Hargrove said, staring out at Queens from the window of a stretch limousine on the way to Kennedy International Airport.
He wasn't kidding.
The 24-year-old jazz trumpet player, who has barely touched his landing gear in New York this summer, was ready on this July afternoon to jet away on another tour with his quintet.
He had arrived in New York the day before, after a day in Montreal.
That morning he had played at the Lincoln Center Institute for the Arts in Education.
Then, he had rushed home to his apartment in Greenwich Village to pick up a "surprise" for his band.
Now he was off for three weeks in Europe.


Corrections
An art review in Weekend on Friday about an exhibition of silk Kashan rugs at the Metropolitan Museum of Art misstated the curator's surname.
He is Daniel Walker, not Daniel Walsh.


Southern Electronics Corp.(SECX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Suicides Inspire Inquiry By the Police
One was a New York City Police Department veteran whose career was put in limbo by the corruption scandal in the 30th Precinct.
The other was a rookie who graduated from the Police Academy just last week but then saw his career jeopardized by a drunken-driving arrest over the weekend.
Within hours of each other yesterday, they chose the same solution to their problems: they shot themselves to death.


U.S. Studies Officer Shooting
A United States Justice Department official said yesterday that the department's civil rights division was monitoring developments in the local investigation of the shooting of a Transit police officer by an off-duty New York City police officer last month.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said senior department attorneys have held preliminary talks with the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan about a potential Federal inquiry.


NO PLAN FOR REVAMPING, COLGATE-PALMOLIVE SAYS
The Colgate-Palmolive Company said yesterday that it had no current plans for a restructuring.
The company was responding to a report last week that it would undertake a $100 million reorganization that would eliminate up to 3,000 jobs.
The report was issued Thursday evening by Bloomberg Business News, and Colgate's offices in New York were closed Friday through Monday.
Reuben Mark, the company's chief executive, said in a statement, "Colgate is always looking for ways to increase productivity, to streamline operations worldwide and increase value to shareholders." Colgate stock closed yesterday at $56.625, down 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Heather Hay, an analyst who follows Colgate for J. P. Morgan Securities, said, "My sense is that they are probably mulling something over but haven't come to a decision."


Samson Energy
Shares of the Samson Energy Company, an oil and gas producer in Tulsa, Okla., rose sharply yesterday on the American Stock Exchange.
Samson Properties, the general partner of Samson Energy, bid nearly $54 million for the three-quarters of the company it does not already own after the market closed on Friday.


Off the Menu
Here Comes the Chef
Alison Hurt, the owner of Alison on Dominick Street, the restaurant at 38 Dominick Street in SoHo, says that hiring a chef in a hurry "is like getting married without ever having dated."
Last winter, when the chef Tom Valenti announced that he was leaving, she had one month to replace him.
She hired Scott Bryan, who had been at Soleil on the Upper East Side.


Candidate Ties Gubernatorial Bid to Property Taxes
In a governor's race in which all the candidates talk tough on crime and promise to purge the government of waste, William E. Curry Jr. has seized onto the state's high property taxes as an issue that highlights his independence from the pack.
While several of his opponents have focused on cutting or eliminating an unpopular income tax introduced in 1991, Mr.
Curry has pledged to return about $1 billion from state coffers to cities and towns for property tax relief.
The details of the program have met widespread criticism, but Mr.
Curry insists that his approach is the only one that challenges the status quo.


Mourning a Slain Trooper


Mexican Banker Disappears After His Arrest Is Ordered
A brash young Mexican bank director who confounded the international business community with deals to acquire well-known food companies in the United States is believed by officials to have fled the country after a warrant was issued for his arrest on charges of fraudulently lending himself as much as $700 million.
The banker, Carlos Cabal Peniche, who has been variously reported to be in his late 30's, is accused of using a complicated shell game to hide a money trail that enabled him to buy several large companies, including the Del Monte Fresh Produce Company of Coral Gables, Fla.
This year he had made a deal to buy Del Monte Foods of San Francisco, but the outlook for completing that transaction is now uncertain.


On the Trail Of Genocide
The prisoners in the Government jail in Kibungo, Rwanda, will tell you they killed their Tutsi neighbors and burned their houses, but they deny they did it willingly.
Their testimony has a chilling similarity: not just their repeated invocations of "orders from above" or their matter-of-fact delivery, but their depiction of the massacres as a military operation, a matter of guns and grenades.
The duty of the civilian conscripts, they say, was nettoyage, "cleaning up" -- killing the survivors.
But it is unlikely that the several hundred prisoners held in Kibungo will come to trial in the near, or even foreseeable, future.
In early August, the United States and the United Nations secured a promise from the new Government of Rwanda that it would not prosecute anyone for genocide.
Instead, Rwanda's Prime Minister, Faustin Twagiramungu, agreed to an international war crimes tribunal under U.N. auspices, probably at The Hague.


Hart Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


People
*
Lon LaFlamme, chief executive of advertising and public relations at the Evans Group, Seattle, was promoted to chief executive of public relations at the corporate headquarters in Salt Lake City. *
Jeffrey Raleigh was named senior vice president and head of the environment specialty group at Hill &amp; Knowlton, San Francisco.
He succeeds Dale Didion, who has served as acting director for the last year and returns to his former position as deputy director of the group.
Mr.
Raleigh was previously senior vice president and general manager at E. Bruce Harrison, San Francisco.


Shawinigan Journal; Quebec Libre? His Hometown Won't Think of It
They have known him here for years, people like Marcel Brousseau, who as a boy played baseball with him, or the brothers Guy and Gilles Sauvageau, who run a coffee, magazine and tobacco shop where he still occasionally drops in to pass the time of day.
Prime Minister Jean Chretien, the son of a machinist at a local paper mill, comes home every few weeks, the way Harry Truman used to return to Independence, Mo.
Mr.
Chretien still owns a house in Shawinigan, has family here and knows many townspeople by their first names.


Rice and 49ers Deliver a Powerful Message
Jerry Rice is unique. Jerry Rice is like any other National Football League player.
N.F.L. coaches can scream and scowl and stroke.
They can attempt to motivate their players in so many ways.
But nothing serves as motivation for an N.F.L. player as much as a subtle push from his opposing peers, Rice included.


Casey's General Stores Inc.(CASY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Editor Leaves Science Post
Jonathan Piel, the editor of Scientific American since 1984, has resigned.
John J. Hanley, chairman and chief executive, said yesterday that Mr.
Piel's resignation was the result of the magazine's decision to adjust its direction and expand its audience.


Accounts
*
USL Capital, San Francisco, to Young &amp; Rubicam, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle its corporate image campaign.
Billings were not disclosed.


Degrees of Freedom for Raft Children
Clad in "Batman" sneakers and a "Miami Dolphins" T-shirt, 8-year-old Yandro Martinez says he has learned some English -- "teacher" and "door" -- and made two friends since he started the third grade last week at Ben Sheppard Elementary School here.
He tells classmates he is a "balsero," a Spanish term now applied to those who came from Cuba on a raft or a small boat.


The Robbers At Tiffany's: Not Jewelers
It was curiosity that drew Cathy Paul to the fabled showroom of Tiffany &amp; Company yesterday, the first day of business after daring robbers escaped with more than $1.25 million in jewelry during the weekend.
"I thought they were going to take the yellow diamonds," said Ms.
Paul, a midtown resident, who was browsing through the store at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street at noon.
"I came to see if they were still there. I heard they went for the stones."


Eating Well
MOST of this country's 50 million children are now back in school, where half of them eat lunches their schools provide.
Nutrition experts say these lunches are filled with fat and pave the way to cancer and heart disease.
Nevertheless, efforts by the Agriculture Department to improve the meals are running into opposition from the same people who say they have been fighting for healthier meals for years -- the school food service personnel.


In a Story of Inwardness, the Hero Is Always the Self
The Jukebox
And Other Essays on Storytelling
By Peter Handke
Translated by Ralph Manheim and Krishna Winston. 167 pages.
Farrar Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
Once upon a time, serious writers decided they were sick and tired of "once upon a time." In 1936, Walter Benjamin spoke of the embarrassment that arose when the simple, primal wish to hear a story was expressed: "It is as if something that seemed inalienable to us, the securest among our possessions, were taken from us: the ability to exchange experiences." Now, almost 60 years later, writers like the Austrian Peter Handke are still looking for ways to reclaim that possession.
"The Jukebox and Other Essays on Storytelling" tries out all sorts of manners and tones.
It struggles, ponders, poses, lectures, deconstructs and daydreams.
It is high-minded, it is artful, it is officious and at moments it is actually moving.


Health Care Debate to Shift To Federal Employees' Plan
Almost every health care proposal still pending in Congress complies with the politically potent demand -- expressed over and over in last month's Senate debate -- that all Americans should be able to get insurance as good as what Congress has.
In fact, there is no special health plan for members of Congress.
They participate in the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, along with nine million other Government workers, retirees and dependents.


Don't Call Unemployment a Jobs Plan
To the Editor:
Secretary of Labor Robert B. Reich's boastful summary of the Clinton Administration's "work-force agenda" in "The Fracturing of the Middle Class" (Op-Ed, Aug. 31) is political disingenuousness.


CUBAN REFUGEES START TO ARRIVE AT PANAMA BASE
The first of what could eventually amount to 10,000 Cubans landed here tonight from the overloaded Guantanamo Bay Naval Station in Cuba, moving into new camps and giving some breathing room to the Administration in its standoff with the Cuban Government.
As the first refugees, most wearing shorts, T-shirts and sandals, walked to a bus, reporters called out, asking how they felt to be in Panama.
One answered: "Good, good. We're a long way from Fidel Castro."


Volt Information Sciences Inc.(VOLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


Grandmothers Raise New Families for Love, Not for Money
To the Editor:
"Paying Grandmas to Keep Kids in Limbo" by Judith Sheindlin (Op-Ed, Aug. 29), on grandmothers who care for their grandchildren, omits details crucial to widespread acceptance of kinship care.
The author devotes much time to the reimbursements grandmothers receive, yet little to the children they care for.
She never mentions that children in the foster care system who are placed with relatives, usually grandmothers, were previously abused or neglected and are typically traumatized.


In America; A Good Chance
A few months ago I was waiting on line for coffee at a shop in Times Square when a fellow in a wheelchair came in.
New York is both a city of strangers and a place where you're constantly running into people you know.
You can spend a lifetime learning the etiquette of eye contact.
I had a feeling I knew this guy but I wasn't sure.
And then he said, "Bob?"
"Jerome! Hey, man, how you doing?"


Japan Raids Companies, Suspecting Bid Rigging
The Japanese Fair Trade Commission raided the offices of more than 20 prominent trading companies today on suspicion that they colluded on bids to supply material and equipment for the country's foreign aid program, news reports and officials here said.
The suspicions about bid-rigging come at a time when the United States Government has announced its intention to help American companies secure more contracts stemming from Japan's foreign aid expenditures, which total more than $10 billion a year.


CHRONICLE
For most of the 33 years that ZUBIN MEHTA has been associated with the Israel Philharmonic, the past 25 years as its music director, he was unable to take the orchestra to India, his place of birth, because Israel and India did not establish diplomatic relations until 1992.
That will change when Mr.
Mehta and the orchestra perform in New Delhi on Nov. 27 and in four concerts in Bombay from Nov. 30 to Dec. 3.
"It will be a dream fulfilled," Mr.
Mehta said yesterday.
"It has hurt me for so many years that I couldn't take this orchestra to my own country."


Let Relatives Be Foster Parents
Many of New York City's foster children live with relatives.
The "kinship care" program has been controversial.
Some critics think it should be eliminated altogether.
In fact it serves the needs of some children well, but can be made to work better.
Just like non-related families that agree to take in abused or neglected children on a temporary basis, relatives of about 40 percent of the city's 47,000 foster children receive government stipends and must be approved and supervised by child welfare officials.


Financial Issues Helping Cuomo to Focus Scrutiny on Pataki as Primary Draws Near
Throughout his rapid rise from local politics to endorsed Republican candidate for governor, State Senator George E. Pataki has sought to present a carefully honed image to the public: son of immigrants, farm boy, Ivy League scholarship winner, principled legislator.
But for the last few weeks, Mr.
Pataki has had to answer questions generated by news articles about his personal finances.
And though none of those questions individually has proved deeply damaging, together they have given Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's campaign new tools to chisel at Mr.
Pataki's public persona.


North Raises Iran-Contra Issue In Debate for Senate Candidates
Oliver L. North used a nationally televised debate tonight to confront what he called "a whispering campaign" conducted by his three opponents in the Virginia Senate race: his role in the Iran-contra affair.
As a military aide to President Ronald Reagan in 1985 and 1986, Mr.
North helped to divert profits from the sale of arms to Iran to the contra rebels in Nicaragua.


Kohl Is Riding High as German Election Nears
An explosion of cheers and applause burst from the crowd as Chancellor Helmut Kohl strode toward the podium to address a campaign rally in Potsdam on Saturday night.
As always, his speech was full of enthusiasm and optimism.
"The landscape here in the east is beginning to bloom, and if it takes four or five years longer than we had hoped, that means nothing in the sweep of history," he cried out in his booming baritone.
"Germany is free, Germany is united, and Germany has a great economic and social future."


2 Ohioans Arrested in Series of Slayings
It was a cross-country crime rampage that began in rural Ohio one week ago with a stolen car, a missing woman and two male suspects.
One was an ex-convict fresh out of prison, a man found guilty both of theft and of once biting his own baby so hard that he drew blood.
The other was a gangly, troubled 16-year-old described as "a follower," not a violent criminal, by his hometown police chief.
The rampage turned murderous three times over in Missouri and Oklahoma, where the victims' cars were stolen after automobiles taken in previous crimes were abandoned.
And it ended this morning, after a nationwide manhunt, with arrests in a dusty culvert at the edge of the mountains around Santa Fe.


Irish Premier Receives I.R.A. Chief Over Protestant Objections
With Government workers watching from windowsills and a knot of cheering supporters waving the Irish tricolor on the sidewalk, Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, entered Government Buildings today for his first meeting with the Irish Prime Minister, Albert Reynolds.
Even before it began, the session was denounced by Protestant Unionists in the North.
They saw it as a charade designed to confer sheep's clothing on Mr.
Adams now that the I.R.A. -- on whose behalf he speaks -- has declared an unconditional cease-fire in the 25-year struggle over Northern Ireland.


After 5 Sacks Against Eagles, Giants Feel Pretty Chipper
After one game, they've stopped saying, "We'll be O.K." In Week 2 of the P.L.T.
Era (Post Lawrence Taylor), the Giants' defense is preparing for Buddy Ryan's Arizona Cardinals with a good measure of confidence, employing less bark and more bite.
Although Mike Nolan, the Giants' defensive coordinator, has yet to buy into this notion, he is "feeling a little better" after the Giants contained quarterback Randall Cunningham in a 28-23 victory over the Eagles last Sunday.


New Tour Plan Put on Hold
A fierce battle for the control of women's tennis in 1995 and beyond was revealed yesterday when Billie Jean King and the International Management Group announced and then hastily canceled a news conference outlining the development of a new tour.
The new tour would be backed and run for the next two years by I.M.G., a sports management conglomerate, and would include King at the helm.
The proposed takeover of the current WTA Tour reportedly has the endorsement of top players, including the WTA Players Association president, Martina Navratilova.
Navratilova favors the streamlining of events to promote more rivalries between top names.


McCallum Likely to Be Out for Season
NAPOLEON McCALLUM, the Los Angeles Raiders running back, was expected to be lost for the season after surgery to replace a ruptured artery in his left knee.
McCallum's knee was dislocated on a tackle in the third quarter of the Raiders' 44-14 loss to the San Francisco 49ers on Monday night.
He underwent two hours of surgery Monday night at Stanford Medical Center.
"It would be premature for me to speculate on the severity, but it would be fair to assume this was at least season-ending," the Raiders' executive assistant, AL LoCASALE, said yesterday.


WCI Steel Inc.(WRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Foe of Risk Hyperbole
To the Editor:
James Hahn (letter, Aug. 29) objects to your quoting a scientist from the American Council on Science and Health because he alleges that our corporate funding makes this person not credible.
We receive relatively little of our budget from the chemical industry, which sells its products to the tobacco industry and is uncomfortable with our unrelenting opposition to cigarette companies.


She's Long On Talent, Short on The Serve
The first time, it was taken as an aberration.
After all, how many times does a serve fall 10 feet short of the net?
Gabriela Sabatini had served softly, 49 miles per hour to be precise, and the ball simply sputtered to a stop before it made it to the other side of the court.
The double fault was Sabatini's seventh of the day, and she would get No. 8 two games later, when yet another serve -- this one clocked at 46 m.p.h. -- drooped and dropped on her side of the court.
This time, Sabatini's odd failure quickly prompted whispers at the United States Open.
And the question so many asked was one heard often lately on the women's tour:


Gopac Trains Leaders In Conservative Ideals
To the Editor:
Re "Newt Gingrich: Leader of the PAC" (editorial, Aug. 30): Representative Gingrich does not have a personal leadership PAC.
Neither his campaign nor he personally receives any money from Gopac.
He is the general chairman of this Republican organization, founded by Gov.
Pete du Pont in 1979.
Gopac's primary role is to be the nation's premier training organization for political leaders on the local, state and national level.


Jews Celebrate the Rosh Ha-Shanah Holidays


Osborne Will Return to Rangers
MARK OSBORNE, who played for the Rangers for three and a half seasons in the mid-1980's, has re-signed with the Stanley Cup champions as an unrestricted free agent, the club announced yesterday.
Osborne, 33, played for the Toronto Maple Leafs last season, scoring 9 goals and assisting on 15 others in 73 games.
He has appeared in 882 career games and has 527 points. (AP)


Disabled: Public or Special School?
"Turning Point" demonstrates tonight that sensitivity need not dissolve into sentimentality.
The delicate subject of "Sean's Story" is inclusion, the principle, which has won support from the United States Department of Education, that disabled children should be admitted to regular classrooms.
Meredith Vieira, reporting, does not let her sympathy for the children and parents directly affected to get in the way of pointed questions.
"Sean's Story" is only partly about Sean, an 8-year-old Baltimore boy with Down syndrome, whose mother fought successfully to have him transferred from Ridge, a school for the disabled, to Sparks, his neighborhood elementary school.
Also on screen is Bobby, another boy with Down syndrome, whose mother is pleased with the attention he is getting at Ridge.


Staten Island's Leader Endorses Pataki
Borough President Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island, a harsh critic of the way Republican leaders chose George E. Pataki as a gubernatorial candidate, endorsed Mr.
Pataki yesterday in a show of party unity before the primary election.
Mr.
Molinari's daughter, Representative Susan Molinari, a Republican of Staten Island, also supported Mr.
Pataki yesterday.
He is running against Richard M. Rosenbaum, a former state party chairman waging an outsider's challenge in the Republican primary next Tuesday.


INSIDE
A Meeting of Irishmen
Gerry Adams, the I.R.A.'s political leader, held his first talks with the Prime Minister of Ireland on ending "the troubles" in Ulster.
Page A11.
Promise From Rwanda
Rwanda's new Government pledged to build a multiparty democracy in which ethnic origin, the root of much strife, was not an issue.
Page A10.
Police Suicide Count Rises
Two New York City police officers killed themselves, matching a grim record set in 1987: 10 suicides by city officers in a year.
Page B1.
Sampras Eliminated at Open
Pete Sampras, the defending champion and top-seeded player, was beaten in five sets by Jaime Yzaga of Peru.
Page B15.


Now Starring in Dublin: A Poetic Friel Heroine
The sad and miraculous plight of Molly Sweeney has brought out the best in the playwright Brian Friel.
Telling the story of a blind massage therapist who, at 41, temporarily recovers her sight, he has produced an entrancing drama that lodges in the mind's eye and stays there, long after Molly's final words have been spoken.


Sit Back, Relax and Enjoy the Air Show
Since 12 touchdown passes had been thrown and 118 points had been scored, what would 7 more points mean?
Everything.
The difference between winning and losing.
The difference between Alcorn State's becoming the first team to defeat Coach Eddie Robinson and Grambling in four consecutive matchups.
The difference between Alcorn State quarterback Steve (Air) McNair leading the Braves to yet another last-second victory over Robinson.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.88
4.72
3.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.58
4.54
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.89
4.82
2.95
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.25
7.19
6.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.49
7.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.29
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.34
6.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Book Notes; Out of art, into publishing Stephen King, on tour Booker Prize time.
Out of Art
David Ramus is a former fine-arts dealer whose high-flying years in the 1980's art world left him with spectacular debts and a number of creditors clamoring for blood.
"I failed miserably in the art world," is how he described it in a recent interview from his home in Atlanta.
Mr.
Ramus, 39, has never been a writer except in private, dabbling in sketches and short stories he never showed to anyone.
But last October, when his art-selling practices became the subject of a Federal investigation, he sat down to write his first novel, as much, he said, "to exorcise my demons as anything else." The book, "Thief of Light," about forged masterpieces and greed and murder in the art world, caused a tremendous end-of-the-summer stir in a small but rich corner of Manhattan's publishing world.
The stir turned out to be brief, because the novel was snapped up so quickly that few people had time to learn about it.


Tending the Spirit as Well as the Body; Chaplains' Nurturing Plays a Growing Role in Hospital Care
During Daryl Bloom's eight-year battle against bone cancer, the doctors and nurses who deftly restored his health over the course of a dozen operations were helped by someone who never stepped foot into surgery, someone, in fact, who holds no medical degree and whose specialty is the realm of the intangible.
Sister Elaine Goodell, a staff chaplain at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, was Mr.
Bloom's "spiritual bodybuilder," providing counsel, conversation or just company during his many hospital stays and insisting that he would get out of the hospital and on with his life.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.(RYK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Late-Summer Festivities of the Tomato Clan
It is the height of tomato season in these last days of summer, and there is no better time to feast on a late but abundant crop.
Tables at farmers' markets and specialty stores groan under the weighty rainbow of varieties, their colors ranging from the palest green of the Ivory Pears to the deepest red of the Romas.
And ribbed tomatoes like the Ultra Boys and the Yellow Stuffers look ready to be eaten out of hand.
With this year's bounty it is no wonder that debates about the genetically engineered Flavr-Savr tomatoes have subsided and that cooks are featuring tomatoes in all their glory.


3 Minutes Of Rock (And Fame)
LIKE once-proud Greeks adapting to the culture of an ascendant Rome, the members of the Russian Red Army chorus were taking their cues from younger, long-haired MTV commissars of our own triumphant culture of rock-and-roll and youth-driven marketing.
"O.K., let's really hear those balalaikas," said one of the Americans, a leather-vested, postmodern, post-Communist, post-adolescent as he led a rehearsal of "Sweet Home Alabama," the song that the Red Army Chorus is to present during the MTV Video Music Awards on Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall.


Lawyer Accuses the Police in His Arrest
The only thing L. Monty Kandekore and the Greenburgh police agree on is this: A struggle took place last fall between Mr.
Kandekore and police officers outside his apartment complex on Central Avenue.
Mr.
Kandekore, a bankruptcy lawyer who is black, says two officers beat him and used racial slurs.
White police officers tell a different story.
They say the lawyer appeared intoxicated and repeatedly punched an officer who was trying to arrest him.
Mr.
Kandekore was indicted on charges of driving while intoxicated, assault and resisting arrest and is awaiting trial.


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for 12mos to July 31


Manhattan Restaurants That Like (Yes, Like) Children
HISTORICALLY, restaurants in Manhattan have not loved children as customers.
"Children are more demanding," said John Hawkins, the owner of the Barking Dog Luncheonette (a restaurant that nevertheless pampers children).
"They're screaming and crying for what they want."
But an informal search has found at least 20 Manhattan restaurants that welcome children, from infants on up, even if they do sometimes eat with their fingers, spill drinks and knock saltshakers off the table.


METRO DIGEST
PEPPER SPRAY GOES TO COLLEGE
The hottest must-have item among female students at Rutgers University this fall is neither baggy pants nor book bags nor electronic games.
It is pepper spray.
Crime and the fear of crime has come to college, from big city universities to tiny rural schools.
Although some still cling to the image of college as a sacred haven of higher purpose, increasingly, experts say, parents and students are realizing that few campuses are as idyllic as they look.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Tailhook Group Wins Early Round in Ex-Navy Woman's Suit
The Pentagon report on the Tailhook Association's 1991 convention has been barred from evidence in a lawsuit brought by a former Navy officer who was one of the women sexually abused there.
The ruling, issued last Friday by Judge Philip M. Pro of Federal District Court in Las Vegas, Nev., who called the report "not sufficiently trustworthy," was a victory for the Tailhook Association, an organization of naval aviators, and its co-defendant, the Las Vegas Hilton, where the convention took place.


Corrections
The Peripherals column in Science Times yesterday, about a software program for business presentations, named it incorrectly at one point.
It is Harvard Spotlight for Windows, not Harvard Presenter for Windows.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Sales of cars and light trucks surged 10.3 percent in August, suggesting that American auto makers were correct in attributing a July slowdown to production shortfalls, rather than to a drop in demand.
Stocks of the Big Three auto makers rose.  [ Page D1. ]


Destination: Paris. First Stop: Willi's.
Back in the 1920's, during Prohibition in the United States, the routine went something like this:
Traveling by ship from New York to the northern French city of Le Havre; by boat train to the Gare St.-Lazare railroad station in Paris, and then, after a quick stop at a hotel, by taxi to Harry's New York Bar for a glorious, inexpensive and totally legal drink.


CHRONICLE
Gone are the days when PATTI LABELLE strutted on stage in glittering dresses, feathers in her hair, platform heels on her feet.
When the singer opens a 50-city, seven-week tour in Oakland, Calif., on Oct. 7, she will be dressed all in red by CAROLINE SIMONELLI, a New York designer, whose elegant ballgowns are sold at stores like Henri Bendel.
"I'm into fire and ice -- brilliant colors and beautiful, refined fabrics like taffetas and crepes," said the singer, who will open her show dressed in a slinky red rayon matte jersey strapless sheath and a matching full-length red coat shaped like a kite.


Sit Back, Relax and Enjoy the Air Show
Since 12 touchdown passes had been thrown and 118 points had been scored, what would 7 more points mean?
Everything.
The difference between winning and losing.
The difference between Alcorn State's becoming the first team to defeat Coach Eddie Robinson and Grambling in four consecutive matchups.
The difference between Alcorn State quarterback Steve (Air) McNair leading the Braves to yet another last-second victory over Robinson.


Western Waste Industries (WW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Undercover Games
To the Editor:
Since anybody can buy a fake badge and a toy gun and play policeman, and since undercover officers can fail to recognize their own, what are we to make of the subway shootout involving two police officers?


Sports of The Times; Pete Flunks Endurance Competition
FIRST Pete Sampras fell into a hole.
Then he hit the wall.
This tennis is a dangerous sport.
And what's worse, the danger is spreading.
Jaime Yzaga is the man who defeated the top-seeded player at the United States Open yesterday, and Yzaga couldn't stay the course, either.
Yzaga walked off the court after beating Sampras and strolled into the press conference and started talking in near flawless English.
But after a few minutes of staring at the raffish gaggle of international journalists, Yzaga, too, hit his personal wall.
"I'm not feel that well, sorry," he said.
"Can we stop it? Who's in charge here? I'm not feeling well."


Woods Named to International Team
TIGER WOODS was one of four players chosen yesterday to represent the United States in next month's world amateur team championship, to be played in Versailles, France.
Woods, 18, won the United States Amateur last month.
Joining him on the team are ALLEN DOYLE, 46, a three-time selection from LaGrange, Ga.; JOHN HARRIS, 42, of Edina, Minn., and TODD DEMSEY, 22, of Rancho Santa Fe, Calif.
The team is chosen by the United States Golf Association based upon play in the last two years. (AP)


Payments, Not Games, Are Latest Issue
Major league baseball union and management officials have been unable to reconvene negotiations in an effort to resolve the major issues that caused a strike to halt games on Aug. 12.
Other issues continue to percolate, one of which resulted in the union's filing an unfair labor practice charge against club owners yesterday.
The charge, registered with the National Labor Relations Board, alleges that the club owners violated the National Labor Relations Act by failing to make a $7.8 million payment to the players' health and benefit fund on Aug. 1.
The missed payment was widely denounced at the time by union officials and players, who called it an inflammatory act on the owners' part, and it added to the bitterness that has characterized the relationship between the two sides.


Jets' Washington Looks For Another Game Ball
When a pro football defense faces a relatively immobile quarterback like Jim Kelly or Dan Marino, it tries to drive him out of the pocket.
Against a mobile quarterback like John Elway or Randall Cunningham, it tries to keep him in the pocket because once he gets outside, he can scramble or throw on the run, sometimes as far as 50 yards upfield or crossfield.
So Marvin Washington, who gave Kelly fits Sunday in the Jets' 23-3 thrashing of the Buffalo Bills, has no time to celebrate, not that he's the celebrating type.
This Sunday, the Jets play the Denver Broncos at Giants Stadium, and Washington must concern himself about Elway.


Moscow Is Almost Certain: Anastasia Died With Czar's Family
Saying it has resolved an enduring mystery, a Government commission reported today that Princess Anastasia, long rumored to have survived the firing squad that killed Czar Nicholas II and his family, was indeed murdered by the Bolsheviks in 1918.
The commission, directed by Deputy Prime Minister Yuri F. Yarov, reached its conclusions after two years of forensic, anthropological and molecular analysis of nine skeletons found in a shallow pit near the city of Yekaterinburg.


Industrial Robots Make the Grade
In the early 1980's, when Roger B. Smith, then chairman of the General Motors Corporation, described his vision for the auto industry's future, he imagined factory floors where, one by one, workers would be replaced by robots.
"Every time the cost of labor goes up a dollar an hour," Mr.
Smith said, "a thousand more robots become economical."


Taking Change From Classroom to Central Office
This fall, Deborah Meier, the reform-minded principal who created a new kind of high school in Harlem, becomes, in a way, one of them at the New York City Board of Education headquarters.
She will now have an office alongside some of the very officials she had long avoided.
For nearly two decades, Ms.
Meier, a prize-winning educator who pioneered several of New York City's alternative schools, has been viewed as an exception, not a threat, by those in charge of the city's schools.
Leave her alone, her supporters said; she just wants to run her schools.


Pope, Lacking Safety Guarantee, Defers Visit to Bosnia
Pope John Paul II has decided to postpone his visit to Sarajevo after failing to receive assurances for the safety of those who would attend events connected with his visit, the Vatican said today.
Preparations for a one-day visit on Thursday had been moving ahead, although the Vatican had consistently left open the possibility of a cancellation, insisting that the visit hinged on firm security assurances, particularly from the Bosnian Serbs.


Johnson &amp; Johnson to Buy Kodak Division
Johnson &amp; Johnson said yesterday that it would buy Eastman Kodak's diagnostics products division, which includes machines that can run hundreds of chemical tests an hour, for $1.008 billion in cash.
The transaction would be the second big acquisition for Johnson &amp; Johnson in recent weeks and an important step in Kodak's efforts to sell off parts of the company not related to pictures and images.


Caribbean New York
New York City is a perpetual work in process, an immigrant city that is always remaking itself from the customs and intonations of its newest foreign-born families.
The process is often imperceptible until a sudden shift in conditions brings a new demographic order into focus.
This will be recorded as the year in which the traditional Labor Day parade in Manhattan was canceled for lack of interest, forcing politicians who typically used it as a photo opportunity to retreat to the West Indian American Day Parade in Brooklyn.
Smart move.
The gathering, known to West Indians themselves as "Carnival," has long been the largest street gathering in New York, drawing between one and two million revelers yearly.


Public &amp; Private; Beside the Point
When Tim Wirth, the Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs, first began to lay the Administration's rhetorical groundwork for this week's global population conference in Cairo, the note he sounded seemed inspired.
"Sustainable development cannot be realized without the full engagement and complete empowerment of women," Mr.
Wirth said in a speech in March.
Bypassing the contentious divisions of overpopulation vs. overconsumption, developed vs. developing nations, the rights of women could unite all in strategies for a world whose population has doubled in the last four decades and might triple by the end of the next century.


Balancing Outsider Appeal With an Insider's Strategy
If the abstract reasons why Richard M. Rosenbaum could win the Republican primary for governor were made flesh and bone, they might walk and talk like Henry Grassi, 68, a retired letter carrier from Brighton Beach, Brooklyn.
After meeting the ever-ebullient Mr.
Rosenbaum at the Brighton Beach Baths on Saturday, Mr.
Grassi said he was impressed with the candidate's cannonball straightforwardness, his gruff lack of pretension.
Impressed enough, indeed, to vote for him over the acknowledged front-runner in next Tuesday's primary, state Senator George E. Pataki.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the reunion of a California woman with her son who had been abducted to Iraq by her estranged husband misstated the given name of a State Department spokesman in some copies.
The spokesman, who described the difficulties of resolving international custody disputes, was Michael McCurry, not Steve.


G.E. Reported To Hire Allen
Allen &amp; Company, the New York investment banking firm, is said to have been hired by the General Electric Company to handle the sale of NBC, the company's television network operation, according to several people with knowledge of the transaction.
An executive close to Allen &amp; Company declined to comment, and a spokeswoman for General Electric said she had no information about it and could not comment.


Cuban Reply to U.S. Keeps Talks Going
Cuba replied today to the new immigration offer made by the United States on Monday as talks on stemming the exodus of boat people from Cuba entered their fifth day.
An Administration official described the Cuban response as serious, though still containing "some material we can't accept." But neither side provided details of what the Cubans said or what the United States is offering.
The two delegations are to meet again Wednesday at the United Nations.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COACHMEN INDUSTRIES, Elkhart, Ind., a recreational vehicle maker, said it had agreed in principle to acquire Georgie Boy Manufacturing Inc., Edwardsburg, Mich., a motor home maker, for an undisclosed price.
GE COMPUTER SERVICES, the computer leasing arm of General Electric Co., bought Total Audio Visual Services Inc., an audio-visual equipment rental company based in Atlanta.
Terms were not disclosed.


Sarajevo Standoff: Paralysis of Big-Power Diplomacy
The cancellation of Pope John Paul II's visit to Sarajevo underscores the continuing limbo of insecurity in which the Bosnian capital lives, and the failure of the United States and its partners to carry out threats of tough action against the Bosnian Serbs.
It is now more than six weeks since the Clinton Administration and its partners in the so-called contact group -- Russia, Britain, France and Germany -- presented a take-it-or-leave-it proposal for a settlement in Bosnia that was supposed to lead to severe punishment for any party rejecting it.


Banker Joins Investor Unit
Thomas C. Theobald, chairman of the Continental Bank Corporation here until its purchase last week by the BankAmerica Corporation, has joined an investment affiliate of William Blair &amp; Company as an investor and partner.
Mr.
Theobald, 57, joined Edgar Jannotta Sr., Blair's managing partner, in the firm's new affiliate: the William Blair Private Equity Capital Management Company.
The affiliate, which expects to raise $200 million, will provide growth and leveraged buyout capital for private companies.


Purepac Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Personal Health; Getting back into the game quickly with RICE.
COMING downstairs the other morning, I missed a step and twisted my ankle so badly I wept with pain.
As visions of weeks without tennis or cycling added to my agony, I hopped to the kitchen where I quickly downed ibuprofen and taped an ice pack tightly around my throbbing ankle.
Then I hopped over to my reclining chair and sat down to read with my foot elevated.
An hour later, I returned to the refrigerator to replace the now-melted ice pack with a frozen one and climbed back up to my chair.
I continued icing my ankle for 20 minutes of every hour all afternoon, keeping it elevated, and took another dose of ibuprofen after four hours.
By evening I was able to walk several blocks to take my nightly swim.
Then I taped the ankle for the night.
The next morning, with the ankle still taped, I was able to bicycle in comfort and the second morning I could play tennis without tape, without pain and without favoring the injured foot.


Dow Posts a 13.12 Rise In Light, Aimless Day
The stock market edged higher yesterday, with trading thin as Rosh ha-Shanah began and the long Labor Day weekend ended.
General Motors' announcement in the late afternoon of strong August auto sales lifted the Dow Jones industrial average slightly, but there was little indication of the general direction of stocks.
The dollar fell and so did bonds, eroding the limited gain in equity prices.


Reeves Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Amino Acid Offers Hope of Relieving Milder Symptoms Of Schizophrenia
AMONG the most intractable symptoms of schizophrenia are those that are the most subtle, including social withdrawal, emotional flatness and apathy, which do not respond to most existing medications.
But new studies are finding that very large doses of a form of glycine, a common amino acid, may offer relief from these "negative" symptoms.
The finding, reported in the August issue of The American Journal of Psychiatry, is potentially of great importance, because the negative symptoms are more persistent than the more blatant ones, like delusions and hallucinations, and account for some of the most debilitating long-term effects of the disorder.


Metropolitan Diary
LETTER from a friend, to be filed under S, as in Smiles, '94.
It is deep in the heart of summer, and I have grown quite accustomed to the sounds of my neighbors' children playing behind our apartments on the patch of concrete which, with its strips of dirt and grass, constitutes a backyard.


A Riddling Writer So Far Out He's In
When Paul Bowles was an aspiring young writer and composer visiting Paris in the late 1920's, he looked up Gertrude Stein and showed her some of his poems.
One of the verses she read began, "The heated beetle pants." Stein sternly pointed out that beetles don't pant and advised him that his real talent was for prose.
Stein also insisted on calling Mr.
Bowles Freddy because she felt that Paul was too romantic a name for someone who she sensed didn't have an ounce of romanticism.


Hong Kong Property Boom Seems Over for Now
This is a city where land is so scarce and so valuable that a parking space sold not so long ago for $500,000, where a two-bedroom apartment with a view of the murky waters of Hong Kong harbor can easily rent for $10,000 a month, where land developers often commit hundreds of millions of dollars to a real estate project with barely a shrug.
Which explains why last month's Government land auction was the stuff of history.


Fear Prompts Self-Defense As Crime Comes to College
The hottest must-have item among female students at Rutgers University this fall is neither baggy pants nor book bags nor electronic games.
It is pepper spray.
Dangling from key chains or tucked inside backpacks, the slender cans of chemical repellent are commonplace across this sprawling campus.
In a bathroom at the student center on the Busch College campus of Rutgers, which crosses into Piscataway, N.J., during freshmen orientation week, several young women relinquished their weapons momentarily as they paused to check their hair.
Outside, a few students displayed their cans and answered without hesitation when asked what topic most occupies their minds.


Now Starring in Dublin: A Poetic Friel Heroine
The sad and miraculous plight of Molly Sweeney has brought out the best in the playwright Brian Friel.
Telling the story of a blind massage therapist who, at 41, temporarily recovers her sight, he has produced an entrancing drama that lodges in the mind's eye and stays there, long after Molly's final words have been spoken.


Neely Ends His Holdout With Bruins
CAM NEELY, one of the league's top goal scorers despite a succession of serious injuries, ended his holdout yesterday by agreeing to a one-year contract with the Boston Bruins.
Terms of the pact were not released, but Neely and the Bruins reportedly had reached agreement on a base salary of $1.4 million, with incentives that could add $1 million. (AP)


Orchestras Merge Business Resources
In an innovative managerial arrangement, the American Symphony Orchestra has taken the chamber orchestra Concordia under its wing.
Concordia, founded 10 years ago by Marin Alsop to explore American music, particularly concert music with jazz influences, will retain its own board of trustees, keep its own books and pursue its own artistic goals.
But the American Symphony Orchestra will oversee the presentation of its concerts, as well as its marketing and fund raising.
"What we're trying to do," explained Eugene Carr, the executive director of the American Symphony, "is to create a new way to manage the arts by combining resources. It seem ridiculous that if you have a dozen organizations, each producing a small number of events every year, you also have a dozen executive directors, a dozen office leases, a dozen marketing departments. None of the organizations can really afford to engage as much staff as it needs."


No Headline
"I don't think people are as naive as they once were. Parents are becoming even more and more sensitive to the issue of safety when they're looking at schools. It's a result of the world we live in." TERESA AWALT, of the National Campus Violence Prevention Center.  [ A1:5. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  VATICAN STALLS U.N.
DEBATE  The Vatican put off for two more days any debate over how to deal with abortion in a plan to stabilize world population, seeking to remove language that might imply that it is acceptable for family planning.
A1


Equitable Comes Roaring Back
When Richard H. Jenrette was named chairman of the Equitable Life Assurance Society in 1990, the company resembled one of the rundown mansions he is fond of restoring.
The company had a glorious past, but had been neglected and mismanaged to the point of ruin.
But in the last four years, Equitable has been renovated.
And with a rebuilt foundation -- the capital base needed to grow and assure policyholders that their claims would be paid -- Equitable's insurance business is standing on its own and expanding rapidly.


Red Hot News From '92
This is a big week for revelations from the 1992 Presidential campaign.
Two items have emerged casting new light on how George Bush managed to blow one of the biggest leads in American political history.
These bits, one having to do with Dan Quayle and another with the abortion issue, are not earth-shaking.
Rather they fall into the suspicions-confirmed category.
Yes, the strategy and management of the campaign really were as incompetent as they seemed.
One story comes from Mary Matalin in the odd-couple campaign book she wrote with her husband, James Carville.
According to Ms.
Matalin, the Bush team lied when it "continued to insist vehemently" that Vice President Quayle was not pulling down the ticket.
In an excerpt in Newsweek, Ms.
Matalin says that the campaign, which she served as political director, was sitting on astonishing news.
Its surveys showed that for the first time in polling history a Vice-Presidential candidate was not a neutral factor.
Someone produced what Ms.
Matalin calls a "secret memo" for campaign insiders saying that Mr.
Bush could get "a potential 4-6 percentage point net gain . . . by replacing Dan Quayle."


Health Plan Skeptics
Newly released records of Hillary Rodham Clinton's health task force show that Treasury officials expressed early and profound doubts about major parts of the President's plan to overhaul health care.
Article, page A22.


VATICAN HOLDS UP ABORTION DEBATE AT TALKS IN CAIRO
In an unexpected maneuver today that angered many participants in the United Nations population conference, the Vatican was able to to put off for two more days any debate over how to deal with abortion in a plan to stabilize world population in the coming decades.
The Vatican move, apparently supported by several small countries that did not enter the debate until today, in effect reopened a discussion on the language of one paragraph of a 113-page document and sent it back to a committee until Friday.
The action brought sharp condemnation from Egypt, the conference host, and sent delegates from a number of nations into private meetings to try to find a way to force the issue back onto the conference floor over the Vatican's objections.


Raytheon Selects Ingalls, Quinn
The Raytheon Company in Lexington, Mass., said yesterday that it had selected Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson in Boston to handle its consolidated worldwide account, previously divided among three agencies.
Billings were estimated at more than $10 million.


Transit Police Report Decline In a Range of Subway Crimes
Four years after Brian Watkins, a 22-year-old tourist from Utah, was stabbed to death in a mid-Manhattan subway station, the transit police said reports of subway crime in the first six months of 1994 dropped faster than at any time since the start of 1990.
Reported subway felonies dropped 17.9 percent in the first half of this year compared to the first six months of 1993.
That sharp drop means that reported crime has declined 47.3 percent over all since the first six months of 1990, the police said yesterday.


Calling All Rangers (Except for Messier)
When the Rangers arrive at training camp on Friday, there is a possibility that Mark Messier, the captain of the Stanley Cup champions, will be absent because of a contract dispute.
Messier, who will turn 34 on Jan. 18, wants to more than double his current salary of $2.65 million a year.
He is requesting a total of about $18 million for three years, an average of $6 million per season, which would put him among the highest-paid players in the National Hockey League.
He has the right to renegotiate his contract because the Rangers won the championship.


Doo-Wop Stars Try for a Comeback
In the early 1950's, when high school seemed more innocent, the stairwells of Morrisania High School in the Bronx echoed with singing, doo-wop singing to be precise.
This precursor of rock-and-roll, which sprouted in Eastern urban high schools, flourished roughly from the late 40's to the mid-50's.
Among the singing groups were the Chords, the Ravens, the Orioles, the Crickets and the Mellows.
The story of these wildly popular yet undercompensated and quickly forgotten singers is the subject of a National Geographic Explorer documentary Sunday evening on TBS at 9 P.M.


From Twins to Cubs
The Minnesota Twins' general manager, ANDY MacPHAIL, yesterday was offered the chance to run the Chicago Cubs and was waiting for the Twins' owner, CARL POHLAD, to give him permission to take the job.
In the last week, Pohlad has waffled about whether he would let MacPhail out of the final two years of his contract.


Stylish Lighting For Less
WHEN was the last time high design became less expensive?
This fall, retail prices of light fixtures by Luce Plan, an Italian company, will drop by 35 percent to 50 percent.
In June, the company was awarded the 1994 European Community Design Prize, and it recently announced the formation of a new American division, Luce Plan USA.
The division's plans include coordinating competitions among design schools to generate original Luce Plan designs that are "more correct for the American market," said Ivan Luini, its director.


Miller Joins Pistons
The restricted free-agent center OLIVER MILLER signed an offer sheet from the Detroit Pistons yesterday, and the Phoenix Suns have 15 days to match it.


Buddy This, Buddy That, Buddy, Buddy, Buddy
The Giants are already getting sick of hearing about Buddy Ryan. Very sick.
"How many Super Bowls has he won?" said Giants defensive end Michael Strahan.
"I'm serious. How many?"


Royal Bank Canada (RY) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


If It's Early September, It's Time for a Haircut; With School Starting, Barbers Find Wedges, Buzzes and Bowls in Big Demand
If there is one thing that Larry Giglio has learned in 56 years cutting hair, it is that a barber who can survive the day before school can survive anything.
"Give me a wedge," said 11-year-old Steve Fiedeldey.
"Cut it a little higher and less hair than usual. I'm playing football. The helmet has to fit on."


People
*
Susan S. Buckley was named publisher at American Health magazine, New York, succeeding Jayne Jamison, who became publisher at Child magazine, New York.
Ms.
Buckley was previously publisher at Hachette Filipacchi Custom Publishing, New York; Beth-Ann Burzon, formerly a corporate sales director, succeeds her there.


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc.(CBRL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


Crown Hts. Defense Team To Ask Judge to Step Down
Lawyers for Lemrick Nelson Jr., who is charged with violating the civil rights of a Hasidic scholar stabbed to death during the 1991 violence in Crown Heights, said yesterday that they would ask the Federal judge assigned to the case to step down from it today.
They asserted that the judge, David G. Trager of United States District Court in Brooklyn, had a conflict of interest.
They argued that the screening committee that recommended him for the Federal bench was headed by a lawyer who also heads a Jewish group that joined the call for a Federal investigation of the August 1991 violence.
The Hasidic scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, 29, was killed during the four-day disturbance.
The investigation later led to the civil rights prosecution of Mr.
Nelson.


James Clavell, Best-Selling Storyteller of Far Eastern Epics, Is Dead at 69
James Clavell, the author of "Tai-Pan," "Shogun," "Noble House" and other richly detailed historical novels set in the Far East, died on Tuesday in Vevey, Switzerland.
He was 69 and had homes in Vevey and Cap Ferrat, France.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, April.


Security Force Eases Up a Bit In Belfast
Security operations have been scaled down somewhat in Northern Ireland after a week in which the Irish Republican Army has stuck to its unconditional cease-fire, the top British representative in the province confirmed today.
The official, Sir Patrick Mayhew, who is Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, said commanders of the 18,000 British troops and 13,000 members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary had relaxed certain procedures in response to the "reduced threat."


Three Players Take Different Roads to Reach Semifinals
There are different ways of getting into a Grand Slam tennis semifinal.
Yesterday at the United States Open, the three-time champion Steffi Graf, the upset-minded Jana Novotna and Todd Martin, the solitary surviving American among the seeded men, explored them all.
Graf, the defending Open champion, got there by rote with a masterful 6-0, 6-2 dismissal of South Africa's Amanda Coetzer that took 55 minutes and left her plenty of time to escape from the courts, enjoy a meal of crab cakes and take in a movie.


Envoys Back Easing of Yugoslav Sanctions if Foreign Monitors Go to Bosnia
Diplomats from the five-nation "contact group" seeking to end the war in Bosnia said today that they would urge an easing of economic sanctions against Yugoslavia if the authorities there accepted foreign monitors to ascertain that Yugoslav aid to Bosnian Serb forces had stopped.
Under the emerging plan, monitors would be civilians attached to embassies in Belgrade rather than members of a multinational military force.
The Serbian president, Slobodan Milosevic, has told foreign envoys that he cannot accept foreign troops in Yugoslavia.


White House Repairs Put Clintons Across Street
Returning from their 12-day vacation on Martha's Vineyard, the Clintons today found that they could not go home.
With renovations to the White House taking longer than anticipated, the First Family moved across Pennsylvania Avenue to take up residence for the next few days at Blair House, the three-story red brick building that serves as the President's official guest house.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Waived Michael Brandon, defensive lineman.
Signed Bernard Wilson, defensive lineman.
Signed Herschel Currie, cornerback, and Bryan Hooks, defensive lineman, to the practice squad.
Waived Chris Swartz, quarterback, from the practice squad.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Damion Lyons, defensive back, to the practice squad.
Waived P.J.
Killian, linebacker, from the practice squad.


Bosnian Leader Assails the U.N., Saying It Sabotaged Pope's Visit
The Bosnian President said today that the top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia had sabotaged the visit to Sarajevo that Pope John Paul II had planned by exaggerating the dangers and deceiving the Pope.
In an unusually bitter public attack, made the day after the Pope postponed his visit, President Alija Izetbegovic said that the official, Yasushi Akashi, had shown consistent hostility toward the interests of Bosnia and that the Bosnian Government would like to see him replaced.


Brodeur Forgets Past And Looks to Future
Martin Brodeur's lips said he no longer thought of Stephane Matteau's double-overtime goal for the Rangers last May 27 that ended the Devils' quest for the Stanley Cup, but his eyes contradicted his words.
"I replayed the thing a few times in my mind," Brodeur said of the goal that put the Rangers in the Stanley Cup finals, "but I don't think about it anymore."


Irish to Play Michigan, but Will Their Offensive Line?
The system has already produced one national championship in Lou Holtz's eight seasons at Notre Dame, and many of the fans who will start to arrive Thursday would volunteer that at least one other title, and perhaps two, has been earned, if not recognized.
But through all the controversies, the system has been consistent.
A basic element of success in the Holtz era has been the ability to run the football, usually behind a strong offensive line.


After Tough Start, Fordham's Spirit Isn't Defeated
When the Villanova football team departed its bus and walked into the Fordham gym, Ted Bonanno, the Rams' facilities director and crew coach, sized up the visitors.
"They certainly looked bigger than our guys," Bonanno said later.


An Innkeeper's Life, Leaky Roof and All
ON a day last spring that was bright with sunshine, Luba and Bill Robinson finally realized that running a bed and breakfast was going to require more than just sipping port and trading witticisms with guests.
It was the afternoon they discovered water slowly sheeting down the parlor wall at the Whistling Swan Inn, a Queen Anne mansion in Stanhope, N.J., that had been lovingly restored.
The owners were on vacation, and the Robinsons were inn-sitting, so to speak.
So far that week, melting snow had already seeped into the basement, winding a course toward the washers and dryers.
On another day, one of the housekeepers hadn't shown up, leaving Mrs.
Robinson to wash the linen for the 10-bedroom inn by herself while her husband juggled reservations and dining-room duty.


Kohl and Challenger Trade Accusations
In what may be their only face-to-face confrontation before German elections on Oct. 16, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his Social Democratic challenger, Rudolf Scharping, used a parliamentary debate today as a campaign forum, accusing each other of cooperating with supporters of former East Germany's Communist regime.
The Chancellor, who has rejected Mr.
Scharping's challenge to debate him on television, accused Mr.
Scharping of planning to form a Government in Bonn after the election with the support of the Party of Democratic Socialism, the successor to East Germany's Communist Party.
Mr.
Kohl, who is 64, said this had broken a postwar democratic consensus not to cooperate with extremists.


Bosnia: Lead, Don't React
The Clinton Administration's Bosnia policy is under attack from both the Russian Government and the U.S.
Congress.
Meanwhile, Britain and France, with agendas of their own, complicate Washington's problems.
Instead of allowing other nations to set the agenda, President Clinton needs to take the initiative.
That means maintaining his commitment to Congress to seek an end to the U.N. arms embargo against Bosnia next month and adding incentives for other Security Council members to go along.


Population Meeting Is Really About Knowledge
To the Editor:
I am surprised that as the United Nations Conference on Population and Development, meeting in Cairo through Sept. 13, takes the necessary and humane steps to address pressing realities, it is met with opposition that includes major Christian bodies.
Underlying the seemingly complicated debate concerning the United Nations initiatives in family planning seems a very simple question: Is the education of women dangerous?


Buses Have Pluses, Like Lots of Stops
To the Editor:
I heartily disagree with Lucius J. Riccio that "fewer stops would mean more riders" on New York City buses (Op-Ed, Sept. 1).
Having to walk two or three blocks to get an express bus places me closer enough to my destination that I just elect to walk.


U.S., Despite Critics, Is to Expand Taiwan Ties
Completing a policy review of how to treat one of Asia's emerging economic powers, the Clinton Administration announced today that it would expand official ties with Taiwan, while continuing not to recognize it as a country separate from China.
Republican and Democratic lawmakers quickly attacked this split-the-difference policy adjustment as not treating Taiwan with due respect, and the Government of this island of 20 million said the new policy fell short of what was needed.


CAMPBELL SOUP CO. (CPB,N)
Benefiting from growing international sales and cost savings from a cutback in advertising expenditures, the Campbell Soup Company reported a 16.4 percent increase in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday.
Net earnings rose to $142 million, or 57 cents a share, from $122 million, or 48 cents, in the comparable quarter a year ago.


Peace in a Northern Ireland Factory
Patrick R. Dougan's office at the Mackie International factory sits astride the peace line, the wall -- imaginary in some spots, quite real in others -- that divides the Protestant and Roman Catholic neighborhoods of West Belfast.
"If you look over there to the left, you can see houses flying tricolors," Mr.
Dougan said as he pointed out the window, referring to the Irish flag, a symbol of the Catholic minority's demands for a British withdrawal from the province.
"Over there to the right, you can see Union Jacks."


Court Strikes Down Abortion-Protest Buffer Zone
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan yesterday struck down as unconstitutional a court-approved buffer zone to prevent anti-abortion demonstrators from encroaching on an abortion clinic in Buffalo.
The 2-to-1 ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit comes two months after the United States Supreme Court approved a 36-foot sanctuary around a Florida clinic that had been besieged by opponents of abortion.


NCH Corp.(NCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


G.O.P. Leaders Bury Hatchets, But Shallowly
Seeking to end a bitter feud that has divided the New York State Republican Party for months, the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, will endorse State Senator George E. Pataki for governor on Thursday, aides to both men said tonight.
The long-anticipated announcement comes after weeks of delicate negotiations between the two camps over whether Mr.
Pataki, the Republican Party's endorsed candidate, would pledge to support Mr.
Marino's leadership in the Republican-controlled Senate next year if he were elected governor.


Christopher Coe, 41; Wrote Gay Novels
Christopher Coe, a novelist, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 41.
The cause was AIDS, said his sister, Kally Kumler.


Pall Corp.(PLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Rowland Pledges an End To the State's Income Tax
The leading Republican candidate for governor, John G. Rowland, pledged today that he would eliminate Connecticut's personal income tax over the next five years and reduce the state's business and inheritance taxes without raising other taxes to take their place.
"We're not going to be increasing any of the other taxes," Mr.
Rowland said during a television debate here with his opponent in next Tuesday's Republican primary, Secretary of the State Pauline R. Kezer.
"We can cut enough spending."


Hiram Walker is seeking to create a less 'fuddy-duddy' image for its Canadian Club whisky
AFTER years of advertising that stressed the "Canadian" in Canadian Club, Hiram Walker &amp; Sons will now turn to stressing another word in the brand name.
Can you guess that word?
O.K., so the concept of a campaign centering on Canadian Club as "the world's favorite club," as the theme asserts, is hardly startling.
And the ads, which feature ever-changing renderings of the Canadian Club bottle to illustrate convivial surroundings from a nightclub to a jazz club, are hardly revolutionary.


Benetton Loses Appeal
Benetton lost its appeal yesterday over MICHAEL SCHUMACHER's disqualification from the Belgian Grand Prix, while the sport's governing body cleared the Formula I team of equipment tampering in the German Grand Prix.
The International Automobile Federation's World Council ruled against Schumacher for the second time in two weeks.
The German lost an appeal of a two-race suspension last week for ignoring a black flag in the British Grand Prix.
Schumacher, who leads DAMON HILL of Britain by 21 points in the overall standing, finished first in last month's Belgian Grand Prix, but was disqualified after inspectors found a wooden plank under his car.


Cher's Gothic Look, by Mail
CHER has something for her fans.
The singer-actress turned cosmetics and hair-product pitchwoman is starting a line of home furnishings and accessories to be sold by mail.
Why not, considering that Cher has renovated some 15 houses in the last 25 years?
But what could her mail-order furnishings possibly look like?
The options were many, considering all of Cher's personas since the long-haired naivete of "I Got You, Babe" in 1964.
Imagine the possibilities: leopard-skin bedspreads (Classic Cher); cellulite-free foot poufs (Cher Lite); tattoed divans (Chez Cher) and black Bob Mackie-sequined draperies (Cher Deco).
A meeting with Bill Sammeth, Cher's personal manager, took place in a hotel suite with a view of Central Park.
His client, out on a shopping spree, sent over a tie for him from Barneys New York.
It was her day off from shooting "Faithful," a movie in which she stars with Ryan O'Neal.
It seemed likely that Cher's collection would be the sheets and towels that are the touchstone of new celebrity product lines.
But no.
Here was a mail-order catalogue with a theme: medieval times.
"Cher thinks that people are getting into a more romantic look," Mr.
Sammeth said as he flipped through the extravagantly photographed catalogue of the collection, called Sanctuary.
The book opens with a picture of a stony, dungeonlike space dimly lighted by torches.
There is a lamp with a chain-mail shade, a wine-velvet ottoman roped like a monk, wrought-iron bedsteads with Gothic arches, frosted glass goblets that Cher designed and innumerable votive candles and incense holders.
"Cher picked every single item either from her own home or from things she's seen around in stores, museums, wherever," Mr.
Sammeth said.
Prices are moderate, topping out at $1,150 for a Gothic-style metal-and-wood bed.
The catalogue is full of three-fors (as in one perfume bottle for $28; three for $70) and clever products that a Harvard M.B.A. might spin off.
For instance, the Moorish-style pattern taken from a tile has been adapted into both a trivet and a box made of chocolate.
The catalogue, or as Cher prefers to call it, a "coffeetable book you can order from," opens with a personal letter.
Cher writes: "I have worked hard, used my own money and, basically, put this baby together with sweat, long hours, late nights and a few dedicated fellow workers in my own home (which looks kinda like a warehouse now)."
The catalogue will be mailed to some 350,000 people whose names have been culled from 35 mailing lists, among them Horchow's, Robert Redford's Sundance collection and those of various museums.
To select items, Cher and her scouts combed through catalogues, trade shows, boutiques and showrooms.
In London, she met Clyde Wainright, a curator at the Victoria and Albert Museum, and became entranced with his recent exhibition on the work of A. W. Pugin, a 19th-century architect who popularized pointy Gothic arches for country estates.
Mitchell Gold, a furniture manufacturer in High Point, N.C., has provided several pieces for the catalogue, including a velvet fainting chaise that Madame Recamier would have been happy to collapse upon.
Mr.
Gold said he thought Cher was taking her new line of business seriously in terms of prices and quality.
"They're going slow; there's no gimmick," he said without a hint of irony.
"Her main thing is that she does not want to disappoint people."
Not surprisingly, Cher's public relations representatives say the same, adding that her image of the Sanctuary customer is a women between 20 and 45.
That explains the jewelry.
There is a trove of it; many heavy chains carry Maltese crosses.
"Cher has these on right now as we speak," Mr.
Sammeth said reverently, pointing out a pair of cross-shaped earrings.
But the catalogue is not all femme-fatale stuff.
There is also a faux-bone plastic knife set, reproduced from Cher's own kitchenware.
The medieval theme, one woman's commitment to a look that had its day eight centuries ago, never lets up.
And it's coming by mail at the end of September, just in time for Christmas shopping.
In a moment of candor, Cher's manager admitted that it had not yet been decided how many of each item to produce.
He added, "Cher thinks it will either be a hit, or the biggest memento she's ever bought."


The Pop Life
MTV Awards
The MTV Video Music Awards, which are to be held at Radio City Music Hall tonight and broadcast live on MTV, have become one of the most eagerly anticipated music awards shows on television.
With the Rolling Stones, Bruce Springsteen, Aerosmith and Snoop Doggy Dogg to perform, and Roseanne the host, the 11th annual ceremony has a lineup that should help it win not only high ratings and sponsors galore but also status as a legitimate awards show.
But is the award itself important?


Population Meeting Is Really About Knowledge; Rightful Place in Debate
To the Editor:
William Safire argues in "Vatican Vs. V.P.: Papal Population Politics" (column, Sept. 5) that it is "overreaching" for an American bishop to "predict the political behavior of co-religionists." Mr.
Safire is responding to Bishop James McHugh's warning that Roman Catholics might desert the Democratic Party if President Clinton continues to finesse support for abortion at the United Nations population conference.
"This papacy," Mr.
Safire says, had better apologize to the President for threatening to adhere to its beliefs.


Where to Find It
"SOMETIMES it's kind of fun to go out and find people who don't normally do what you need to have done," said Barbara Hill, an artist and movie set designer in Houston.
And that is precisely what Ms.
Hill did when she wanted a slick, lacquered look for a collection of wood and metal furniture from the 1940's and 50's for her house.
After buying automobile paints in fuchsias, purples and blues, she took her furniture to a nearby auto-body shop and asked to have it sprayed.
"They had never had a request like that," she said.
But they did it, right down to the old, curved wood sofa legs.
"I wanted something one of a kind," Ms.
Hill said.
"And I didn't want to spend a lot of money."


Russians Seal Nuclear Sub On Sea Floor
Russian divers have completed the first phase of a deep sea operation to seal holes in a sunken submarine to prevent its corroding nuclear torpedoes from leaking plutonium and other radioactive material into the North Atlantic, the head of the expedition said yesterday.
Diving more than a mile under the waves in a pair of manned sub mersibles, the Russian team succeeded in attaching nine large seals to the bow of the submarine, the Komsomolets.
The first phase of the expedition began in June and ended in August.
The sealing job is to be completed next year.


Sharing the Load Isn't Sherrard's Style
While most of the attention this week has been focused on the rotating Giants linebackers and Buddy Ryan's big mouth, there has been something else brewing.
Mike Sherrard is extremely concerned about the way the Giants are rotating their receivers -- the way the team does with its middle linebackers -- and has gone to Coach Dan Reeves over what he sees as a diminishing role.
This is not to portray Sherrard as a complainer.
In fact, Sherrard, who is the Giants' best receiver and the team's big-play threat, was hesitant to talk about the situation.
He made it clear that as long as the team is winning that's what matters the most.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED HOLDINGS INC., Atlanta, has signed a definitive agreement to acquire Auto-Trans, Canada's largest transporter of motor vehicles, in a transaction worth about $65 million.
AMERICAN TRAVELLERS CORP., Bensalem, Pa., a provider of long-term care and home health care insurance, has signed a letter of intent to acquire J. C. Penney Life Insurance Co., Plano, Tex., a unit of the J. C. Penney Co.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


Expanding Duties At Ogilvy &amp; Mather
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York said yesterday that it would expand the duties of several senior managers in Europe to help focus its worldwide development and planning.
Harry Reid, 49, the chairman of Ogilvy Europe, was promoted to the newly created post of chief operating officer of Ogilvy Worldwide.
He will continue to be based in London.
Before being named chairman of Europe in 1990, Mr.
Reid had headed Ogilvy's Asian operations for five years.


Top Advocate On Health Care Urges a Delay
Representative Jim McDermott, the Washington Democrat who rallied 85 colleagues behind his proposal for a Government-paid health care system far more sweeping than President Clinton's plan, urged Congress today to abandon all efforts at health care changes this year.
Mr.
McDermott, who had reluctantly gone along with efforts to develop other versions of legislation to insure all Americans, said none of the incremental plans now being considered would "even bring us close" to a system that offered universal coverage, fairness and cost controls.


Dart Board Aims to Avert Showdown
The Dart Group Corporation decided late today that an executive committee of its outside directors would run the company, in a move to avert an immediate showdown in the bitter family fight between Herbert H. Haft, its chairman, and his son, Ronald S. Haft, its president.
The two feuding executives supported the action "as a means of maintaining stability while efforts are under way to resolve disputes," the company said.


ADVANCE IN TRADE MADE WITH JAPAN
American and Japanese trade officials said today that they were making progress toward agreements to open Japan's controlled markets in insurance and government purchasing.
But they said that talks on getting Japan to buy more American cars and auto parts were still deadlocked and that no accord was likely anytime soon.


Troubled Precinct Absorbs Another Blow
At the epicenter of a police corruption scandal for months, the 30th Precinct in Harlem suffered another surge of sadness and grief yesterday over the suicide of one of its own.
Officers searched for black bunting to hang in the station house, to put alongside the funeral announcements and the memorial bouquet resting on the front desk.
The Friday night office jaunt to Atlantic City, which officers organized as part of an effort to build up morale, was called off.


Pact May Open Phone Lines to Cuba
Clinton Administration officials and telecommunications companies said today that they were close to reaching an agreement with Cuba that would restore full telephone service with the island.
Largely because of the American trade embargo, only two telephone circuits -- both routed through Italy -- are available for calls between Cuba and the United States.
Officials of several phone companies said there could be more than 500 circuits once full telephone service was restored.


James Maloney, 49, Ex-Leader Of Party and an Owner of Team
James F. Maloney, a former New Jersey Democratic chairman and one of the people who brought minor-league baseball back to Trenton after 44 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Haddonfield.
He was 49.
The cause was a heart attack, officials of the team said.


Ohio State Missing Star
Ohio State's star wide receiver, JOEY GALLOWAY, who passed up the National Football League to return to the Buckeyes for his senior year, was suspended yesterday for two games for accepting money from a financial planner.
Galloway tied a school record with 11 touchdown receptions last year.


Treasury Had Doubts About Health Plan, Papers Show
From the first weeks of the Clinton Administration, Treasury officials expressed profound doubts about major parts of the President's plan to overhaul the nation's health care system, White House records made public today show.
Today, the Administration released 234 boxes of working papers of Hillary Rodham Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform, after fighting for 18 months to keep the boxes, each containing about 2,500 pages, secret.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 2
Aug. 26
Sept. 3
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.2
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.3
Gasoline stocks
205.7
209.4
202.9
Distillate stocks
136.3
132.6
126.3
Crude imports, daily
8.4
7.2
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.1
1.5
Crude stocks
321.6
322.9
339.7
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
94.7
95.6
92.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Repeat Sex Offenders Should Serve for Life
To the Editor:
"Megan's Legacy" (editorial, Aug. 31) was a thoughtful examination of strategies for handling repeat sexual predators in our communities.
New Jersey is just one of the states grappling with this serious problem.
As the original authors of legislation to protect against sexual predators, we are also concerned about the release of convicted sex offenders.
And we are also aware of the concerns voiced by police and parents about letting repeat offenders go free.


Black Heroes Commemorated


Three Congressional Endorsements
In three metropolitan area Congressional districts, victory in the Democratic primary on Sept. 13 will be tantamount to election because of the overwhelmingly Democratic registration.
Here are our recommendations in these races.
Manhattan-Bronx, 15th District: Charles Rangel, the dean of New York's Congressional delegation, faces two challengers in only his second primary contest during 24 years in office.
One of the challengers is Adam Clayton Powell 4th, son of the famous Harlem politician unseated by Mr.
Rangel in 1970.


Hot, Hot Shades For Instant Cool
LIKE sneaker designs, sunglass styles have a way of suddenly becoming the popular rage.
Whether one intends to "bust fat air" snowboarding down Mount Hood or do lunch at Vong, the frame of the moment seems to be the E Wire by Oakley Inc. of Irvine, Calif.
The design melds 60's oval granny glasses and a backswept effect and was created by Jim Jannard, Oakley's founder.


Fierce Emotion Now Introspection
Brando  Songs My Mother Taught Me  By Marlon Brando  With Robert Lindsey.
Illustrated. 468 pages.
Random House. $25.
As Stanley, the brutish destroyer of innocence in "A Streetcar Named Desire"; as Johnny, the brooding gang leader in "The Wild One"; as Ken, the anxious war veteran in "The Men," and as Terry, the ex-boxer who makes a heroic stand in "On the Waterfront," Marlon Brando brought a fierce new emotionality to the screen, a psychological realism that seemed to sum up the postwar yearnings and discontents of a generation.
As Richard Schickel, the author of an illuminating study of Mr.
Brando's work, once put it: an "untutored, unspoken sensitivity informed most of Brando's early roles, and the suspense in all of them (other than 'Streetcar' and, of course, 'Julius Caesar') revolved around whether or not he would acknowledge his best self, articulate his aspirations and his pain. In all of them he eventually did."


Women's Channels Are Next For Cable
Televised women's sports, all too often the lower-rated stepchildren of men's events, are about to become a battleground between two groups seeking to launch women's sports cable networks over the next year.
On one side is the Women's Sports Network, an entrepreneurial effort of Mike Weisman, a former executive producer of NBC Sports, and Terry Kassel, a former senior vice president of Major League Baseball Productions.
The venture, they said, is backed by "tens of millions of dollars" in capital.


CHRONICLE
They waste no time in tackling weighty issues in Washington, so it didn't strike anyone as unusual to hear WALTER F. MONDALE, the United States Ambassador to Japan, deliver a talk on trade to an audience of more than 350 people at the National Press Club on Tuesday.
Despite the seriousness of his topic, he did manage to inject some levity in his remarks when he described his first year as Ambassador.


2 Like-Minded Liberals, 1 Job. Who'll Win?
Under a lowering sun on upper Broadway, a volunteer for Thomas K. Duane was trying to convince work-weary Upper West Siders, rushing home with arms filled with groceries, why her man would make a better Congressman than Jerrold L. Nadler.
"Jerry's good," the volunteer, Nina de Fels, said hurriedly, as she shoved a flier into one woman's grocery bag, stuffed full with onions.
"I like Jerry, but Tom's terrific." She emphasized "terrific," apparently the only word she could find to distinguish the two.


AT HOME WITH: Dennis Hopper; A Wild Man Is Mellowing
THIS isn't the sleepiest burg in the world.
It's got about 62,000 people in it, and it draws tourists with its proximity to the ocean and its surrounding area rife with museums and historical sites.
The ambiance in its residential neighborhoods is Southern-style lush.
It has a growing importance in the business of motion picture production.
And it's Michael Jordan's hometown.
But walking the streets on a steamy day, you wonder what a guy like Dennis Hopper could find here to keep himself interested.
Still, here he is, climbing out the window of his newly renovated downtown loft apartment and onto the roof of the building, a five-story, 61,000-square-foot behemoth he owns that was once a Masonic temple, built, he said, in 1887.
Its pinkish, sandstone exterior is striking, particularly in the context of the bland strip of commercial real estate on which it sits.
The ground floor most recently housed a discount drugstore, the aisles of which are now dark, filthy and forbidding, and the rest of it, too, though impressive in its dimensions, remains rather glamorously decrepit.


U.S.-Cuban Talks Suspended As Envoy Returns to Havana
Talks between the United States and Cuba on halting the exodus of Cuban boat people toward Florida were suspended today when the chief Cuban negotiator, Ricardo Alarcon, abruptly broke off discussions and flew back to Havana to consult his Government.
But the rest of the Cuban delegation remained in New York and the spokesman for the American delegation, David T. Johnson, said the negotiations could resume as early as Friday.


New Training Videos for Officers
As a grand jury continues to investigate the death of a Staten Island man in police custody, the Police Department said yesterday it would begin showing a new series of training videos next week to try to prevent excessive force and deaths of suspects in custody.
Among the suggestions will be more widespread use of pepper spray instead of physical force, Chief of Personnel Michael Julian said.
The spray was used only 100 times in the last year in the 12,000 incidents in which force was necessary, he said.


Success in School Called Family Effort
LAST week, Nancy Romanchek had a bad dream: she was in the seventh grade, and on the first day of school, she forgot her locker combination and lost her class schedule.
But she's not among those going back to school; Mrs.
Romanchek, 45, of Langhorne, Pa., is jittery about the new school year for her two sons, James, 11, and Todd, 7.


Police Striving To Find Ways Of Combating Rising Suicides
They were mainly young, in their 20's and 30's, police officers just settling into a dangerous and, many of them would often say, rewarding job.
But one by one this year they died sudden deaths -- not, as they might have assumed, in combat with those who have made fear an enduring part of city life, but by their own hands.
This week the number of police officers who committed suicide in 1994 reached 10, matching the record set in 1987.
For four of the last five years in New York City, suicide has been the leading cause of death among officers.
Before two officers killed themselves on Tuesday, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton had already stepped up counseling efforts.
Now those efforts are being intensified as officials struggle to better understand the deaths.


U.S. Reassures Seoul on Nuclear Arms Talks With North Korea
With American and North Korean negotiators soon to resume their talks on Pyongyang's nuclear weapons program, the Clinton Administration is trying to reassure South Korea that it is not overly eager to reach an accommodation.
In a news conference today with South Korea's Foreign Minister, Han Sung Joo, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced that he will visit Seoul and said no resolution of the nuclear issue was possible unless the North was willing to improve relations with the South.


Arthur Robins, 86, Tuberculosis Expert
Dr.
Arthur B. Robins, a former director of New York City's Bureau of Tuberculosis Control, died on Saturday at the Park Vista Nursing Home in Fullerton, Calif., where he lived.
He was 86.
The cause was renal failure, said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the bureau's current director.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Japan and the United States are making progress on trade.
The two nations' negotiators said that they were moving toward agreements to open Japan's markets in insurance and government purchasing, but that talks on getting Japan to buy more American cars and auto parts were still deadlocked.  [ Page A1. ]
The huge task of desegregating Northern Ireland's economy and making opportunity more equitable can be seen at the Mackie factory in Belfast.
The plant, once a bastion of Protestant employment, has sought to hire Roman Catholics.
But as business leaders look to breathe new life into the economy, employment discrimination remains a deep-rooted problem.  [ D1. ]


Prices of Treasuries Fall On New Inflation Fears
Prices of Treasury securities closed above their lows of the session yesterday but still fell modestly as traders reacted to higher commodity prices and a Government report that labor costs rose in the second quarter.
Both reports fanned investors' fears about inflation, but the concern was partly offset by a steady dollar in the currency markets.


Essay; Imagine A G.O.P. Senate
"Seven More in '94" was the wild-and-woolly slogan perpetrated in this space almost a year ago, in a report of a long-shot Republican chance to capture the Senate.
Back then, the switch of seven seats to give the G.O.P. a 51-to-49 majority was seen as a partisan's pipe dream.
Now, as the '94 campaign begins in earnest, you hear George Mitchell, the retiring Democratic leader, predicting a loss of three or four seats (not including his own) while Bob Dole (busily creating delegate i.o.u.'s in the Northwest this week) predicts Republican gains of six or seven.


Journal; Trans-Atlantic Fantasy
America is so loud it's hard to get far enough away to escape its din.
Even Timbuktu may at this moment be colonized by Burger King tie-ins to "The Lion King." So on a vacation during which I hoped to purge my mind of all things Whitewater, Brentwood and Presley-Jackson -- but had scant expectation of actually doing so -- I was at first startled and then delighted to discover an America-free zone in a most unexpected place not all that far from home: England.
Maybe England's aversion to hard American news reflects the triumph of Rupert Murdoch's scorched-earth campaign to strip journalism of anything that might resemble fact.
Maybe it's because every British editor of any skill has already immigrated to New York to work for Conde Nast.
Whatever the reason, it is now almost impossible to find cogent information about what's happening in the United States in even the upmarket London newspapers.
For an American looking to get away from it all, even a week in urban England is tantamount to a month in the country.
Without CNN.


Economic Scene; A study says global warming may help U.S. agriculture.
REMEMBER global warming?
For the policy wonks, that was yesterday's worry; they have moved on to nuclear proliferation, ethnic slaughter and the reliability of DNA tests in identifying O. J. Simpson's blood.
But the near-consensus that civilization is playing high-stakes games with Mother Nature has not changed since the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
Nor has Washington's belated commitment to reduce the emissions of so-called greenhouse gases, mostly carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels, to 1990 levels by the year 2000.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Gauging Rain
After the thunder and lightning have ended, how can you be sure that enough rain has fallen to satisfy thirsty plants?
Rarely, if ever, is the amount of rainfall quite what you think it is.
And with this year's alternating heavy and light showers, it's particularly hard to know just when to water again, unless you faithfully monitor the weather reports.
It is easier to use your own rain gauge.


Irish to Play Michigan, but Will Their Offensive Line?
The system has already produced one national championship in Lou Holtz's eight seasons at Notre Dame, and many of the fans who will start to arrive Thursday would volunteer that at least one other title, and perhaps two, has been earned, if not recognized.
But through all the controversies, the system has been consistent.
A basic element of success in the Holtz era has been the ability to run the football, usually behind a strong offensive line.


Times Plans On-Line Test For Classified Advertising
For the first time, The New York Times will offer its help-wanted classified advertising electronically late this year.
Executives of the newspaper said yesterday that The Times would begin a six-month test during which help-wanted advertisements that appeared in the newspaper would also be available on the Internet, the worldwide web of computer networks.


A Vacation Ends: The Burden of Bosnia on Clinton
Even as the Administration tries in talks with Cuba to put one crisis to rest, senior aides to President Clinton say he faces more troubles abroad this fall, with tensions over Bosnia about to jump back to center stage.
The officials say they harbor no illusion that the forces that have pulled the United States toward a more prominent role in Bosnia can be kept dormant much longer.
They cite a volatile mix of Serbian stubbornness in resisting peace plans, Russia's independence in easing its pressure on the Serbs and a desire in Congress to end the arms embargo on the Bosnian Government -- all of which could increase the pressure for American action, pressure that will only intensify as the November elections near.


Isles Relent and Hogue's Holdout Ends
Benoit Hogue is a no-show no longer.
The Islanders and Hogue came to terms this afternoon, ending the 27-year-old forward's three-day holdout.
Hogue passed his physical this afternoon and was scheduled to be ready to skate in practice on Thursday morning.


A Romantic's Romantic In a Romantic Mood
Even in a cabaret world that is the last bastion of traditional pop romanticism, Ann Hampton Callaway stands out as a romantic's romantic.
With her lush, throbbing voice, smooth long-lined phrasing, and near-tearful commitment to love songs, she treats classic pop ballads like precious jewels.
And in her fine new cabaret act at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), she is at her most persuasive singing standards by Rodgers and Hart ("Where or When"), Sigmund Romberg and Dorothy Fields ("Close as Pages in a Book") and others.
The high point of Tuesday's opening-night show was a seamless medley of Stephen Sondheim's "Not a Day Goes By" and Jule Styne and Carolyn Leigh's "Killing Time," in which Ms.
Callaway transcended her uusual reserve and belted with an unaccustomed ferocity.


F.D.A. Blocks Some Shipments Of Blood Products From Canada
Federal Health officials have halted shipments of some blood products from Canada after a Food and Drug Administration inspector found substandard procedures and sloppy record keeping at a Red Cross blood center in Toronto.
The agency's order said the "inspection raised concerns regarding the operations of all Canadian Red Cross establishments." No Canadian blood is transfused in the United States, officials said.


Missing Boat: Perils in a Life at Sea, and on Land
The women of this fishing community have a covenant with their men.
They don't tell their husbands how much they worry when the men are at sea, for days and sometimes weeks on end.
And the men don't tell their wives about the waves crashing over the deck in 50-mile-per-hour gales, or the ice on the masts in winter, or the freighters they can't see in the fog.
And they never, never admit that sometimes they are afraid.


Using That Higher Math
JHANE BARNES would like her 11th-grade trigonometry teacher at Timonium High School near Baltimore to see her now.
"I wanted to be an astrophysicist, but he told me I'd never be able to get the math," she said.
"He'd be surprised to know I'm using the stuff every day today."
Ms.
Barnes, 40, who has won awards for her fabrics for Knoll Textiles, produced computer-generated designs based on fractal geometry for her spring 1995 fashion collection.


Add Rugs to the Three R's
DAVID SHAW NICHOLLS, a designer from Bellshill, Scotland, associates rugs with his earliest memory of learning language: at age 4, he read his first book, a World War I-era edition of fairy tales and fables, while sprawling on the hearth rug. (The illustrations from the book inspired the designer's 1993 china patterns for Swid-Powell.)
Mr.
Nicholls, 38, who worked as the project architect with Ettore Sottsass Associati and studied at the Domus Academy, both in Milan, Italy, has come down to earth with a line of graphic and boldly colored area rugs in tufted or flat weave styles that are produced in India.
Convinced, he said, that "a nice rug is the most important piece of furniture to a child," Mr.
Nicholls created four styles with the alphabet, numbers and music as themes, intended to stimulate an interest in reading.
"I'm already ribbing my 4-year-old about not growing up to be a video junkie," he said, referring to his son, Ross.


Near a Dark Stadium, the Spirit of Baseball Lives
Just as George Steinbrenner so often warned might happen, Yankee Stadium these days is just another vacant building in the South Bronx.
The House That Ruth Built didn't go dark for the reasons the team's owner predicted: the fans' fear of crime and other urban demons.
The players' strike shut the stadium, of course.
But in a way the strike has cleared the air in the South Bronx of all that talk about the Yankees moving to New Jersey.


Focus of White House Inquiry Sharpens
Federal investigators have found evidence that the former head of the White House travel office deposited money that news organizations paid for Presidential trips into his own bank account and may have diverted some of it to his personal use, law-enforcement officials said today.
About $55,000 in such money was deposited into the bank account of the former official, Billy R. Dale, from 1988 to 1991, the officials said, referring to a review of Mr.
Dale's bank records.


Stewart Enterprises Inc.(STEI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on Tuesday, about trends in advertising, marketing and media, misstated the first name of the announcer in commercials for Burger King and the New York State Lottery.
He is Colter Rule, not Colton Rule.


Ruling May Further Open U.S. Auto Market to Japan
In a decision that could help Japanese auto makers re-enter the two-door sport-utility vehicle market in the United States, a Federal appeals court ruled today that the two-door Nissan Pathfinder was wrongly classified as a cargo vehicle, subjecting it to a 25 percent import tariff.
Instead, the court ruled, United States Customs should treat the two-door Pathfinder as consumers would -- as a passenger vehicle -- and subject it only to the 2.5 percent tariff for imported cars.
Partly because of the steep cargo tariff, which was imposed in March 1989, Nissan stopped importing the two-door Pathfinder in 1990; also, the Toyota Motor Company stopped importing a two-door sport-utility vehicle.


Bowne &amp; Co. (BNE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Max Kaminsky, 85, A Jazz Trumpeter With the Top Bands
Max Kaminsky, a trumpeter associated with the Chicago school of jazz musicians of the 1920's and 30's, died on Tuesday at Castle Point Veterans Administration Medical Center in Castle Point, N.Y.
He was 85.
The cause was a stroke, said his wife, Virginia, of Hopewell Junction, N.Y..


P.B.A. Chief Defends Officer Who Shot Transit Policeman
Saying he wanted to "set the record straight" for an off-duty New York City police officer who mistakenly opened fire on a plainclothes transit officer last month, the president of the police union said yesterday that the off-duty officer was completely focused on the other man's gun and shot in "response to a life-threatening gesture."
Phil Caruso, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, offered what he said was Officer Peter Del-Debbio's account of the Aug. 22 shooting on an East Side subway platform in which he critically wounded Transit Officer Desmond Robinson, whom Officer Del-Debbio mistook for a criminal.


Exxon Oil Spill Devastated a Way of Life
To the Editor:
Five years after the Exxon Valdez oil spill, all is not well in Alaska's Prince William Sound.
I live here and know firsthand the environmental degradation, economic devastation and social upheaval it caused.
Exxon ruined far more than the sound's fishing.
Exxon ruined a way of life.


More Records Fall, but Not for U.S.
Outside the Foro Italico, the Tiber river lazily follows its serpentine course, and the steamy city streets are only slowly coming back to life after summer vacation.
Inside the Foro Italico, the mood is not nearly so sleepy.
Inside, everyone seems to be in a hurry, particularly young, once-anonymous women from China.


Buses Have Pluses, Like Lots of Stops; Credit Ralph Kramden
To the Editor:
The subheadline "fewer stops would mean more riders" (Op-Ed, Sept. 1) calls to mind that this suggestion was first made by New York's premier bus driver, Ralph Kramden, Jackie Gleason's alter ego on television's "Honeymooners."


Calendar: Tours, Talks And Antiques Shows
East Side Architecture  Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street; (212) 838-6878.
A walking tour focusing on turn-of-the-century carriage houses will be offered on Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets are $10.
Call for reservations and meeting location.


Time to Change Chords
St.
Louis Blues goaltender CURTIS JOSEPH, disappointed with the lack of progress in contract negotiations, said he will play out his option this season.
Joseph is in the final year of a three-year, $3 million deal he signed during the 1992-93 season.
If he and the Blues do not reach agreement on a new contract before June 30, he will become a free agent.


This Young Star Has a Pro Gleam
Martina Hingis has an endorsement deal with Yonex, which provides her tennis racquets, and with Tacchini, which supplies her shoes and clothes.
She is represented by International Management Group, the leading management company in the sport of tennis, and she recently bought herself a horse.
Hingis also happens to have braces and has been in the eighth grade for all of two weeks.
But with her 14th birthday just a few weeks away, she is poised to become the newest phenom on the women's professional circuit, with her tour debut scheduled for Oct. 3 in Zurich, Switzerland, her home country.


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc.(NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Education Board Extends Takeover of Jersey City Schools
The Jersey City public schools will remain under state control for at least another year, the State Board of Education decided today.
In an action that had been expected, the board voted unanimously to extend its five-year takeover of the 29,000-student district until the system can meet state certification standards.
The State Education Commissioner, Dr.
Leo F. Klagholz, said that process would take at least a year, and could take significantly longer.


CHRONICLE
A court in Paris has legally recognized an 18-year-old woman as the daughter of Yves Montand, Reuters reported yesterday.
Mr.
Montand, the French singer and actor, who died in 1991 at the age of 70, had repeatedly refused to submit to blood tests in connection with claims that he was the father of the woman, AURORE DROSSART.
The court made its ruling without a blood test, based on other evidence.


Winnebago Industries
Shares of Winnebago Industries, the maker of recreational vehicles, dropped sharply yesterday after it announced that fourth-quarter earnings would be lower than expected.
After the market closed yesterday, Winnebago said problems with suppliers had hurt vehicle production.


What If A River Runs Through It?
The concept that an individual or a club can own a navigable river, in New York State at least, was put to rest recently in a ruling by a state appeals court.
The decision ended a history of litigation in which the Adirondack League Club sued the Sierra Club on grounds of trespass over a 12-mile stretch of the South Branch of the Moose River.
Neil Woodworth, counsel to the Adirondack Mountain Club, the large outdoor organization that backed the defendant's position, described the Aug. 19 ruling as "a landmark decision."


INSIDE
Re-examining an Embargo
If Serbia accepts monitors to insure an end to its aid for Bosnian Serbs, the U.S. and other nations will urge an easing of sanctions.
Page A12.
A Political Handicap, Too
A Chinese man who lost his legs under a tank in Tiananmen has been barred from international games for the handicapped in Beijing.
Page A3.
Grief in a Fishing Town
In a Massachusetts town where the sea binds men and women in an anxious pact, hope faded for four fishermen missing off Cape Cod.
Page A16.
Suicides on the Force
One by one, 10 New York police officers have died sudden deaths this year -- not in the fight against crime, but by their own hands.
Page B1.


New Shot By I.B.M. At Rivals
I.B.M., hoping to revive its desktop software business and exploit a delayed product introduction by the Microsoft Corporation, is about to introduce a more powerful, consumer-friendlier version of the OS/2 software operating system for personal computers.
Although I.B.M.'s OS/2 software has been highly regarded by a core of technically proficient computer users since its introduction in 1987, it has been overwhelmed by the popularity of Microsoft's Windows operating system software.
But now, in light of recent announcements by Microsoft that the next version of Windows would be delayed until next spring at the earliest, some analysts see a chance for I.B.M. to gain ground.
Tough Fight Ahead
The critically acclaimed improvements to OS/2, some of which were disclosed by I.B.M. today, include built-in, easy access to the Internet, the global web of computer networks.
Even so, any market-share gains by OS/2 will be hard won, analysts caution.


No Headline
"I brought my grandson here to see what can happen in gangs. That's a baby in there and I'm scared to death for mine." -- CATHERINE WILDER, at the wake for a Chicago boy killed by his street gang.  [ A1:3. ]


In Memoir, Barbara Bush Recalls Private Trials of a Political Life
Bending, if not quite breaking the silence on political issues that she kept in 30 years of public life, Barbara Bush says in a new autobiography that she disagrees with her husband's stances on abortion and gun control, thinks Patrick J. Buchanan's "America-first" speech at the 1992 Republican convention sent a racist message and believed that Bill Clinton "did not have a chance" to defeat George Bush in the last Presidential election.
In an otherwise rosy depiction of life as the helpmate of a rising politician, Mrs.
Bush also states, almost as an aside, that she was so deeply depressed in the mid-1970's that she sometimes stopped her car on highway shoulders for fear that she might deliberately crash the vehicle into a tree or an oncoming auto.


Jets' Newest Challenge: Elway and the Broncos
No rest for the weary.
After the Jets thrashed Jim Kelly and the Buffalo Bills, 23-3, in the season opener, this week's challenge is John Elway and the Denver Broncos.
Elway could be more dangerous than Kelly, who was sacked three times and intercepted twice by the Jets.


A Top Official Is Promoted At Kidder
Michael D. Madden, a longtime executive at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company who returned with much fanfare a year ago, was named yesterday to a post that puts him in line to become president of the beleaguered firm sometime next year.
In an internal memorandum received by employees yesterday, Dennis D. Dammerman, Kidder's interim chairman and chief executive, and Denis Nayden, president and chief operating officer, said Mr.
Madden had been appointed to the new position of executive vice president in charge of global origination.


On a Harlem Block, Hope Is Swallowed by Decay
There are days that Robert LeShawn Garland, a lanky 18-year-old with a yen to fly airplanes, can look out his window and spy his father waiting in a snaking line to buy crack.
Once their eyes met, and his father hung his head.
On the floor below, Donna Williams often starts her day with a beer, trying to beat the blues.
She has five children, she just turned 40, and she has been on welfare for more than a decade.
From her living room, she can see an empty lot and rows of boarded windows.


Paris Opera Reaches Pact With Conductor
The Paris Opera dismisses its music director.
A French court rules that it has no right to do so.
The music director shows up to conduct rehearsals.
His path is blocked by the opera house's director.
The court fines the house $9,500 a day.
An appeals court is called on to give its verdict.
Over the last month, the bizarre power struggle between the Paris Opera and its music director, Myung-Whun Chung, has come to resemble opera bouffe, with lawyers dodging in and out of court and the main actors exchanging insults while the audience watches with detached amusement.


6 Officers Hurt as Police Cars Collide in a Chase


Simpson Agrees to Give Up Custody of His Children for Now
O.
J.
Simpson will allow the parents of his slain former wife to have legal custody of their two grandchildren until charges that he murdered their mother are resolved, according to an agreement filed with an Orange County Court.
If approved by the court, as is expected, custody of the two children will be given to Louis H. Brown and Juditha Brown, who have cared for the children since the slayings of their mother, Nicole Brown Simpson.


Events: Harvest Fair, Herb and Orchid Sales
A Fair for Children  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
A children's harvest fair, centered around the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden, which is tended by children, will be held Saturday, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Events will include arts and crafts for children, games, entertainment and programs to explore flowers, plants and insects.
Garden admission is $3; students, those 65 and older and children 6 to 16, $1; activity tickets for the children's harvest programs are $4 for those 5 and older, and $2 for children 2 to 4.


Woyzeck, as Puppet, Still Yanked Around by Life
Woyzeck is back.
History says Johan Christian Woyzeck died long ago, a real man beheaded for a real crime of passion.
He stabbed his lover, the widow Woost, to death with a knife.


92d St. Y Turning From the Classics To Music That Pays
With neither the pretense nor the purse of cultural palaces across town, the 92d Street Y has for years been a crucial address for serious music in New York, with an importance far beyond its modest setting.
It introduced talents like Dawn Upshaw and Yo-Yo Ma, featured intriguing music without much concern for commercial success, and offered programs that broadened musical scholarship.
But troubled by deficits and doubts over high-brow culture altogether, the Y is turning to community service and music that pays.
Last year, the Y split off the New York Chamber Symphony, created in 1977 to crown the Y's presence on the classical music scene.
After a few years of transitional support, the 46-player symphony will have to fend for contributions itself, and may well seek a new home.


CHRONICLE
They waste no time in tackling weighty issues in Washington, so it didn't strike anyone as unusual to hear WALTER F. MONDALE, the United States Ambassador to Japan, deliver a talk on trade to an audience of more than 350 people at the National Press Club on Tuesday.
Despite the seriousness of his topic, he did manage to inject some levity in his remarks when he described his first year as Ambassador.


Eilat Journal; It's Israel, Where Teen-Agers Cram for the Army
Like many teen-agers, Sebastian Cabots is wary of the use of military might.
He says Israel's invasion of Lebanon a decade ago "wasn't justified" and calls the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip "a political mistake."
"We have suffered a moral decline," he said.
"All these are strikes against Israel and the army."


New President Is Snubbed By Opposition In Mexico
Snubbing an invitation by President-elect Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon to help plan a new government, the two major opposition parties have shown no sign that they are ready to work with him or even accept his victory, more than two weeks after the election.
Anxiety over the unsettled situation is heightened by continuing tensions in the southern state of Chiapas.
The rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army warned last week that there would be another outbreak of violence unless the ruling party's candidate for Governor there renounced his victory, which has been recognized by electoral authorities but not by the rebels.


Because of Foster Care System, a Child Wakes at Night Crying
To the Editor:
Part of my professional work involves doing intakes (gathering background history) for new prospective patients in a mental health clinic in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
I recently encountered the case of a 6-year-old Hispanic girl named Judy, who has been with her foster mother since the age of 1 month.
She had been immediately placed into foster care because traces of heroin were discovered in her blood at birth.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.81
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.52
4.58
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.85
4.89
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.25
5.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.54
5.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.40
6.82
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.37
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Trashing of CUNY
The decline or demise of the City University of New York has been forecast at least as far back as 1969, when enrollment was opened to anyone with a high school diploma.
But this summer, the critics have been especially busy, and mean-spirited, too.
First, a long, contemptuous article by Heather Mac Donald appeared in the summer issue of City Journal, the quarterly of the Manhattan Institute, a conservative group that aspires to serve as the Giuliani administration's think tank.
That attack found a much wider audience when John Leo cited it approvingly in U.S.
News &amp; World Report; Mr.
Leo's column was then reprinted in newspapers around the country, and readers as far away as Seattle learned that "CUNY is at the cutting edge of a nationwide movement to do away with the very distinction between academic proficiency and deficiency and replace it with the concept of competence in one's own culture."


METRO DIGEST
WHERE HOPE IS SWALLOWED BY DECAY In Harlem, 129th Street between Malcolm X Boulevard and Fifth Avenue is a block in the America of the black underclass -- a block that could be in Chicago, Miami or Los Angeles.
It has its own values, rules and economy.
Even as the nation engages in a spirited dialogue on issues like welfare reform, education and job training, places like 129th Street exist as a world apart.
The scrappers on the block -- the ones who call the police on drug dealers and badger landlords for repairs -- say the old civil-rights remedies like affirmative action do little to improve lives hobbled by a multitude of ills.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CROWN HTS.
DEFENSE TO SEEK NEW JUDGE Lawyers for Lemrick Nelson Jr., who is charged with violating the civil rights of a Hasidic scholar stabbed to death during the 1991 violence in Crown Heights, said that they would ask the Federal judge assigned to the case to step down from it.
They asserted that the judge, David G. Trager of United States District Court in Brooklyn, had a conflict of interest.
B3.


Executive Changes
CONTINENTAL PRO, New York, named Ed Velasquez president.
DECORATING DEN SYSTEMS INC.
Bethesda, Md., named Jim Bugg Jr. president and chief executive.


China's Discus Champ: Alone, Disabled and Barred
Disappointed and angry, China's national champion discus thrower among disabled athletes, Fang Zheng, sat in his apartment here this week as an international competition he was barred from entering took place 1,500 miles away in Beijing.
"I am the champion," he said, adding that he had reaffirmed his supremacy in the discus with several record-breaking throws of 27 meters during training this summer.


Bridge
One of the most popular figures in the world of bridge, Jean Besse, died Saturday in his native Switzerland at age 80.
Beneath a placid exterior, he concealed a razor-sharp mind that he applied to mathematics and computing as well as bridge.
He was a newspaper columnist and a theorist as well as a player of the highest class.
A quarter-century ago, he won the Sunday Times Pairs in England, an event to which Europe's best were invited, and he represented Switzerland in 27 international championships.
In 1964, he was a member of a four-man team that seemed headed for the semifinal stage of the world team championship when fatigue took its toll.


In an 11-Year-Old's Funeral, a Grim Lesson
In the last day and a half, mothers and their mothers skipped work, took their young by the hand and pulled them past the coffin of a stranger, 11-year-old Robert Sandifer.
His small body looked as though it belonged to a 7-year-old playing dead in his big brother's tan suit.


Affluent Europe's Plight: Graying
For most of those attending the population conference here, the question is simple to put, if baffling to answer: What do you do when your land has too many people, especially young people?
But what do you if your land has too few young people, a riddle that confronts the low-birth-rate countries of Western Europe, Italy in particular, where the population has actually begun to shrink and where ever-smaller family sizes and the aging of society mean that, in a few years' time, there will only be one person of working age for every two retirees demanding a pension.


For Cubans Left Behind, Fearful Wait for Word
Each morning before he leaves for high school, Rene Neto takes the family bicycle from the crumbling three-room apartment he shares with his grandparents, an aunt, his mother and four siblings and rides off to look for his father.
At an ancient Roman Catholic church at the mouth of Havana harbor, the wiry 15-year-old scans a long list of boat people from his neighborhood who have been taken to the United States Naval Station at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
In the afternoon, he rides up the coast to the home of a half-brother in case anyone there has heard any news.
At night he listens for hours to a Spanish-language radio station in Miami, hoping to hear his father's name among those listed as having survived.


Kennedy Supports Ordination Of Women as Catholic Priests
Little more than three months after Pope John Paul II declared that Catholics must accept that the priesthood is open only to men, Senator Edward M. Kennedy has said he favors allowing women to become priests.
"I count myself among the growing number of Catholics who support the ordination of women as priests," Senator Kennedy said in a brief statement.


Corrections
The pop music listing in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday included an outdated entry for tomorrow night's concert at Jones Beach in Wantagh, L.I.
Kenny G will appear; Toni Braxton will not.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Richard M. Rosenbaum's campaign for the Republican nomination for Governor of New York misstated the date of his appearance in Brooklyn.
It was on Saturday.


Market Place; A novel approach from Johnson &amp; Johnson: It isn't downsizing.
WITH its latest big acquisitions, Johnson &amp; Johnson seems to be bucking a trend in industrial consolidations.
The big health care company said it was filling out and expanding its product lines and did not plan to squeeze cost savings from the new units by dismissing hundreds of their employees.
The two most recent deals -- the $1.01 billion purchase of Eastman Kodak's diagnostic products that was announced on Tuesday and the pending $924 million acquisition of the Neutrogena Corporation -- would not dilute profits, analysts said.
And by adding two profitable units to the 167 operating companies in its international roster, Johnson &amp; Johnson bolstered its position as the world's largest diversified health care company.


Rams Re-sign Henley
Cornerback DARRYL HENLEY, who faces a January trial on Federal drug trafficking charges, was re-signed yesterday by the Los Angeles Rams.
United States District Court Judge GARY L. TAYLOR ruled last week that Henley could travel with the team without being accompanied by a Federal agent and also eased bail restrictions.


U.S. Team at Wembley A Flop in Bonus Round
As it turned out, the $25,000 bonus didn't work, on any level.
In the first appearance by Americans at Wembley in the storied stadium's history, the United States lost to England, 2-0, tonight.
The score could easily have been twice that.


Wallace Computer Services Inc.(WCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Digital Introduces High-Performance Chip
The Digital Equipment Corporation introduced the next generation of its Alpha AXP 64-bit microprocessor today and laid claim to having the world's fastest and highest-performance chip.
The speed of the new chip may bolster Digital's competitive position in the hotly contested market for computer systems.
The financially troubled computer maker has bet its future on the Alpha AXP chip, offering a range of computer systems, from personal computers to powerful midrange systems, based on the new technology.


The Duchess of Parma
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 1 news article on the arrival of Pizza Hut in Parma, Italy, refers erroneously to Napoleon's widow, the Duchess of Parma (as well as of Piacenza and Gustalla), as Maria Luisa of Bourbon-Parma.
The duchess was Marie Louise of Hapsburg, daughter of the Holy Roman Emperor Francis II (later Emperor of Austria as Francis I).


Sports of The Times; Owners Have Short Time To Wise Up
SOMETHING was wrong.
I was sitting home watching Andre Boy on the tube, and every time they would go to a change-over, I would click the channel changer.
Nothing.
Just nothing.
With a certain amount of shame, I realized I was clicking for a baseball game.
I didn't want to find myself missing baseball this way.
I had sworn off the stuff weeks ago.
I had told myself that there was plenty to write about, that I didn't want to play the owners' game by missing baseball.
But my reactions were impulsively honest.


Canadian Imperial Bank (CM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Agassi Plants Another Seed At the Open
They would not be his final bows, but Andre Agassi, the man who observes the rules of a compass each time he takes his leave of the packed Stadium Court, acknowledged all points north, south, east and west.
And then, with his mission of reinvention in full swing here at the United States Open, he strode briskly into the semifinal round after causing yet another upset.
Last night's departee was the 13th-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria, a hard-driving, hard-grunting martial man who was trounced, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3, 6-0, by this event's own baroque boy, the pony-tailed and bejeweled Agassi.


Making More Beachfront in New Jersey


Adieu, Galeries
To the Editor:
I don't want Galeries Lafayette to leave New York City without a fond, sad farewell (Business Day, Aug. 31).
Few stores in the city have had a more gracious, courteous atmosphere than this branch of the Parisian department store.
The salespeople seemed to enjoy attending to customers.
I once bought an inexpensive belt on sale -- the salesman polished all the silver on it before wrapping it.


Designs in Touch With the Soul of Nature
WHEN the Japanese-American woodworker George Nakashima died in 1990, he left a legacy for generations of furniture designers in his book "The Soul of the Tree" (Kodansha America, 1981) and in his Arts and Crafts style that married Western function and Eastern craft and joinery techniques.
David Fay, 28, is an Oakland, Calif., designer who began his career, much like Nakashima, traveling the world on a shoestring while learning carpentry and, he said, developing the sense that "every piece of lumber tells a story about the life of the tree."


Southern Union Co.(SUG,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Both Sides Gather: Will It Be Baseball or a Burial?
Negotiators who held what was arguably the first serious talks aimed at ending what a 28-day-old players strike emerged from three hours of meetings last night with no settlement.
What they did find, however, was some hope that constructive discussions could ultimately return the game to the field.
"There still are differences between us of a not insignificant nature and dimension," Gene Orza, the associate general counsel of the Major League Baseball Players Association, said, "but it certainly is better today than it was yesterday. And the goal is to make it better tomorrow."


Stocks End Day Mixed as Dow Falls 12.45
As the stock market returned to active trading following Labor Day and Rosh ha-Shanah, share prices closed mixed yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 12.45 points, to 3,886.25, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 fell 0.87 point, to 470.99.
But the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 4.80 points, to 764.28.


Sounds Around Town
Arab Festival
Mahrajan Al-Fan: A Day of Arab World Culture, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, (718) 638-5000.
An all-day look into Arab culture, including music, poetry, food and dance, is exactly the sort of thing the Ethnic Folk Arts Center, the producer of the festival, knows how to do.
There will be films of the legendary Egyptian singers Umm Kulthum and Mohammed Abdel Wahab, along with music from Egypt, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen.
It's expansive and yet touches only a few of the myriad activities produced by Arab cultures in New York.
The show begins at noon on Sunday.
Tickets: $12.
PETER WATROUS The Essence of Swing
Leon Parker, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Leon Parker is a smooth drummer who has pared down his drum set to just a few pieces, allowing him to extract the essence of the sound of swing.
He puts together fine groups, and this one is no exception.
It features the tenor saxophonist Mark Turner, the pianist Bruce Barth and the bassist Ugonna Okegwo.
The shows are Sunday night at 10, 12 and 2.
There is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
P.
W.
A Sideman Steps Forward
Steve Wilson, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, Morningside Heights, (212) 749-2228.
Steve Wilson, an alto saxophonist, is one of the better young players working in New York, on call as a sideman for small groups and big bands.
He likes stretching out, letting long, sinuous lines flap in the gale of his group.
He'll be joined by his quintet.
There are shows tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 10:30 and midnight.
There is a $10 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.


I.B.M. Unit to Cut 3,000 Jobs
The International Business Machines Corporation will eliminate 3,000 jobs, primarily by layoffs, in its North American marketing organization, the company disclosed in an internal memo yesterday.
The cuts, involving about 7 percent of the unit's 43,000 employees, result from an analysis of staff functions as part of the company's re-engineering efforts.


Explorers and Their Expeditions, Preserved on Film
For many New Yorkers, the American Museum of Natural History equals dinosaurs, an equation the museum happily promotes with its gift shop full of dinosaur tchotchkes, from T-shirts to key chains.
But another of the museum's treasures comes from the more recent past: its collection of more than a million photographs and 3,000 reels of film documenting the natural world.
As part of its 125th-anniversary celebrations, the museum is presenting a small sampling from this vast archive in its Library Gallery.
Assembled from gifts or expeditions sponsored by the museum, "The World Explored: 125 Years of Collecting Photographs" includes famous images from the early history of photography, as well as unusual works made to record natural phenomena.


For a Baseball Case History, Look at Cleveland; Salary Cap Compromise
To the Editor:
Well, here's a simple idea for the baseball strike.
The owners discard the salary-cap proposal and agree among themselves to a redistribution plan to help the small-market teams that is based on total team salaries, rather than on revenues.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Selling underwear, and ideas: New signs are turning Times Square into an issues forum.
FOR decades, Times Square has been called the crossroads of the world.
Now it appears that Times Square is becoming a town square, too.
An increasing number of giant signs -- spectaculars, in the parlance of the outdoor advertising industry -- are promoting debate on social issues like gun control, AIDS and nutrition.
These paid pitches stand alongside the big billboards dedicated to conventional sales messages for products like jeans, soft drinks and underwear.


A Strindberg Fable With Puppets
Roman Paska's realization of "The Ghost Sonata" for the Marionetteatern of Stockholm -- playing in the International Festival of Puppet Theater at the Joseph Papp Public Theater through Sunday -- is a magical adaptation of August Strindberg's short play, a peculiarly frustrating work since it is so haunting but almost impossible to stage effectively.
Whereas Strindberg's play appears starkly realistic and only gradually is seen as a fable, Mr.
Paska, in his direction, takes full advantage of the psychology of puppetry and plays it from the start as a fable, but one that leaves us with powerful reflections on the absurdities of human conventions.
And he replaces Strindberg's intellectual tone of angry irony with a rueful humor that touches the heart.


Laurentian Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $92 million of notes due in 1997 that are callable in one year, carry an interest rate of 6.75 percent and are priced at par.
It is also selling $50 million of noncallable notes due in 1995 with an interest rate of 5.58 percent and priced at par.
The issues are being sold through Smith Barney Inc.


One Woman, 2 Men And Their Secret
A woman in 19th-century dress stands on a hill, her back to the camera, looking toward the gorgeously photographed sea.
She brings to mind many other enigmatic heroines in movies and novels, from "The French Lieutenant's Woman" to "The Piano." Like them, Sarah, the title character of "December Bride," embodies the flip side of Victorian repression.
She is a sexual rebel, a servant in turn-of-the-century Ireland who moves into the house of two brothers, becomes pregnant, and defies anyone in their narrow community of Ulster Presbyterians to make her reveal which of the men is the child's father.
What sets this 1990 Irish film apart from others of the enigmatic-heroine school is that Sarah (Saskia Reeves) seems more willful than sensuous, her rebellion one of class at least as much as passion.
She insists that her son have her name, and his existence elevates her status in the household.


Jones Spacelink Ltd. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Tailhook Suit Settled 4 Days Before Trial
Four days before trial of a lawsuit over the Tailhook Association's bawdy 1991 convention in Las Vegas, the naval aviators' group has reached a settlement with the plaintiff, a former Navy lieutenant who was among the women sexually abused there.
The settlement was disclosed this afternoon by lawyers for the association and Paula Coughlin, who filed the suit last year.


Inside Art
Historical Society to Sell
G.
Oliver Koppell, the New York State Attorney General, has finally permitted the New-York Historical Society to sell about $20 million worth of art and objects from its collection.
The proceeds are to go toward the museum's endowment, which covers some of its operating costs as well as the care of the society's art collection and library.
But the sale, expected to take place at Sotheby's in New York early next year, will proceed in a highly unusual fashion.
In an attempt to raise the most money for the financially troubled institution while giving other New York State institutions a break, Sotheby's, the attorney general and the society have come up with what they are calling a "pre-emption plan," whereby New York State museums, libraries and archives will have a right of first refusal to buy items at a discount, but only after the auction.
Buyers will be informed before the sale that in fact, they may not be buying at all.
If an institution decides it wants a work of art or an object that has been auctioned, that can in effect void the sale of that item to the private bidder.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Seeking to halt talk of a split at the top of the Federal Reserve, Alan S. Blinder, the Fed's vice chairman, took the unusual step of defending remarks, saying he does not differ with Alan Greenspan over monetary policy.  [ Page D1. ]


Of Colonials in Africa And Insults That Insult
A good book is the basis for "A Good Man in Africa," but its mordant humor has curdled badly on the screen.
Although William Boyd, the author of these gimlet-eyed observations of colonial antics in Africa, adapted his own novel and also served as one of the film's producers, "A Good Man in Africa" now has none of the cunning that it had on the page.
The film has been directed in woefully unfunny fashion by Bruce Beresford ("Driving Miss Daisy," "Black Robe," "Tender Mercies"), whose talents ordinarily take a more quietly dramatic turn.
Here, lumbering through the machinations of a frenzied farce, he displays a comic touch that is unfailingly mirthless, and a penchant for offending his audience in needless, obvious ways.
Oliver Stone looks like Ernst Lubitsch compared to this.


Kmart Speeds Shift to Core Business
Accelerating a move to turn around its core discount retail business, the Kmart Corporation said yesterday that it would close 110 stores nationwide and eliminate 6,000 jobs, including 650 store-manager positions that amount to 10 percent of its executive work force.
The closings in 30 states represent 4.7 percent of the 2,350 discount stores of Kmart, which has lost market share to more nimble competitors like Wal-Mart and Target.
Kmart also announced the hiring of two new executives to head the retailer's Super Kmart Center operations and information systems department, disclosing Kmart's competitive focus on larger stores and the increasing use of technology.


Dennis Morgan, 85, A Hollywood Actor Of the 40's and 50's
Dennis Morgan, who appeared in Hollywood films opposite Bette Davis, Betty Grable and Barbara Stanwyck, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Fresno, Calif.
He was 85 and lived in neighboring Madera County.
A family friend said he had had heart problems for some time, The Associated Press reported.


Kohlberg, Kravis's Battle With Former Ally Heats Up
Henry R. Kravis and Leon D. Black -- two of Wall Street's biggest deal makers of the 1980's and former allies -- are locked in an increasingly noisy battle over a beleaguered company in which both men have big personal and financial stakes.
At the center of their fight is Walter Industries, a Florida conglomerate that Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company bought in 1987 with the help of Mr.
Black, then its investment banker.
But two years later, Walter was forced into Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings by an avalanche of asbestos litigation.


With Deadline Near, Players Offer Owners an Idea
With little time left to salvage the remainder of the regular season and the World Series, baseball players and their negotiators methodically pieced together a new plan yesterday that they hoped would entice the owners away from their salary cap demand and end the four-week-old strike.
After spending the entire day working on the concept, which combines a revenue-sharing and a payroll-tax plan, the union sent a contingent of three lawyers and four players to discuss it early last night with a group of six owners and club executives and their negotiating team.


Quayle, Defending '92 Speech, Returns to Family Values Theme
With an eye on both his political past and future, former Vice President Dan Quayle returned today to the place where two years ago he made Murphy Brown's out-of-wedlock television baby a "family values" issue in the 1992 Presidential campaign.
Speaking again to members of the Commonwealth Club of California, he said the baby was still a values issue in American life, an unfortunate prime-time symbol of the country's "poverty of values."


Nebraska Runs Mark to 2-0 Behind Frazier and Phillips
Nebraska 42, Texas Tech 16
LUBBOCK, Tex., Sept. 9 (AP) -- Tommie Frazier ran for two touchdowns and threw for one as No. 1-ranked Nebraska broke open a close game in the second half and beat Texas Tech, 42-16, last night.


Beijing, Despite Taiwan Issue, Looks to Better Ties With U.S.
China said today that the Clinton Administration's decision to expand its official ties with Taiwan, which Beijing considers a renegade province, will adversely affect United States-China relations.
But at the same time, it took another step to signal that it wants to improve its relations with Washington and repeated an invitation to President Clinton to visit China.
The modest change in Taiwan policy was announced in Washington on Wednesday.
It reaffirmed the longstanding American position that there is only "one China," but in a nod to Taiwan's growing economic power in Asia it loosened some of the strictures that have prevented American officials from carrying out direct talks with Taiwan officials on trade and economic issues.


Car Struck by Bullet On Long Island Road
A bullet fired by an unknown gunman passed through the front windshield of a car heading south on the heavily traveled Meadow Parkway near the Roosevelt Field Shopping Center early today, narrowly missing its driver, the state police said late tonight.
The driver of the car, who was not identified, was not injured, said Maj.
Anthony J. Deresta, commander of Troop L in Farmingdale.


Call Novacek And Stich Semifinalists
Going where neither of these yeomen had gone before, all the way to the semifinal round of a Grand Slam, Karel Novacek took dead aim from the service line and bisected the Stadium Court with a match-winning ace yesterday to eliminate Jaime Yzaga and secure a berth with destiny -- in the form of fourth-seeded Michael Stich -- at this upset-ridden United States Open.
The pint-sized Yzaga, a man toting some elephantine ambitions, became a giant-killer here by upending the defending champion Pete Sampras in a bizarre five-setter in the round of 16.
But yesterday he fell prey, 6-2, 6-7 (7-9), 6-1, 5-7, 6-3, in the late-afternoon sunshine to the sturdy, stately Novacek.


Republican Candidates Run Hard and Cheaply
It seems like a throwback to old-fashioned politics, two candidates traveling across Connecticut, speaking at luncheons, shaking hands at fairs, marching in parades, telling people face to face why they want to be elected to the United States Senate.
But for Dr.
Gerald Labriola, a retired pediatrician, and Dr.
Joseph Bentivegna, a young ophthalmologist, their shoe-leather campaigns in a primary for the Republican Party's Senate nomination are all they can afford.
While the Democratic incumbent, Joseph I. Lieberman, has raised more than $4 million and already is spending heavily on television ads, the two Republicans together have raised less than $120,000.
Television is something they can only watch.
Incumbent's Advantage
As a result, changing the campaign-finance laws to limit the advantages of incumbency is one of the few issues on which the two doctors agree.
Dr.
Labriola, a former state senator and candidate for governor and lieutenant governor, notes that Senator Lieberman established a re-election fund a month after taking office in 1989.


Sounds Around Town
Richman's Folk-Rock
Jonathan Richman, the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, Manhattan, (212) 921-1940.
Jonathan Richman may be the only rock singer who can win nearly every heart in an audience by talking about his wife.
He's not afraid to tell bad jokes, and his voice, which sounds like that of a pre-teen with a spring cold, is irresistible.
After 24 years of music-making, this Boston singer's idiosyncratic folk-rock songs still sound honest, sincere and mischievously innocent, even when delivered from the perspective of a 2-year-old.
The show is tomorrow night at 8; admission is $18.50 in advance or $20 at the door.
NEIL STRAUSS Still Improvising
Derek Bailey Quartet, the Cooler, 416 West 14th Street, West Village, (212) 229-0785.
In the 1980 book "Improvisation," the guitarist Derek Bailey contends that improvisation is the most widely practiced musical activity, but the least acknowledged and understood.
He ought to know.
As a pick-up musician in the 1950's and a studio musician in the 1960's, he learned a lot about discipline and restriction before striking out on his own in search of freedom.
Three decades later, he's still twisting his tuning pegs, whittling atonal guitar lines, and breaking for periods of silence.
He has become one of the most technically adept performers in a genre that has pretty much remained unacknowledged and misunderstood.
He performs with the saxophonist Peter Brotzmann, the drummer Gregg Bendian and the bassist Skuli Sverrisson tonight and tomorrow night at 10.
Admission: $10.
N.
S. 50's Dreams
Love Jones, Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, three blocks south of Canal Street, TriBeCa, (212) 966-4225.
At the end of one song on Love Jones's first album, a sultry female voice whispers, "I'd like to buy the band a drink." Her offer conjures up a world of vinyl seats and smoking jackets, of sensuality and cordiality, of inebriation and restraint that exists only in a misguided vision of the 1950's and in the music of Love Jones.
Led by Ben Daughtrey, a reformed hardcore rock musician, Love Jones croons self-consciously slick retro-rock songs colored with light brush strokes of bossa nova, soul and doo-wop.
The band sometimes tries too hard to imitate a style of music characterized by its effortlessness, but that's only part of its charm.
Doors open at 8 P.M. admission is $8.
N.
S.


Airline Hurt By High Costs
USAir, the nation's sixth-largest airline, is one of the shakiest financially.
The airline, which has not had a profitable quarter since 1989, is negotiating with its employee unions to bring down its costs, the highest in the business.
The airline, based in Arlington, Va., has a 7.7 percent share of the domestic commercial aviation market, measured in passenger miles.
It uses its more than 400 aircraft mostly on flights between Eastern cities.


Detailing a Masterly Point of View
Theory and Philosophy of Art
Style, Artist and Society
By Meyer Schapiro
Illustrated. 256 pages. George Braziller. $27.50.
The dauntingly titled "Theory and Philosophy of Art: Style, Artist and Society" has been long awaited.
It is the fourth in a series of essay collections by the eminent scholar Meyer Schapiro, who will be 90 on Sept. 23.
The first three volumes, devoted to late antique and medieval, Romanesque and modern art, came out in the late 1970's.
They revealed to a general audience what many art historians and artists and his former Columbia University students knew: that Mr.
Schapiro is among the century's most inspired thinkers.


Citing Organized Crime, U.S. Sues to Take Control of Union
Citing years of corruption and organized-crime influence, the Government yesterday moved to take control of a New York City union representing construction laborers.
The prosecutors asserted that Mafia members, corrupt union officials and others had systematically plundered the $270 million benefit fund of the union, the Mason Tenders District Council of Greater New York, endangering the benefits of the union's 7,000 current and retired members.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  SERBIA ASSENTS TO MONITORS  President Milosevic of Serbia has accepted a compromise plan for monitoring the trade embargo he has imposed on the Bosnian Serbs, diplomats said.
In return, the United Nations Security Council will move to ease sanctions on his country, possibly as early as next week.
A1  FROM AFAR, BOSNIANS HEAR POPE  Delivering the sermon he would have given had he gone to Sarajevo, the Pope raised an impassioned plea for peace in Bosnia.
He also offered a "kiss of peace" to Serbian Orthodox Church leaders.
A6


Corrections
An article yesterday about a group of doo-wop singers misidentified the Bronx high school that most of them attended.
It is Morris High School, not Morrisania.


No Headline
"They do not know that if they kill us, they help us. I do not care if the Macoutes kill me because it only brings an end to my suffering." LIONEL BRENE, a Haitian orphan.  [ A8:6. ]


Sports of The Times; Did Football Send Owners To the Table?
IF our wonderful baseball owners can get over their gripping obsession with the salary cap, baseball fans may have to give thanks to a strange new ally: football.
My theory is that king football -- and particularly a new American sporting hero named Jeffrey Lurie -- had a great deal to do with the wonderful owners scurrying to New York yesterday.


Sports Service For Computers
The Sports/Leisure Magazines Group of The New York Times Company said yesterday that it would develop with the Unet 2 Corporation an on-line sports network for computer users.
The companies said they planned to start the service, to be called the Sports/Leisure Online Network, by the beginning of 1995.
Magazines of the Times Company that will be available on the computer network include Golf World, Tennis, Snow Country, Cruising World and Sailing World.


For a Ziff Sale, Spit and Polish and Good Timing
In early June, when William B. Ziff Jr. surprised the computer publishing industry by announcing that he wanted to sell the family-owned Ziff Communications empire, he insisted that his decision was reached only months before the announcement, after his three adult sons had indicated that they had no interest in running the business.
That may well have been the main reason for putting the company on the block.
But the confidential documents being reviewed by the prospective bidders indicate that from a financial standpoint the time might also be right for the Ziffs to sell.


For a Baseball Case History, Look at Cleveland
To the Editor:
In the writings about the baseball strike and its economics, I've seen little about the huge benefits team owners and players get from the investment that cities make in ballparks, arenas, infrastructure such as streets and highways and continual service demands, including the police.
The owners receive sweetheart deals to "rent" the stadiums, making huge profits from concessions and advertising, though the cities own and must maintain the facilities.


Pataki Wins A Big Backer For Governor
Standing side-by-side in matching pinstripe suits, Senator Ralph J. Marino, the majority leader from Long Island, and Senator George E. Pataki, whose gubernatorial campaign is premised on his independence from Mr.
Marino, publicly ended a longstanding feud yesterday with a fidgety show of New York Republican unity.
It had long been assumed that Mr.
Marino, who worked against Mr.
Pataki's designation at the state Republican convention in May, would ultimately endorse Mr.
Pataki.
But the actual event was delayed by disagreements over terms and intraparty squabbles that only seemed to deepen the distrust between the two camps.


CHRONICLE
JOHN MELLENCAMP canceled the remainder of a national tour yesterday after doctors found a clogged artery in his heart.
"The doctors are coming up with a course of treatment," Lauren Murphy, a spokeswoman for Mercury Records, Mr.
Mellencamp's label, said yesterday in New York.
"The prognosis is extremely good for a full recovery."


For the New York State Legislature
The New York State Legislature's poor record this year on budgetary and social issues leaves no doubt that Albany could use some shaking up.
But who will do the shaking?
The paucity of quality challengers taking on incumbents in next Tuesday's primary voting for safely Democratic Senate and Assembly seats is a disappointment.
Some of the least worthy incumbents face no challenge.
Here are our endorsements in several of the livelier contests in New York City districts where a primary victory virtually guarantees election.


CUC Intl(CU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Judge Chides Prosecutors in Crown Hts. Civil Rights Case
The judge in the case of Lemrick Nelson Jr., who is charged with violating the civil rights of a Hasidic scholar stabbed to death during the 1991 violence in Crown Heights, raised sharp questions yesterday about several aspects of the Justice Department's case against Mr.
Nelson.
At a pretrial hearing to determine whether Mr.
Nelson should be tried as an adult or a juvenile, Judge David G. Trager of Federal District Court in Brooklyn chided Government prosecutors for introducing the fact that earlier this year Mr.
Nelson was charged with slashing another teen-ager with a razor in a suburb of Atlanta.


Joy Ungerleider-Mayerson, 74, Former Head of Jewish Museum
Joy Ungerleider-Mayerson, a former director of the Jewish Museum in Manhattan and a philanthropist, died on Wednesday at her home in Larchmont, N.Y.
She was 74.
The cause was cancer, said her son Andrew Ungerleider.


Report Says Uncovering 'Rogue' Brokers Is Tough
In a report on "rogue," or unscrupulous, brokers, the General Accounting Office said yesterday that it was difficult to locate these brokers and to uncover their wrongdoing, and that existing detection systems were plagued by numerous shortcomings.
The report, which was issued by Representative Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat, is part of a larger effort taking place in Washington to rid the brokerage industry of the small percentage of brokers who are involved in improper, and often illegal, sales practices that harm investors.


Regulator Fears That Economics Could Lead A-Plants to Scrimp
The chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today that looming deregulation was creating unprecedented economic pressure for utilities and providing an "incentive to cut corners" at nuclear reactors.
The chairman, Ivan Selin, said the pressure would prompt his regulators to examine a new area when evaluating a plant that is operating badly: whether financial strain on the parent utility had left it starved for resources.


WTA Has One for the Ages
The Women's Tennis Council announced yesterday that it had agreed in principle to toughen the age restrictions of the WTA Tour.
According to Anne Person Worcester, the head of the council, future 14-year-olds "will not be allowed on the pro tour" and will instead participate in a regimented "phase-in" program.
But if you're 14 this year and want to turn pro, not to worry.
If you're 13 and want to turn pro next year, not to worry: you'll be treated like a 15-year-old.
For the time being, not much has changed.


Some Lawmakers Say Clinton Can Order Haiti Invasion
Several influential Democrats have told the Clinton Administration that it will not need formal Congressional approval to invade Haiti, and the Pentagon announced today that seven large civilian-operated cargo ships had been activated for possible use in any military action there.
Defense Department officials have also told lawmakers that they have more than doubled -- to about 20,000 -- the size of an American-led invasion force that would be used to restore the exiled President of Haiti, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Diner's Journal
Med and the Southwest
The entire front of Spartina is thrown open to the street, and it's hard to resist the invitation to come in.
The large room is spare and pretty with low, flattering lighting and walls stripped down to the bricks.
Here and there are accents the color of dusty tomatoes.
It has a warm, casual feel.
"I guess you'd call our cooking Med-Rim," said the waiter in answer to a question.
And then he stopped himself and added, "with a couple of Southwestern accents."


METRO DIGEST
WHERE FAMILIES BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
On 129th Street in Harlem, between Malcolm X Boulevard and Fifth Avenue, the traditional family is harder to find than ever.
The replacement families vary.
In some apartments, teen-age mothers on welfare double up to get by.
In others, the exhausted female companions of grandfathers comfort the children of imprisoned mothers.
Other households are headed by teen-agers because their parents are gone.
A1.
DRUG-DEALING ORGANIZATION DISMANTLED
Arsenio Diaz began his career in the drug business in Washington Heights as a lookout for a dealer in 1984, according to law-enforcement officials.
Ten years later, they say, he had become the biggest drug dealer in upper Manhattan.
Mr.
Diaz, 37, was indicted, along with 63 of his employees, on murder, conspiracy and drug charges, in the second largest drug case ever brought by the Manhattan District Attorney's office.
A1.


Awards for Dance Scholarship
The Dance Perspectives Foundation has given its 21st annual De La Torre Bueno Prize for scholarship in dance writing to Dr.
Susan Manning and Dr.
Maurice Esses.
Dr.
Manning received the prize for her "Ecstasy and the Demon: Feminism and Nationalism in the Dances of Mary Wigman," published by the University of California Press.
Dr.
Esses, a musicologist, mathematician and senior editor of college textbooks at Prentice-Hall, Canada, won for "Dance and Instrumental Diferencias in Spain During the 17th and 18th Centuries," published by Pendragon Press.


Home Video
Packaging the Hits
With schools open and a new television season unfolding, September is a slack time for big video releases.
Come mid-November, though, and about a dozen hits that have pulled audiences into movie theaters all summer will begin crowding shelves in video stores.
Already the elbowing has begun.


JLG Industries(JLGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Man of 2 Minds About His Future
IN the vast category of dramas that explore the rifts between fathers and sons, Brian Friel's "Philadelphia, Here I Come!" is surely the most lyrical.
Let others look back in remorse or anger.
Mr.
Friel chooses to sing.
Even as he is chronicling the inability of his characters, residents of a stultifyingly dull village called Ballybeg, to connect with one another, he is filling the stage with glorious words.
The dialogue is as close to pure music as speech can get: rowdy, frolicsome and melancholy, by turns.
This 1964 work established the Irish playwright as one of international stature; 30 years later, it seems no less fresh and vital.


National Semiconductor Corp.(NSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.74
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.52
4.52
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.85
4.85
3.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.27
7.28
5.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.56
5.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.42
6.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.38
5.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Nadjari's Slim Record
To the Editor:
Michael J. Gorman's Sept. 1 letter recalls that about 20 years ago, "Maurice Nadjari, the special state prosecutor, put fear into the hearts of corrupt police officers." That fear, however, was neither pervasive nor transfixing.


20th Century Industries
Shares of 20th Century Industries, the insurer based in Woodland Hills, Calif., fell sharply again yesterday as the company raised its earlier estimate of losses from the January earthquake by a fifth, to $815 million.
Analysts said the company might have to sell stock or assets to raise cash for payouts.


Mullen's Status Still Uncertain
Brian Mullen met with Islander General Manager Don Maloney today to discuss his status with the team.
Mullen suffered a stroke on Aug. 11, 1993, and underwent heart surgery a little over a month later.
His comeback attempt last season ended on March 20, when he suffered a seizure during a morning practice.
"We're still getting further medical opinions," Maloney said.
"There is a position for him in our organization, regardless. It is still to be discussed whether he will have the opportunity to work out in camp. If he's deemed unable to play, the logical step is a coaching position of some sort."


Harlem Family Battles Burden of the Past
It was an exquisitely bad day in a time of long, bad days.
The washing machine broke and the food stamps ran out.
Despite scores of phone calls, the welfare caseworker could not promise Vikki the bigger apartment she needed to care for the three cousins she was raising and the baby she was expecting.
In a gloomy apartment in Harlem, Vikki, 26, has been waging a lonely campaign to keep it all together.
Once a key figure in a local drug operation, she is unemployed, diabetic and overweight.
She is the legal guardian of the cousins, whose drug-addicted and abusive parents abandoned them long ago to foster care.


Giants' Daluiso Is Again Simply 'That Kicker Guy'
When Brad Daluiso walks into a local restaurant, he will sometimes be recognized, but rarely.
Usually it's a "Hey, you're that kicker guy" or something like that.
He is not Rodney Hampton after all.
And he is not some strapping lineman who is built like a tall building and will draw attention anyway.
Daluiso is a 6-foot kicker for the Giants.
Kickers do not normally stand out in a crowd.
But when Daluiso is on a football field, everyone notices him.
Especially at Giants Stadium, where he has become a sort of cult hero.
In the era of the salary cap, when teams are trying to trim every possible salary-related expense, Daluiso has survived because he can do one thing well: kick the football far.
Very far.
Into the stands kind of far.


F.B.I. Sting: Hot Cars, Great Deals, 45 Suspects
To car thieves with hot goods to sell, it looked like an auto leasing agency whose shady dealers were willing to pay cash for stolen BMW's, Acura Legends and other luxury models.
Actually, it was an F.B.I. sting operation, and over the last two years it bought 120 stolen cars for a fraction of their value.
It also kept track of the sellers -- mostly members of car-theft rings in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut -- people who scoffed at alarms, popped door and ignition locks like toys, easily defeated anti-theft devices like the Club and were willing to sell just-stolen $35,000 cars for $2,000, sometimes less.


CHRONICLE
NBC's announcement yesterday that BRIAN WILLIAMS, the former anchor of Channel 2 News in New York, would be elevated to the post of chief White House correspondent was a signal that he is a contender to become the next lead anchor at the network whenever the day comes that TOM BROKAW steps down.
Mr.
Brokaw filled the White House post before his anchor days.
Mr.
Williams, who has reported on the Middle East and South Africa for NBC in the past year, as well as serving as anchor of the Saturday broadcast of the "NBC Nightly News," joined NBC in March 1993.
"Everyone perceives him as being groomed for bigger things," one NBC News executive said yesterday.


Race for Attorney General
CANDIDATE Charles J. Hynes
PRODUCER: Harvey Cohen, New York City
VISUAL: The camera zooms up the side of a luxury brick co-op, then pans through a unit's sumptuous interior: oriental rugs, vases, paintings, a sailboat zipping by out of the window.
Superimposed over this vision of comfort are tabloid headlines reminding viewers of a different world.
The headlines read "Crime Time" and "Outrage over freed rapist." Mr.
Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, strides toward the camera in a charcoal suit and delivers his pitch.
He then peers out the window, looking serious, possibly a bit disgusted.


Bramalea Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


To Our Readers
Starting next week, the suggested newstand price of The Times on Monday through Saturday will increase to 60 cents in the New York metropolitan area.
The change will not affect the Sunday price, the weekday price outside the metropolitan area, or the cost of copies from The Times's direct home delivery service.


'That's a Baby in There'
The speaker of those words was not, we know, referring to a stroller but to a coffin.
She was talking about Robert Sandifer, an 11-year-old accused of murdering another child, who was murdered in turn, probably by his own colleagues in crime.
The woman had brought her grandson to look at Robert -- as had many other adults in his Chicago neighborhood -- in hopes that his small body would serve as a warning: Death is permanent.
This is where gangs will take you.
Beware.
Much has been made in the media this week of Robert's sad story: abused and abandoned at 3, cared for variously by a grandmother and child welfare agencies, a gang member at 9.
But that neglect cannot be the entire explanation.
Neighbors and schoolmates of Robert's alleged killers -- brothers aged 14 and 16 -- say those two had good parents.
"Their mother and father are real good, nice people," said one.
"They just can't control them." Others talked of losing sons and friends to the streets.
Children spoke openly of being thankful each day to make it home from school.


AIR FORCE CHARGES 6 IN IRAQ DEATHS
The Air Force has charged an F-15 pilot with negligent homicide and dereliction of duty for his role in the shooting down last April of two Army helicopters over northern Iraq, the Pentagon announced today.
The pilot, Lieut.
Col.
Randy W. May, was charged with 26 counts of negligent homicide -- one for every person killed in the accidental downing of the two Blackhawk helicopters.
An Air Force spokesman said the charges, which could result in dismissal and a maximum prison term of 26 years, appeared to be the most serious ever leveled against a pilot because of the accidental downing of friendly aircraft.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
C. W. Post
A titan has emerged on Long Island, the Pioneers from Brookville who start a new season tonight with a 10-game winning streak and enticing expectations.
The opening opponent on the road is a new one, William Paterson at Wayne, N.J., the latter a Division III playoff team last season.


Fed Deputy Denies Rift With Chief
Seeking to calm a controversy over whether he is soft on inflation, Alan S. Blinder, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, took the unusual step today of defending remarks he made at a recent conference and saying he does not differ with his colleagues over monetary policy.
Mr.
Blinder said that stories about an intellectual split at the top of the Fed were "alleged news." And he added that he and Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, had similar monetary policy beliefs but used different rhetoric to explain them.
"There is no rift between the chairman of the Federal Reserve and myself," he said in a speech this morning to the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.


Arrests in New York Are Said to Cripple A Huge Drug Gang
Arsenio Diaz began his career in the drug business in Washington Heights as a corner lookout for a dealer after arriving from the Dominican Republic in 1984, according to law-enforcement officials.
Ten years later, they say, he had become the biggest drug dealer in upper Manhattan, and one of the biggest in New York City.
Mr.
Diaz, 37, was indicted yesterday, along with 63 of his employees, on murder, conspiracy and drug charges, prosecutors said.
Officials said it brought an end to an efficient, $1 million-a-week operation that Mr.
Diaz had named, simply, La Compania: The Company.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about the American Travellers Corporation's purchase of a unit of the J. C. Penney Company misidentified the business changing hands.
It is the long-term care business of the J. C. Penney Life Insurance Company, not all of J. C. Penney Life Insurance.


Messier Gets Impatient About New Contract
Barry Klarberg gets paid to count Mark Messier's money.
As Messier's accountant, Klarberg is also involved in negotiations with the Rangers to get his client a new contract.
But Klarberg hasn't seen any new numbers with dollar signs in front of them attached to Messier's name.
Like Messier, he is becoming increasingly impatient.
If the Rangers don't make their captain a new salary offer soon, Messier might not be among the players reporting to training camp today in Rye, N.Y.


Women Protest at Gates of Gaza Jail


Carter Puts Zip in the Penn State Uniform
As a budding football player growing up in Westerville, Ohio, Ki-Jana Carter dreamed of someday playing at one of two places: Notre Dame if he chose to leave home, Ohio State if he stayed.
Never in his wildest dreams did he ever think he would wind up in the mountains of Pennsylvania, wearing the plain blue jersey and donning the plain white helmet of Penn State University.


Cuba, in Shift, Says Deal Can Be Reached With the U.S.
Just days after the Government described its talks with the United States over immigration issues as being stalled, Cuban officials now say they believe a deal can be struck.
Returning home for consultations with President Fidel Castro and other officials, Cuba's chief negotiator, Ricardo Alarcon, said Wednesday night that despite major differences he was "confident that an acceptable agreement can be reached."


CHRONICLE
There must be something about Rainbow and Stars at 30 Rockefeller Plaza that inspires doors to close tight.
Last September Lainie Kazan was inadvertently locked in the 67-story G.E.
Building after a show, and on Wednesday, a door slammed shut again, this time before ANN HAMPTON CALLAWAY'S first show of the evening.
The door to the dressing room used by RICHARD RODNEY BENNETT, the show's musical director and pianist, and TERRY CLARKE, the drummer, was locked, and their dinner jackets and music were inside.
And the building manager holding the only keys had gone home for the night.


Market Place; Warner-Lambert is leading the takeover list in the drug industry's case of acquisition fever.
THE Warner-Lambert Company, one of Wall Street's hottest takeover candidates, is shadow-boxing with possible predators whose identity can only be guessed.
The company says it wants to stay independent, but security analysts dream of a juicy takeover deal.
They say the company, based in Morris Plains, N.J., is a relatively weak drug maker, not big or profitable enough to stand alone.
Its 1993 sales were $5.79 billion, of which $2.11 billion were drugs.


Of Life, Comedy, Mortality and Cancer
Nick Ullett, the English-born author of "Laughing Matters," his one-man show at Primary Stages, would very much like you to know how to pronounce his name.
It rhymes with gullet, and no one in the United States ever gets it right.
The corollary seems to be that if people can't say the name, then the name isn't very well known (although Mr. Ullett might benefit from a conversation with Kim Basinger or Witold Rybczynski).
And in recent years, the performer has become obsessed with, as he puts it, leaving "my mark" on the world.
A tall, long-faced man with an avid eagerness to charm, Mr.
Ullett was found to have non-Hodgkins lymphoma in 1990 and has since been taking conscientious inventory of a rambling life filled, he says, with "half-truths and lies." It is remarkable, he adds, "how fast you stop lying when you learn you have cancer."


U.S., Criticized for Helping Japan Over Plutonium, Will Stop
For seven years the United States has been quietly supplying Japan with technology to refine bomb-grade plutonium from breeder reactors, despite the official American position against the export of any technology that helps the spread of nuclear weapons, according to a report issued today by Greenpeace.
Before Greenpeace's news conference was over, the Department of Energy announced that it would end the exports by letting the agreement under which they took place expire at the end of this month.


Algeria Rulers In Peace Talks With Muslims
The Algerian Government has begun secret peace talks with imprisoned leaders of the militant Muslim opposition whose armed groups have racked the North African nation during two years of urban guerrilla warfare, Algerian officials said today.
Gen.
Lamin Zeroual, who leads the military-civilian junta that has governed Algeria since independence in 1962, confirmed in various comments over the last two days that he had directed senior Government officials to hold meetings with Abassi Madani, the jailed leader of the Islamic Salvation Front opposition party, and five of his closest associates in the town of Blida, where they are being detained.


Dollar Rent-a-Car Switches to GSD&amp;M
In a surprise move, Dollar Rent-a-Car Systems Inc. said yesterday that it had shifted its account to GSD&amp;M Advertising in Austin, Tex., after seven years at FKQ Advertising Inc. in Clearwater, Fla.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Tenacious Lawyer Turns Exxon Spill Into Pollution Case for the Ages
In the annals of the environmental bar there has never been a trial like the one against the Exxon Corporation that began last May and is about to end in Federal District Court in Anchorage.
Like Alaska itself, everything about the Exxon Valdez disaster and its legal aftermath was oversized.
The 1989 oil spill, 11 million gallons, was the largest ever by a tanker in North American waters.
About 15,000 fishermen and other Alaskan plaintiffs sued Exxon, asserting that the spill had destroyed their livelihoods.


How to Lose the Olympics
The International Olympic Committee stung China's leadership last September by rejecting its heavy-handed campaign to be host of the 2000 Olympics.
What seems to have tipped an extremely close vote was the committee's anxiety that a Chinese human rights debacle could seriously embarrass the Olympic movement.
Yet China, which still hopes to win the 2004 Games, persists in putting political repression ahead of sports.
Witness the case of Fang Zheng, a champion discus thrower abruptly excluded from competition at the Far East and South Pacific Disabled Games for the crudest of political reasons.


A Democrat Who Thrives Opposing the President
From almost the day President Clinton entered the White House, Senator Richard C. Shelby has been at his heels, a nettlesome and outspoken critic.
Never mind that Mr.
Clinton is from Arkansas and Mr.
Shelby is from Alabama, or that both are Democrats.
Although the positions that Mr.
Shelby has taken reflect the native conservatism of Alabama, what has made him stand out from other conservative Southern Democrats is the flourish and relish with which the two-term junior Senator has consistently opposed the President.


Coral Reefs Endangered In Jamaica
A new report says disease, hurricanes and overfishing by a booming human population have combined to destroy most of Jamaica's coral reefs, once a jewel of the Caribbean.
The only way of avoiding greater losses or repairing widespread damage, the report says, is if Jamaica adopts a policy that seeks to stop overfishing.
The return of mature herbivorous fish around Jamaica is seen as helping to fight growths of fleshy algae that otherwise come to dominate the reef ecosystem and crowd out coral polyps.


Dylex Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Cleanup of Nuclear Waste Progresses
To the Editor:
A Sept. 1 news article on a General Accounting Office report faulting the Department of Energy's nuclear waste cleanup effort may have left the wrong impression.
Contrary to the G.A.O.'s statement that there has been "little cleanup," we have made real progress in addressing the environmental and public health risks from four decades of nuclear weapons production, testing and research.


SERBIAN PRESIDENT IS SAID TO ACCEPT TRADE MONITORING
Western diplomats said today that President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia had accepted a compromise plan for monitoring the trade embargo he has imposed on the Bosnian Serbs.
In return, they said, the Security Council will move to ease sanctions on Serbia as early as next week.
The United States, Britain, France, Germany and Russia, members of the so-called contact group trying to make peace in Bosnia, announced in Berlin on Wednesday that if the Serbs agreed to allow observers along the border with Bosnia, the economic embargo against Serbia would be relaxed in stages.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about Barbara Bush's memoirs misidentified the needlework she displayed in the 1975 photograph.
It was needlepoint, not knitting.


Forstmann &amp; Co.  (FSTM,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to July 31


Top Officer Shifts Made At Merck
In the latest upheaval in the turbulent pharmaceutical industry, Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, retired two widely known senior executives yesterday, sent a third executive on his way and eliminated a layer of top management.
Advancing an industrywide trend as drug makers scramble to cut costs and keep profits rising under growing pressure from managed health care customers, Raymond V. Gilmartin, president and chief executive of Merck, said he was "establishing the example for the company of a leaner, flatter organization." Eleven longtime Merck executives who are responsible for day-to-day operations and corporate planning were named to a management committee that will report directly to Mr.
Gilmartin.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CONTINENTAL CORP., New York, a property and casualty insurance company, agreed to sell its Canadian unit to Fairfax Financial Holdings Ltd., Toronto, for $155 million in cash and debt.
HILLSIDE BEDDING INC., East North Port, L.I., a provider of computer software and hardware to businesses, agreed to acquire Cony Computers, Norwalk, Conn., for an undisclosed amount of Hillside stock.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  A Water Hazard That Wasn't  Nick Price, who has won the Britsh Open, PGA and three other American tour titles this year, had a five-under-par 67 yesterday in the opening round of the Canadian Open that included "maybe the biggest break of my life." The Zimbabwe native is one shot behind the co-leaders Mark O'Meara and Dick Mast in Oakville, Ontario, and one lucky shot is why.
From a fairway bunker on the right of No. 11, Price watched his approach head toward Sixteen Mile Creek, which fronts the green.
But the ball hit a rock in the water near the far bank and bounced up on the green.
"Two putts for par and I ran to the next tee," Price said.
O'Meara, buoyed by his best performance of the year in his last outing, and Mast, 43, a career struggler still chasing his first victory in a tour career that began in 1974, both birdied the final hole to share the lead.
Mast had nine birdies and 10 3's on his card at the Glen Abbey Golf Club. (AP) DOG SHOW  A Boxer Has Her Day  Champion Jacquet's Cambridge Fortune, a Brindle Boxer owned by Ikuko Ohtani, William Dunn and Richard Tomita yesterday was named best of 1,077 dogs at the 61st all-breed show of the Rockland County Kennel Club at Bowline Point Park, in Haverstraw, N.Y.
It was the third top award for Casey, as the 3-year-old bitch is called, and she was handled by Marylou Hatfield.
It was an exceptionally strong final, with six of the seven dogs previous winners of a top award.
Among them they had amassed 110 bests.
"It's easier to find a male boxer, who is robust, well put together and looks like he can work, but to find all of that in a bitch, who still is very feminine, is remarkable and she truly is remarkable," said Anitra Cuneo, the judge.


Jet's Final Seconds: 'A Whole Lot of Fire'
Richard Trenary and Gerald Taylor were sitting in Mr.
Taylor's yard in Hopewell Township, Pa., yesterday when the calm of a warm summer evening was interrupted by strange noises overheaded.
They looked up in time to see USAir Flight 427 hurtle over them and into the ground.
"The plane come straight down," Mr.
Taylor said.
"Hit the ground nose first, like a bomb."


Frederick Manfred, Novelist Who Wrote Of West, Dies at 82
Frederick Manfred, the author of many novels set in a mythical High Plains territory he called Siouxland, died on Wednesday in Luverne, Minn.
He was 82 and lived in Luverne.
The cause was lymphoma, said his agent, Albert Eisele.


Paris Journal; Mitterrand's 'Mistakes': Vichy Past Is Unveiled
It would be an exaggeration to say that the early life of President Francois Mitterrand was a state secret, but as long as he was a politician with another election ahead of him he saw to it that an aura of mystery surrounded the years before he emerged as a Socialist leader.
But now, at the age of 77 and just eight months before retiring from Elysee Palace, Mr.
Mitterrand has helped a French writer to reveal new details of his hidden past, first as a rightist student in the 1930's and then working for the collaborationist Vichy Government in World War II.


The First Date From Purgatory
In his small, edgy two-character film, "What Happened Was . . .," Tom Noonan aims for something universal.
Charting an uneasy evening spent by two slightly acquainted people on a first date, Mr.
Noonan reaches into the depths of their loneliness, letting them reveal themselves gradually over the course of an awkward dinner.
As the writer, director and leading man of this rueful drama, Mr.
Noonan makes it clear that "What Happened Was . . ." is a labor of love.
He shaped the film with its other star, Karen Sillas, as a workshop production with the Paradise Theater Company in the East Village, and let the characters develop in this semi-improvisatory fashion.
Working in this gradual, cumulative way, he and Ms.
Sillas clearly brought a great deal of care and urgency to their roles.
When Mr.
Noonan took his film to the Sundance Film Festival last winter, it won both the Grand Jury Prize and the Waldo Salt screenwriting award.


Orphans of Haiti Disappear, Targets of Murderous Thugs
The rusted iron gate of the peeling old orphanage is bound in place with three feet of heavy chain and an ancient padlock, not to keep children in, but to protect them.
In Haiti, where gunmen loyal to the military Government have methodically murdered the poorest of the poor, a favorite target is a motherless child.
These children are seen as enemies of the state, and hundreds have been killed in the last three years.
No one complains, no one claims the bodies, no one cries when they are hauled off to common graves, say the people who run the orphanages, and some of the children in them.


An Ovation for the Jackson 2


Protestant Militants Weighing Response to I.R.A. Cease-Fire
Commanders of Protestant gunmen said today that they were weighing how to respond to the cease-fire declared last week by the Irish Republican Army and indicated that, given certain assurances, they might call a cease-fire of their own.
Although their statement today did not say so explicitly, the tone suggested that the Protestant militants were now taking the cease-fire seriously and were open to the idea of abandoning their campaign of violence intended to scuttle the I.R.A. cease-fire.


The 'Same Old Jets': 3 Ignominious Words
"Same Old Jets." For Coach Pete Carroll, those three words will take on a different resonance this season.
The same old Jets will no longer mean failed promises.
"Somewhere down the road," said Carroll, "someone will say, 'same old Jets' because we'll be kicking people around again."


S.E.C. Cites Refco Account
In the early 1980's, when short-term interest rates were sky high, the concept of the "cash management account," pioneered by Merrill Lynch, swept the brokerage industry.
An important part of it was that idle cash -- from the sale of securities or dividend payments or any other source -- was automatically put into a money market fund.
Refco, a large commodities brokerage firm, was one firm that followed the trend.
But its account was not like the others.
Rather than invest the money in a money market fund, which purchased such securities as commercial paper and Treasury bills, Refco used the money to finance its own operations.


Discord and Delay for Bell Atlantic Network
The Bell Atlantic Corporation's $11 billion effort to build an advanced video network over the next five years has been delayed by technical snags and pricing squabbles with its main equipment supplier, the AT&amp;T Corporation.
Bell Atlantic executives said AT&amp;T and its partner, the General Instrument Corporation, had not finished a number of key network components.
The executives also vented displeasure at AT&amp;T's performance as chief coordinator for the huge project.
Meanwhile, they said, AT&amp;T was asking for more money as it sought to hammer out a contract.


For Children
'Peppi and the Pop-Up Dragon'  International Festival of Puppet Theater Joseph Papp Public Theater 425 Lafayette Street East Village (212) 598-7150 Recommended ages: 3 to 8 Tomorrow and Sunday
Two years ago, in a Manhattan preschool class, Penny Jones, a puppeteer, helped 4-year-old children to construct Halloween witch finger puppets; the puppets looked flimsy, but at least one has lasted.
The pencil-thin witch, with a black nylon cape and a substantial broom, seems straight from a spider-filled Oz castle.


A Pog, by Any Other Name, Is an Intense Legal Dispute
Pog has been called the tiddlywinks of the 1990's, heir to mumbletypeg and marbles.
But the explosive popularity of this simple children's game, and its profit potential, have ignited a legal dispute so intense that it has at times erupted into adult violence.
At issue is one company's claim of exclusive rights to the name Pog, the name by which the game is now almost universally known by the children who play it and by the adults who market it.


Robert Weaver, 70, Painterly Illustrator And Noted Teacher
Robert A. Weaver, an influential illustrator who combined dazzling draftsmanship with an unusually painterly style, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70.
The cause was cancer, said his brother, Fritz.


As Abortion Fight Rages, Population-Plan Accord Nears
As the United Nations population conference ended its fourth day of deadlock on the abortion issue, some delegates reported progress today toward agreement on what they called the real purpose of the gathering: a plan to increase global spending on population control and related health services from around $5 billion now to $17 billion by the year 2000.
Nicolaas Biegman of the Netherlands, the usually restrained vice chairman of the conference's main drafting committee, vented exasperation at the increasingly wide gulf between the maneuvering over abortion and the central question of how the world is to stabilize its population, currently estimated at 5.67 billion people, at a supposedly sustainable 7.27 billion by the year 2015.


Swing Time: Finding Bliss In a Batting Cage
EFFECTING a line drive is among the more unsung pleasures available to humans.
But as anyone who has done it can tell you, swinging a bat levelly, crushing a baseball and then watching it describe a flat parabola toward the horizon is a jolt at once as potent as morning coffee and as inspiring as fireworks.
For this, I patronize batting cages.
In the step-and-slash repetition of swinging a bat, I've discovered the satisfaction of honing a small and unimportant physical gesture.
I've learned to savor the occasional joyous confluence of serendipity and skill, the moment when ball and bat meet with the resonant sound of an orchestral wood block. (O.K. It's tinnier when the bat is aluminum.)


U.S. Treasury Bond Prices Barely Budge
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed yesterday as investors limited their trading, awaiting today's release of the Producer Price Index.
Some analysts expect the report to show that inflation is accelerating and to speed up the timetable of another interest-rate increase by the Federal Reserve.
The price of the benchmark 30-year bond was unchanged at a price of 999/32 to yield 7.56 percent.
The yields on some shorter maturities, like the three-year note, fell slightly.


In the Flux And Flukes Of Pop Fads, 21 Albums For Adults
POP records in the 90's have as many meanings as there are niches in the musical marketplace.
Some are fashion statements, others political broadsides.
Some function as aural graffiti, others are spinoffs of pop-star iconography.
Some are spontaneous rants of adolescent frustration, others seek only to soothe nerves and create a pleasant ambiance.
And some are combinations of the above.
Most of these 90's records aspire to do what pop records have always aspired to do, which is simply to make money.
Trying to seize whatever moment they can, they are commercial opportunities competing in a jungle of opportunistic sounds.
Nowadays that moment is as likely to be a beat or an instrumental texture as it is a tune.
If commercially successful, that little fragment will have been used up, an overnight cliche.


Man Wounded At Grand Central


Bluntly, the Tragedy of 'the Troubles'
With the Irish Republican Army's recent announcement of a cease-fire in Northern Ireland, Willie Doherty's art has topicality to spare.
Like all of this young Irish artist's efforts, his two somber works at the Grey Art Gallery and Study Center in Greenwich Village -- a blunt photography installation pitted against a discursive video installation -- concern the tragedy of "the troubles," as the quarter-century of sectarian violence between Roman Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland is called.
Mr.
Doherty, who made the short list of this year's prestigious and closely watched Turner Prize, which is awarded annually in November by the Tate Gallery in London, was born and reared and continues to live and work in Londonderry, a town that has seen some of the worst of the troubles and was the site of the 1968 riot that ignited them.
He knows his subject intimately and, despite some weaknesses in his work and the presence, at Grey, of text panels that pedantically overexplain his efforts, he tends to handle it effectively.


Pope Offers Olive Branch To Serbian Orthodox Church
Pope John Paul II, delivering the sermon he would have made had he gone to Sarajevo today, raised an impassioned plea for peace in Bosnia and offered a "kiss of peace" to leaders of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
Seeking to heal the religious and political differences underlying the strife in Bosnia, John Paul appealed to "international organizations" like the United Nations to redouble efforts for peace in the region.
He sternly condemned the "inhuman practice of so-called ethnic cleansing," but he also prayed that "restrictive measures" like the embargo on Serbia "not become the cause of inhuman suffering," and offered words of reconciliation to the Serbian Orthodox Patriarch, Pavle.


Restaurants
My guest was gazing covetously at the richly patterned china on our table.
"Do you think they would notice if I just slipped one of these bread plates into my purse?" she joked.
She looked left and right, picked up a plate, flipped it over.
"Gianni Versace!" she read.
"I didn't know he made plates as well as clothes. And look, there are little holes to hang it up with. I knew these were too beautiful to eat off of."
The gorgeous plates at Fantino are just one element in a room so filled with luxury that just walking through the door makes you feel pampered.
Your feet pad along soft carpets, your eyes are soothed by the peachy glow of the walls and when you sit your body is embraced by tapestried armchairs.
There are paintings on the walls, flowers on the tables and everywhere an impression of space.
Are there other people in the room?
Certainly, but you would hardly know it just by listening.
Fantino is a civilized experience.


A Museum That's Its Own Best Exhibit
The history of a museum might seem an unlikely subject for three hourlong essays on television, but the Hermitage is no ordinary museum and "The Hermitage: A Russian Odyssey" pays it splendid if somewhat breathless homage.
The first installment, "Catherine the Great: A Lust for Art," is on Channel 13 on Sunday at 7 P.M.
First there was the Winter Palace, built in 1754 in St.
Petersburg as a home for the czars.
But it wasn't until 1763 that Catherine the Great, widow of the murdered Peter III, began building additions to the palace.
These hermitages, fashionable at the time for affording the aristocracy private nooks, as it were, were used to house Catherine's rapidly expanding collection of European art.


Offshore Pipelines Inc.(OFP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


The Desert Fax: Henesey Lands a Job
Ingenuity still has a place in the National Football League.
Brian Henesey, two years removed from Bucknell University, six months removed from a pharmaceutical job, six months removed from inundating Buddy Ryan's fax machine, five months removed from a scam as a Federal Express deliveryman, will be the Arizona Cardinals' backup fullback against the Giants Sunday night.
The Cardinals did not scout Henesey; he scouted them.
No soliciting is permitted at the team's red-brick facility here, but Henesey might be the first player who ever used the "Avon" approach to earn a tryout.


The Spoken Word
GAIL GODWIN, Barnes &amp; Noble, Avenue of the Americas between 21st and 22d Streets, Chelsea.
The author will read from her novel "The Good Husband." Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 727-1672.
LECTURE AND SLIDE SHOW, Tibetan Museum, 338 Lighthouse Avenue, Lighthouse Hill, S.I.
Builder Levy, a photographer, will speak about his work in Mongolia.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission: $2, plus museum admission; $3 for adults, $2.50 for the elderly and $1 for children.
Information: (718) 987-3500.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


New York Energy User Can Buy Elsewhere
The New York State Public Service Commission said yesterday that it would allow the largest customer of the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation to instead buy cheaper electricity from an independent power producer, a decision that analysts said could open the state's utilities to further competition.
The decision by the five-member commission, which regulates utilities in New York, permits the Alcan Aluminum plant in Oswego to buy its electricity from Sithe Energies, which is building a 1,000-megawatt power facility near the Alcan plant in Oswego.
Although the commission said other independent power producers had been able to sell power to industrial customers in the state, analysts said yesterday's decision was a first for New York.


Discrimination or Discourtesy?; A Commuter Won't Leave Her Bus Seat for Hasidic Prayer Meeting
Every day, a dozen commuter buses travel between this Rockland County village and New York City equipped with an amenity seldom found on public transportation: a curtain that separates men and women for Jewish prayers.
The curtains have been there for four decades, ever since Hasidim began settling here and in nearby Monsey and Spring Valley, earning their livelihoods in New York and using the long bus ride to fulfill their daily prayer obligations.


Zale Corp.(ZALE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Minority Test Scores Don't Predict Success
To the Editor:
For various reasons, "minority" candidates sometimes do not do well on standardized tests.
As an adviser to City University of New York undergraduates who seek admission to graduate programs, I often must explain to graduate schools that these tests are unreliable predictors of academic success for our students.


Federated-Macy Marriage Advanced
A Federal bankruptcy judge approved a merger agreement between Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company yesterday, bringing the proposed $4.1 billion combination a step closer to completion.
In approving the document, which the companies signed on Aug. 16, Judge Burton R. Lifland cleared the way for a Sept. 29 hearing on the joint reorganization plan and the disclosure statement filed with the bankruptcy court on Aug. 31.


Two Fighters Seek Victory and Vindication
Julio Cesar Chavez and Meldrick Taylor have learned that swapping blows is one thing.
Convincing the boxing world that their skills have not eroded in recent years is an entirely different challenge.
It is one they hope to achieve well before their Sept. 17 pay-per-view rematch at the M-G-M Grand in Las Vegas, Nev.


Vote on Shifts At Saturn
Workers at the Saturn Corporation in Spring Hill, Tenn., have voted to reject their current rotating shift system, which has been a key element of the company's unusual principle of teamwork.
About 51 percent of the Saturn workers who voted on Wednesday endorsed the traditional union approach, which assigns them a fixed shift based on seniority.
The development is a setback for management of the General Motors unit, which had been besieged by complaints that the new system posed mental and physical hardships for workers and their families.


Audio Gear Is Stolen From the Delacorte
Masked robbers, one armed with a handgun, handcuffed a security guard to a steampipe and stole thousands of dollars worth of audio equipment from the Delacorte Theater in Central Park early yesterday, the police said.
The theft came four days after the New York Shakespeare Festival closed "The Two Gentlemen of Verona" to end its summer season, and hours before the equipment was to be moved.
"We were going to load out a lot of it today," said Rik Kaye, production manager of the festival.
"They went for the expensive stuff."


FILM REVIEW Eggs, Ears And Excess In Paradise
Venturing all the way to remote, exotic Easter Island, the makers of "Rapa Nui" try to capture the natural beauty of a place that can no longer be called unspoiled.
There aren't any gas stations in evidence, but the landscape is now knee-deep in cheesy props and faux primitivism, with the sound of ridiculous dialogue lingering in the air.
In its insistence on imposing the dopiest movie dramaturgy on such a pristine setting, "Rapa Nui" does its best to shrink the world.
"Rapa Nui," which takes its title from the island's original name, is no two-bit folly.
Extravagantly staged, it has been directed by Kevin Reynolds in the snooze-inducing style of his "Robin Hood," though it has none of that film's star power.
The biggest luminary attached to "Rapa Nui" is Kevin Costner, one of its two producers.


Algae Bloom Shuts Down Croton Aqueduct
The aqueduct from the Croton water system in Westchester and Putnam counties that supplies 10 percent of New York City's drinking water has been shut for two weeks because of algae growing in the water there.
Marilyn G. Gelber, Commissioner of the city's Department of Environmental Protection, said yesterday that the algae did not pose a health hazard.
But, she said, "the odor, the look, the taste is not as high as with Catskill and Delaware," the two larger, newer water systems west of the Hudson River.


Starks Wants Harper to Join Party
If Ron Harper signs with the Knicks, John Starks said he would welcome the addition.
Starks and Harper will be the Knicks' top two shooting guards if Harper, a free agent, joins New York.
Both the Knicks and Harper insisted they have not reached an agreement, but Harper made no secret yesterday that the notion of playing in New York appealed to him.


National Medal of Science Winners Are Named
The National Science Foundation announced today that eight scientists would receive the National Medal of Science, the nation's highest award for basic research.
Among the medalists was Dr.
Robert K. Merton, the first sociologist to win the medal.
Dr.
Merton, of Columbia University, studies scientists and is best known for creating the focus interview for marketing purposes.
"Just as physicists, chemists and botanists explore the world of nature, I am observing scientists at work," he said at a news conference.


Cries for Calm Amid the Optimism
There's a fever in the land. Baseball fever. And that's good, right?
Well, not quite yet.
Or so say some owners, players and union officials who spent the last two days working to end a players strike that has idled the major leagues since Aug. 12.


Favored Prince Anointed at Ford
Ever since Henry Ford 2d stepped down 15 years ago from active management of the auto company that bears his family name, people inside and outside the Ford Motor Company have speculated about which member of the next generation would emerge as leader of the nation's most powerful industrial dynasty.
"There are no crown princes," Henry once grumbled, dismissing the notion that a member of his family must control the company.
But the Ford family effectively retains voting control of the auto maker -- indeed, hourly workers still refer to the company as "Ford's" -- and no one here has ever really believed that Mr.
Ford meant what he said.


On Stage, and Off
Cynthia Ozick's Play
Cynthia Ozick's much discussed play, "Blue Light," completed its run at the Bay Street Theater Festival in Sag Harbor, L.I., last weekend, but it won't be coming to New York right off the bat.
The play, which is about two concentration-camp survivors, a woman and her niece, and their betrayal by a stranger who enters their lives (explaining more about him would undermine the play's revelations), has, it is generally acknowledged, a potent second act.
But even Ms.
Ozick herself agrees that the first act, which has been problematic all along, still needs work.
Several regional theaters, including the Coconut Grove Playhouse in Florida and the Long Wharf in New Haven, have offered to give the play its next home, and the producers do want to see the play on its feet again out of town before bringing it to New York.
But the creative work needs to be done first.


A Bush Tops G.O.P. Field Vying to Face Gov. Chiles
Buoyed by his father's name and his own aggressive campaign, Jeb Bush easily vaulted to the top of a seven-candidate field today in this state's Republican gubernatorial primary.
Family ties were also front and center in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate, where Hugh E. Rodham, the brother of Hillary Rodham Clinton, was the top vote getter.
But neither man did well enough to avoid a runoff.
Mr.
Bush faces a one-on-one contest next month with the second-place finisher, Jim Smith, the Florida Secretary of State.
Mr.
Rodham will face Mike Wiley, a former Orlando radio talk show host.


INSIDE
Algeria Talks With Militants
Algeria has begun secret peace talks with jailed leaders of the fundamentalist opposition, officials said.
Violence by the movement has racked Algeria for two years.
Page A10.
Cuba Hopes for U.S.
Deal
Changing its tone, Cuba said it hoped to reach an accord with the United States on immigration issues.
The flood of refugees from the island seems to be slowing.
Page A3.
Movement in Baseball Strike
With the season in danger of being lost, the players' union offered the owners a new plan that, in effect, imposes a payroll and revenue tax on high-revenue clubs.
Page B9.
Settlement in Tailhook Case
A woman sexually abused at a Tailhook Association convention has reached a settlement with the group.
She continues to sue the hotel where the convention was held.
Page A22.
The Ford in Ford's Future
Ford Motor sent a strong signal about which member of the next generation will lead the industrial dynasty, naming William Clay Ford Jr. chairman of a key committee.
Page D1.
Shooting at Grand Central
A man in a business suit shot and wounded another man aboard a subway train at rush hour in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
Page B3.


Seven Agencies Help Finance Study
Seven agencies have teamed up with more than 20 media properties and advertisers to finance a study of media habits in Central and South America.
The study, which is being conducted by Audits and Surveys in New York, is intended to track the reading, viewing and consuming habits of 5,800 people aged 12 to 65 in 19 Latin American countries.
The results are expected in November.
The agency sponsors are Bates Worldwide; BBDO Worldwide; DDB Needham Worldwide; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding; McCann-Erickson; J. Walter Thompson, and Young &amp; Rubicam.
The media sponsors include CNN International, MTV Networks, Reader's Digest and the Weather Channel.


Cuban Centrists Face Retribution in Miami
To the Editor:
Moderate voices in the Cuban exile community are heard less frequently than anti-Castro extremists, but this is not because "they are an insignificant minority in Miami," as Jorge Mas Canosa has alleged.
Indeed, a poll cited by The Economist in July found that "nearly four out of five Cuban-Americans" favor "negotiations with the Cuban Government to facilitate peaceful change."


Rabin Outlines Phased Pullout In Golan Area
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has for the first time publicly given a timetable for a partial Israeli withdrawal on the Golan Heights in return for peace with neighboring Syria.
He told his Cabinet today that he had informed the American intermediaries in talks with the Syrians that Israel would undertake an initial "very slight" pullback, which would last for three years.
In that period, Israel would see how far Syria went in normalizing relations with Israel before deciding on subsequent withdrawals.
This would include such steps as the establishment of embassies in Damascus and Jerusalem.


Leonard/Monahan Adds Executive
Leonard/Monahan in Providence, R.I., said yesterday that it had hired David Baldwin, a senior copywriter at Cole &amp; Weber in Portland, Ore., as senior vice president, creative director and a partner, effective Oct. 10.
Mr.
Baldwin, who is 32, succeeds David Lubars, who left the agency nine months ago for BBDO West in Los Angeles, where he is now president and executive creative director.
Leonard/Monahan was formerly Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly.
Tom Monahan, 44, who had acted as creative director after Mr.
Lubars's departure, will continue as executive creative director, turning over day-to-day duties of running the creative department to Mr.
Baldwin.


Fay's Inc.(FAY,N reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


I.B.M. Agrees to Pact for Venture
A computer-chip company from California and I.B.M. announced yesterday that they had reached agreement on a joint manufacturing venture that could bring as many as 700 jobs over the next three years to the mid-Hudson Valley, where I.B.M. has laid off thousands of employees in the last two years.
Supported by $40 million in low-interest loans from New York State, the computer-chip company, the Cirrus Logic Corporation of Fremont, Calif., plans to invest $100 million in the new operation.
Cirrus Logic and International Business Machines, based in Armonk, N.Y., have agreed to convert an existing I.B.M. plant in East Fishkill in Dutchess County to supply each company with semiconductors used in computers and other electronic equipment.


What Was Said on President's Visit to Maine
To the Editor:
"President Begins a Campaign to Avoid Losses for the Democratic Party in November" (news article, Sept. 6), your report on the President's Labor Day visit to Maine, contained factual errors.


Cygne Designs Inc.(CYDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


U.S. Musters Force, But Dissent Persists
Plans moved forward for a possible invasion of Haiti, with Pentagon officials telling lawmakers that seven cargo ships were being readied.
While Democrats assured President Clinton that he would not need formal Congressional approval, top Republicans said he was only trying to improve his ratings.
The timing and prospects remained uncertain.
Article, page A8.


Giuliani to Put Housing Police Under Bratton
Signaling his determination to move ahead with a merger of New York City's three police departments, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to sign an executive order today that would put the housing police under the jurisdiction of Police Commissioner William J. Bratton as of October.
Paul A. Crotty, the city's Corporation Counsel, said yesterday that the Mayor was issuing the executive order to comply with the State Civil Service law, which requires city employees to receive 20 days' notice before being transferred between agencies.
He said the executive order would be supplemented by a resolution by the city Housing Authority approving the merger.


On My Mind; Yasir Arafat's Promise
On Sept. 9, 1993, Yasir Arafat sent a signed promise to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.
That was four days before he was to meet at the White House with Mr.
Rabin.
The promise was essential for Mr.
Rabin to be able to sign the Israeli-Palestinian outline for peace.


Airliner Crashes Near Pittsburgh; All 131 on USAir Jet Are Killed
A USAir flight from Chicago nose-dived into the ground just outside Pittsburgh as it was preparing to land yesterday evening, killing all 131 people aboard.
It was the worst air disaster in the United States in seven years.
In calm, clear weather, USAir Flight 427, a Boeing 737-300, plunged into a wooded hillside in a sparsely populated area of Hopewell Township in Beaver County, about six miles from the airport and about 20 miles west-northwest of Pittsburgh.
Witnesses said the plane appeared to lose power and altitude, then banked, descending steeply and almost silently into the ground.


Change in Science Curriculum Hurts Students
To the Editor:
"The Science Upgrade Proves Steep" (editorial, Sept. 1) mentions "budget cuts, inadequate materials and pessimism among principals and teachers" as being a threat to the Board of Education's new program to improve New York City's instruction in science and mathematics.


Charter Plan Is Under Fire But on Ballot
After months of partisan debate, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors today unanimously approved the final wording for a charter revision that will go to the voters in November.
And while all six supervisors said they would urge adoption of the revision, which would replace the board with a 19-member legislature, several citizens' groups expressed doubts about whether voters will approve the measure.


The Desert Fax: Henesey Lands a Job
Ingenuity still has a place in the National Football League.
Brian Henesey, two years removed from Bucknell University, six months removed from a pharmaceutical job, six months removed from inundating Buddy Ryan's fax machine, five months removed from a scam as a Federal Express deliveryman, will be the Arizona Cardinals' backup fullback against the Giants Sunday night.
The Cardinals did not scout Henesey; he scouted them.
No soliciting is permitted at the team's red-brick facility here, but Henesey might be the first player who ever used the "Avon" approach to earn a tryout.


A Lonely Job? No, a Lovely View!


New York Energy User Can Buy Elsewhere
The New York State Public Service Commission said yesterday that it would allow the largest customer of the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation to instead buy cheaper electricity from an independent power producer, a decision that analysts said could open the state's utilities to further competition.
The decision by the five-member commission, which regulates utilities in New York, permits the Alcan Aluminum plant in Oswego to buy its electricity from Sithe Energies, which is building a 1,000-megawatt power facility near the Alcan plant in Oswego.
Although the commission said other independent power producers had been able to sell power to industrial customers in the state, analysts said yesterday's decision was a first for New York.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Gary Rajsich scout.


Forzani Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


9 Movie Makers Telling Short Tales
"Notes in a Minor Key," the most confident of the nine short films being shown in a new anthology, "Young Black Cinema II," tells a story of sibling rivalry between young musicians in a style that is as crisply assured as the Louis Jordan-style jazz that infuses the movie with a swinging buoyancy.
When a teen-ager accidentally discovers his grandfather's saxophone, it opens up a painful chapter of family history that had been kept secret.
It turns out that in the 1940's, the grandfather, Kansas (Keith David), and his brother, Teddy (Harry Lennix), played together in an up-and-coming Harlem jazz band.
Most of the film is an extended flashback in which Kansas recalls the devastating consequences of his own professional and sexual envy of his more talented brother.


Olco Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bland Candidate Giving Barry a Battle
Turning blandness into a virtue may just make John Ray the next mayor of the nation's capital.
Although he has been a city councilman for 16 years, Mr.
Ray is so unassuming that most voters still have no idea who he is.
Three times before this campaign, he ran for mayor.
And three times he failed.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "STEVE ALLEN: A RETROSPECTIVE," Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
Screenings of Steve Allen's television work, today through Sunday, featuring "Meeting of Minds," at 12:15 P.M, and "The Steve Allen Comedy Hour," at 2 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly; $3 for children under 13.
Information: (212) 621-6800.
"THE TRADITION OF THE NEW: POSTWAR MASTERPIECES FROM THE GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM," Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Fifth Avenue at 88th Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
"EDWARD HOPPER AND JACK PIERSON: AMERICAN DREAMING," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $7; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.
"BUILDING THE COLLECTION: RECENT ACQUISITIONS AND SELECTED WORKS FROM THE PERMANENT COLLECTION," Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania.
Highlighting works by African, African-American and Hispanic artists.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 6 P.M.
Suggested admission: $3; $2 for students; $1 for the elderly; free for children 12 and younger.
Information: (718) 681-6000.
Closing Next Weekend  "SHUT UP! LITTLE MAN" Thread Waxing Space, 476 Broadway, at Broome Street, SoHo, second floor.
An "audio-verite" work by Gregg Gibbs based on surreptitious tape recordings of two vicious, drunken apartment dwellers in San Francisco.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today through Sunday, 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 966-9520.
"PRIDE EQUALS POWER," Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Photographs chronicling the evolution of the New York Gay Pride March from 1970 to 1993.
Through Sept. 18.
Hours: Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for children; $8 for a family.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"DALI: THE EARLY YEARS," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street, Manhattan.
A retrospective of the artist's work as a teen-ager and young man.
Through Sept. 18.
Hours: Fridays and Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M; Sunday and Tuesday through Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $7; $3.50 for students, the elderly and children.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


A Woman Is Crushed to Death Between Two Buses


Chinese Swimmers Win With Drugs, U.S. Team Leader Charges
In the wake of China's six gold medals and three silvers in the first eight women's events of the world swimming championships, a top official with the United States team said today he was convinced the Chinese were winning with the help of banned performance-enhancing drugs.
Dennis Pursley, the national team director of United States swimming, who oversees the men's and women's programs, called for an immediate and marked improvement in drug-testing procedures conducted by FINA, the sport's governing body, particularly in out-of-competition testing.
If quick progress is not made, Pursley warned, the future of international women's swimming could be in jeopardy.


Allies' Departure Leaves Berlin Without Foreign Troops
Troops of the United States, France and Britain said farewell to Berlin tonight, leaving the city without foreign troops for the first time since the end of World War II.
With a solemn torchlight ceremony at Brandenburg Gate, the last of scores of parades and festivals attended by more than one million Berliners, remaining troops from the three nations were honored in a traditional Prussian-style tattoo, a centuries-old musical tribute used in farewells and decommissionings.
It was performed by a German fife-and-drum corps accompanied by torchbearers and two platoons in arms.


People, People Who Need People
Nobody was waiting to take Brad Gilbert's picture or ask for his autograph yesterday afternoon out on Court 9 at the National Tennis Center.
Word got out that Andre Agassi was scheduled to hit there, probably bare-chested, and that sure was one alternative to Karel Novacek and Jaime Yzaga on the Stadium Court.
"They're waiting for Andre?" Gilbert said, of the growing crowd and the fidgeting newspaper photographers.
Gilbert was roaming the men's locker room, looking for someone to hit with.
He had booked Court 9 in Agassi's name, the way you would drop a name making reservations for dinner.
His protege, Agassi the United States Open savior, happened to be taking the afternoon off.


Man Is Shot on Crowded Subway Train
A man in a business suit shot and wounded another man yesterday morning after a dispute aboard a packed, rush-hour subway train as it pulled into Grand Central station, the police said.
As shots rang out around 8:30 A.M., panicked passengers dived to the floor of the southbound No. 4 train and onto the grimy concrete platform.
Once the shooting ended, people jumped up and scattered, pushing and shoving one another as they rushed to safety.
One woman twisted her ankle while trying to run.


For U.S. Juniors, the Future Isn't Now
Players and executives from the United States Tennis Association player development program gathered in the stands of the shady Grandstand Court at Flushing Meadows yesterday.
The match was not particularly compelling -- the seventh-seeded and 13th-seeded boys were facing each other in the third round of the United States Open junior singles.
The stands were scattered with a handful of fans, most having drifted over from the Stadium Court next door.
But the U.S.T.A. representatives had reason for their visit.
On the court was Justin Gimelstob, the 13th-seeded boy and the final remaining American in what is the premier American event on the international junior tour.
Scott Humphries and Paul Goldstein, the top two juniors from the United States, were upset in the first round.
Only 4 of the 17 American boys in the junior draw made it to the second round.
And only one, Gimelstob, was left in the third round.





Term Limits Defy Constitution, Administration Tells Justices
The Clinton Administration has told the Supreme Court that state-imposed limits on terms for members of Congress are unconstitutional and has asked the Court's permission to present that argument when the Justices hear an important term-limits case from Arkansas later this year.
In a motion filed with the Court last week, Solicitor General Drew S. Days 3d said that because Congressional term limits "directly affect the composition of the Federal legislature," the Government has an important stake in the outcome, although it is not a party to the Arkansas case.


James F. Jacobs; Dancer and Designer, 42
James F. Jacobs, a dancer and interior designer, died on Saturday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 42 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Annabella Gonzalez, a friend and choreographer with whom Mr.
Jacobs danced.


Shuttle Soars Into Orbit to Test Device for Space Rescues
The space shuttle Discovery and six astronauts sailed aloft today on a nine-day mission that is to include the firing of a laser beam for Earth studies, the launching of a satellite for solar studies and the testing of a jet pack for rescuing astronauts.
About 160 miles above Earth, speeding along at more than 17,000 miles an hour, two of the astronauts are to take turns putting on the new backpack next Friday and using it to fly no more than 25 feet from the shuttle.
The $7 million device, making its orbital debut, was developed to allow astronauts who are adrift to save themselves when no rescue craft are available.


On MTV, One Sure Winner
At the MTV Video Music Awards, MTV always wins.
The annual telecast celebrates MTV above all: its power to muster stars, its air of hipness, its hold on the squealing teen-age masses, its endless chain of self-reference.
MTV promotes the video clips, the video clips promote the performers, the performers promote MTV.
For the 11th annual awards show, telecast live from Radio City Music Hall on Thursday night, MTV reveled in its ability to disrupt midtown traffic and crowd the sidewalks.
Pitched to a younger audience and with a news booth prominently displayed on the street, the telecast enjoyed a more hysterical public response than the Grammy Awards broadcasts from the same theater.


Observer; A Lot to Be Modest About
These letters piled here denounce me as an elitist.
My humility makes them hard to answer.
They are all written in such -- well, such an elitist tone.
Annoyed by some half-baked opinion voiced in this column, or irritated by some idle criticism of their favorite novelist or sitcom, their writers mount the high epistolary bench to condemn me as an elitist, hence unfit to address the common man.


Beliefs; An evangelical intellectual finds a kind of heresy in evangelicalism's neglect of the mind.
Evangelical Christians in the United States have suffered their share of scandals.
But perhaps the biggest scandal has nothing to do with Elmer Gantry-like antics, sexual or financial.
It is what Mark A. Noll, a highly regarded historian of American religion and himself an evangelical Christian, calls "the scandal of the evangelical mind."
At least a fourth of the people in the United States classify themselves in surveys as evangelical Christians.
The group is probably the largest, certainly the most religiously active and potentially the most politically powerful religious force in the nation.
And yet, Professor Noll says, evangelicals have let their religious tradition sink into intellectual penury, largely bereft of the kind of vigorous intellectual life that would engage their faith with the whole array of modern learning and artistic expression.


Mortgage Study Found Race Discrimination, Not Redlining
To the Editor:
The Boston Federal Reserve Bank study on discrimination in mortgage lending is misrepresented in "Redlining Under Attack" (front page, Aug. 30).
The study found discrimination in mortgage lending based on race, not on geography (redlining), as you assert.
Indeed, in a follow-up effort using the study's data we found no redlining in Boston.
You imply that our findings are questionable because the study did not include all the relevant variables in the decision to grant a mortgage, was overinfluenced by two minority-owned institutions and was invalidated by the published analysis of David Horne of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
In our view, all three observations are incorrect.


Sister Parish, Grande Dame of American Interior Decorating, Is Dead at 84
Sister Parish, the acclaimed and enduring American interior decorator who began her career when she was a young Depression-era mother and later came to redesign rooms of the White House during the Kennedy Administration, died on Thursday at her home in Dark Harbor, Maine.
She was 84 and also had a home in New York City.
She had suffered a lengthy illness, said Dorothy B. Gilbert, one of her daughters.


Geography, Not Ideology, Counts in District 17
Willie Colon, the internationally known salsa musician turned Democratic Congressional primary candidate, asked a voter in the South Bronx on Thursday afternoon if he knew anything about the district's current Congressman.
Tony Draper, a welder, drew a blank on Representative Eliot Engel's name, but then said, "I know him, he's the guy who lives out of state, Maryland or something."


Brazil Stocks Fly High, But the Word Is Caution
FOR months, the Brazilian stock market has been serving up some of the sweetest returns in the world.
The Bovespa stock index at the Sao Paulo exchange has risen an eye-popping 90 percent in dollar terms this year, compared with the 1,325 percent in local currency caused by the country's hyperinflation.
In the Lipper Analytical Services' survey of closed-end investment funds, the best performers through August were the Brazilian Equity Fund and the Brazil Fund, each up nearly 60 percent for the year.
Now that the monthly inflation rate has dropped from more than 50 percent in June to about 5 percent, Brazil is even more enticing.


Manufacturer Of Rail Cars To Construct A New Plant
Dangling a $41.5 million contract for 34 new commuter trains for the Metro-North Railroad, New York State has lured a Canadian rail car manufacturer to build a new assembly plant in upstate New York.
The plant, officials said yesterday, will be located at the Plattsburgh Air Force Base, which is scheduled to close next year and has long been the economic heart of the relatively isolated area near the Canadian border.
The closest major city is Montreal, which is 65 miles away.


To Our Readers
Starting next week, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on Monday through Saturday will increase to 60 cents in the New York metropolitan area.
The change will not affect the Sunday price, the weekday price outside the metropolitan area, or the cost of copies from The Times's direct home delivery service.


Montana-Young Matchup Steals Spotlight
Pundits and fans have been asking the question all week: Who is the best quarterback in a one-game matchup, Steve Young or Joe Montana?
Several fans have driven past the 49ers complex here, leaning out their car windows and yelling: "Go Joe! Go Kansas City!" The sports radio talk show lines have been buzzing and the local television news programs just can't get enough.
If hype eventually becomes reality on Sunday when San Francisco plays at Kansas City, then the results could be a mini-Super Bowl.
Or, by several people's hope, a preview of the real Super Bowl.


Simpson Prosecutors Will Not Seek Death
Prosecutors said they planned to seek a sentence of life in prison without the possibility of parole for O. J. Simpson when he goes on trial for first-degree murder in the slayings of his former wife and a friend of hers.
The Los Angeles District Attorney's office said that after considering all the evidence, it had decided not to seek the death penalty.
Article, page 6.


The Discipline of Saving for College
When Kalman A. Chaney, author of "Paying for College," begins to brief parents, he urges them to take a deep breath and quips that he has a supply of smelling salts.
A newborn today, he explains, will pay about $360,000 for a degree from an Ivy League college, $180,000 for a private college and $85,000 for a public university.
Once parents get over the shock, Mr.
Chaney tells them to accept the uncertainties of interest rates, inflation, taxes and tuition costs and to establish a regular savings plan, no matter how small.
To his mind, something saved is better than nothing, and with the power of compounding, the sooner parents start, the better.


Quindlen Leaving The Times To Be a Full-Time Novelist
Anna Quindlen, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1992 for "Public &amp; Private," her twice-weekly Op-Ed column in The New York Times, said yesterday that she would leave the paper at the end of the year to devote herself full time to her career as a novelist.
Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the publisher of The Times, said: "It will be hard to imagine the Op-Ed page without her. Anna brought her graceful writing and insights to the paper in a way that only she could do. She will be missed by all her colleagues and by her other readers as well."


U.S. Open '94; Now, If He Can Only Get Past Martin . . .
Before Andre Agassi can get around to winning the United States Open and saving tennis, there is the matter of Todd Martin in today's semifinals.
It's a match Agassi could very well lose.
"The scary thing is that Todd has played lousy here and he's in the semis," Brad Gilbert, Agassi's coach, said yesterday, referring to the three match points Martin faced in the first round against Guillaume Raoux and the one-set deficit he was in before Richey Reneberg was forced to retire from their fourth-round match.


Finding Best Write-Off On Cars for Business
WITH auto makers about to roll out new models, car shoppers across the country are crowding the showrooms, often looking for bargains on 1994 cars that they can either buy or lease.
"The trend is toward leasing" if the car is to be used mainly for business, said Avery E. Neumark, a partner in Weber, Lipshie &amp; Company, an accounting firm in New York City.
"You generally get a better tax write-off" because the actual cost of the lease may be deducted, whereas there are limits on purchases.


Messier Is Missing From Rangers' Camp
The arrival of hockey players in training camp in early September is like the return of students for a new school year.
But Mark Messier was absent when his Ranger teammates reported to a Rye, N.Y., hotel for the official opening of camp at midnight last night.
You might say "the dog ate his contract," but it's a little more complicated.
Messier, the captain of the Stanley Cup champions, is involved in a sensitive salary negotiation and is seeking to more than double his salary, which is scheduled for $2.6 million this season.
Earlier in the day, his father, Doug Messier, bargained via telephone with Neil Smith, the president and general manager of the team.


Resutlts Plus
GOLF  A Surprised Leader  Robin Freeman compiled a second consecutive 68 and took a one-shot lead yesterday at the halfway point of the $1.3 million Canadian Open in Oakville, Ontario.
Freeman, yet to win in four seasons on the PGA Tour, completed 36 holes over the Glen Abbey Golf Club in 136, eight under par.
Freeman had no illusions about his chances of holding on for the $234,000 first prize.
"This is new to me," Freeman, who has a career-high finish of a tie for third, said.
"I'm just going to try to play as well as I can." Jay Don Blake was astounded to be one shot back, after opening the tournament with a 74.
He was tied at seven-under with Clark Dennis and Brandel Chamblee.
Dennis shot 66 and Chamblee 69. (AP) Skinner Holds Lead: Val Skinner, barely finishing before play was suspended by thunderstorms, shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday to take the early first-round lead in the Ping-Cellular One Golf Championship in Portland, Ore.
Play was suspended for 2 hours 38 minutes with more than half of the players yet to complete their round.
Eighteen hadn't even started.
Skinner birdied the final two holes, then had time to eat a quick bowl of soup before the horn sounded suspending play.
Skinner had a one-shot lead over Michelle Redman, who had hit the first shot on her final hole when the delay began, had a sandwich during the break, then returned to miss a birdie putt and finish at four-under-par 68.
A Hall of Famer, Pat Bradley, joined Amy Alcott, Michelle McGann and Cathy Johnston-Forbes at two-under-par 70 on the par-72, 6,319-yard Columbia-Edgewater Country Club course. (AP) N.H.L.  'Teemu!
Teemu!'  Teemu Selanne, playing in his native Finland, scored four goals and added an assist to help the Winnipeg Jets beat Tappara of Tampere, 8-2, last night in an exhibition game in Helsinki.
The Jets, who practiced only five times before the game, won easily in the first game of a four-team tournament.
Spurred on by shouts of "Teemu! Teemu!" the 24-year-old right wing played his first game since an Achilles' tendon injury in January.
"I was very nervous," Selanne said.
"It's always nerve-racking to play in front of your home crowd, especially as it was my first game after my injury." Today, the defending Finnish champion, Jokerit, faces Helsinki IFK. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Poll-Sitter: Nebraska  Nebraska (2-0), showing why it's ranked No. 1 in the polls, piled up 612 yards of offense in defeating Texas Tech, 42-16, Thursday night in Lubbock, Tex.
The Cornhuskers were leading by just 14-9 in the third quarter when they finally got their offense in gear against the Red Raiders (1-1).
Nebraska's Lawrence Phillips scored 2 touchdowns and finished with 175 yards on only 19 carries.
Quarterback Tommie Frazier scored Nebraska's first two touchdowns on runs of 58 and 3 yards, then threw a 35-yard touchdown pass to Eric Alford. (AP)


U.S. Open '94; Graf and Sanchez Becoming Familiar Foes as Finalists
Although the imminent thunder and lightning never showed up yesterday to disturb the women's semifinals at the United States Open, the inelegant curse of the double fault did strike twice in the same place on the Stadium Court and left the usual wreckage in its wake: a pair of unhappy losers in Jana Novotna and Gabriela Sabatini.
Helped along by the serving woes of their ardent but too often artless challengers, Steffi Graf and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, respectively the top two ranked women in the world, used straight-set victories to reach the final round.
For them, this is a round that has become old hat.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday, about the purchase of the American Residential Holding Corporation by the Chase Manhattan Corporation, misstated the price.
Chase paid $348 million, not $384 million.


Baseball's Owners Reject Players' Bid To Tax Rich Clubs
Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner, joined the negotiations on the 29th day of the players' strike yesterday, and joined his bargaining team in rejecting the players' proposed plan for taxing clubs' revenues and payrolls.
The move seemed to dampen the chances for a quick agreement in the dispute that has shut down baseball since Aug. 11.
But Mr.
Selig did not call off the rest of the season on the day he had set as a deadline for doing so.
And he did meet secretly with the players' labor leader, prompting speculation that the two sides could yet reach a season-saving settlement.


33 Are Charged as Drug Gang Members
On the street, they had nicknames like Chick, Isa, Popcorn, Macho and Joey Tell.
But yesterday, under their real names -- Edgardo Pabon, Victor Ocasio, Manuel Salgado, James Perez and Joseph Duran -- they were among 33 men charged with crimes like conspiracy and murder, in indictments that law-enforcement authorities said destroyed a $350,000-a-week crack cocaine operation, with as many as 2,000 customers a night in Manhattan Valley.


Bridge
When the world championships begin in a week's time in Albuquerque, N.M., the women from Japan are likely to make a strong impression.
Four of them recently won a Japanese national team title with help from the diagramed deal: it produced what is surely the biggest swing of the year -- perhaps of the decade -- in serious competition.
With Mizuko Tan and Kazuko Banno in the North-South positions, the bidding went as shown.
East's take-out double of one spade was peculiar, but there are no rules for bidding extremely freakish hands.
Anything that lets the bidder eventually become the declarer can be judged a success.


Bosnian Serbs Increase Purges of Muslims, Red Cross Says
The Bosnian Serbs, stepping up a 29-month campaign to purge Muslims from the territory they hold, have forced nearly 600 Muslim civilians from the northeastern town of Bijeljina across the front line into the Government-held town of Tuzla, an International Comittee of the Red Cross official said today.
The forced evictions last night of women, children and old men came as the United States and its European partners put the final touches on an agreement with the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, the man who armed, financed and backed the Bosnian Serb actions against Bosnian Muslims before ending his support for them last month.


CHRONICLE
With her retirement approaching next year, the soprano LEONIE RYSANEK says that she wants to be remembered as an artist, not as an opera star or, even worse to her, a legend.
The Associated Press reports that Ms.
Rysanek, 67, plans to give her final performance in the Metropolitan Opera's 1995-96 season, when she is to play the countess in Tchaikovsky's "Queen of Spades."


Building Explosion Sets Off Moscow Residents' Fears
It was a measure of the edginess of Moscow life that many Russians instantly assumed that organized crime and not a gas leak was behind the mysterious explosion that killed at least 7 people and wounded more than 46 this week.
Three blasts ripped through a two-story building in a quiet residential part of the city early Wednesday evening.
This afternoon, rescue workers ended their search for victims.
But investigators continued to hunt for clues.


Managed Care Shortchanges Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
The growth of managed care companies has created a new health care power group whose motivation is making money.
Whatever progress has been made toward kinder and more human care is being lost.
In my own practice as a psychologist, I find myself doling out therapy sessions like precious pearls to individuals in need, so that I will have sessions left in the event of a major crisis.
I cannot even rely on getting the full 30 sessions that a given policy might cover because the case manager, usually having lesser credentials than myself and fewer years of experience, may not be agreeable.


USAir Must Now Combat Fliers' Fears
USAir, struggling with poor financial and accident records even before Flight 427 crashed Thursday night, now adds to its problems the perception among many travelers that it is no longer safe to fly the airline.
"Everyone who called about USAir this morning was trying to change to a different airline," said Bonnie Scheck, a vice president at Travel Trends, a travel agency in Fort Lee, N.J.


The Paragraph on Abortion
Following is the text of Paragraph 8.25, which was adopted today by delegates preparing the proposed final document of the United Nations Conference on Population and Development:
In no case should abortion be promoted as a method of family planning.
All governments and relevant intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations are urged to strengthen their commitment to women's health, to deal with the health impact of unsafe abortion* as a major public health concern and to reduce the recourse to abortion through expanded improved family planning services.
Prevention of unwanted pregnancies must always be given the highest priority, and all attempts should be made to eliminate the need for abortion.
Women who have unwanted pregnancies should have ready access to reliable information and compassionate counseling.
Any measures or changes related to abortion within the health system can only be determined at the national or local level according to the national legislative process.
In circumstances in which abortion is not against the law, such abortion should be safe.
In all cases, women should have access to quality services for the management of complications arising from abortion.
Post-abortion counseling, education and family-planning services should be offered promptly which  [ would ]  also help to avoid repeat abortions.


Mine Won't Threaten Yellowstone Park
To the Editor:
The proposed New World gold mine that our company plans to construct does not threaten Yellowstone National Park, despite your suggestion to the contrary in "No Mines Near Yellowstone" (editorial, Aug. 29).
Although only three miles east of the Yellowstone boundary, the mine property is not in a pristine area.
We have been cleaning up the debris and damage left from mining activities by others dating back to the 1860's.


Negotiating With a Bank to Buy a House in Foreclosure
When Susan and Frank Ciafone went looking for a house, they stumbled on a jewel in the rough.
Their real estate agent showed them a house in Kings Park, L.I., that had been abandoned for three years and that was in pretty bad shape.
They made an offer, but were rejected by the bank.
After lengthy negotiations, the parties came to terms.
The couple agreed to pay the asking price, and the bank's insurance company agreed to make repairs to the house.
As for the Ciafones' mortgage, the bank handled the paperwork and waived the closing costs, a common practice in such situations.


REPORT ON PRICES RENEWS CONCERNS OF MORE INFLATION
Producer prices rose a surprising six-tenths of a percent in August, the biggest monthly rise in nearly four years.
The spurt in prices fanned fears that inflation, which has been below 3 percent for three years, is speeding up.
The surge in the Producer Price Index for Finished Goods, which measures price changes at the nation's farms and factories, made another interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve more likely this fall.
It also sent stock and bond prices tumbling.  [ Page 37. ]  And economists scurried back to their computers to take another look at their relatively sanguine inflation forecasts for next year.


Esiason and the Jets Brace for Elway
There is a white bronco bucking toward the sky high over the open end of Mile High Stadium in Denver.
For too long, the statue has put quarterbacks who oppose John Elway in a Wild West shootout frame of mind.
Who can blame them?


Wolverines And Irish And Many Questions
The scalpers had not yet taken their places at the ramp from Exit 77 of the Indiana Toll Road, and the mobs had not taken over the bookstore.
It was early Thursday evening, at the end of football practice, a point in the week when the signature pessimism of Notre Dame Coach Lou Holtz is usually transformed into assuredness.
Even when Michigan is coming to town.
But this Michigan-Notre Dame game had been preceded by a greater degree of uncertainty on the part of both teams than most of their high-profile, early-season meetings.
Notre Dame's uncharacteristic problems up front, and the series of Michigan injuries, have complicated the preparations for a game that has an annual impact on the top of the national polls.


School Starts Minus Teachers
Public school teachers in Mount Vernon, N.Y., went on strike, but schools opened anyway, with a makeshift staff of substitutes.
Page 21.


Fuji Develops Big-Capacity Floppy Disk
Japan's leading manufacturer of photographic film, the Fuji Photo Film Company, said today that it had developed technology for a computer floppy disk that can store more than 50 times the data that diskettes now being used can hold.
With computers entering the multimedia age, the high-capacity disks could provide a convenient way for computer users to carry files and programs containing digitized pictures, video and sound.
Such content can quickly overload the storage capacity of conventional floppy disks.


For Many on Jet, Day Began With Routine Business and Ended With Terror
Most passengers who boarded USAir Flight 427 in Chicago on Thursday were headed home to Pittsburgh from business trips.
Timothy McCoy, 27, had been repairing a machine that had broken down in Rockford, Ill.
Lisa M. Ferm, 34, a regional director for Interstate Hotels, was returning home with two colleagues.
David Mirilovich, 38, had gone to an engineering seminar.
Randall Dellefield, 37, was at a conference with others from the Federal Department of Energy.
Larry Grondin, 41, was on his way back from a machine tool show.
And Daniel A. Clark, 61, had been to his company's home office near Chicago.


Stronger From Bond Of Cancer
MYRNA MARCH nudged the cat from her lap and took her husband's hand.
"You'll be running for both of us," she said, referring to the Race for the Cure in Central Park, where on Sunday her husband will be one man among many women raising money and calling attention to breast cancer.
Self-consciously, the woman who had been a singer and model touched the blonde wig she has worn since once again starting chemotherapy to kill a cancer that has recurred in her breastbone.
While her husband runs, she will be resting up from her latest dose of the tiring treatment.


Construction Industry Gives the Most to Gubernatorial Candidates
More than 25 percent of the large contributions to Connecticut gubernatorial candidates this year came from lawyers, lobbyists and people associated with the construction industry, according to a report released today by Common Cause, the nonpartisan good-government group.
The report, based on a computer analysis of all contributions over $1,000 as of July 7, showed that the construction industry had given the largest share, $275,119, followed by lawyers and lobbyists with a total of $259,416.


Public &amp; Private; Barbie At 35
My theory is that to get rid of Barbie you'd have to drive a silver stake through her plastic heart.
Or a silver lame stake, the sort of thing that might accompany Barbie's Dream Tent.
This is not simply because the original Barbie, launched lo these 35 years ago, was more than a little vampiric in appearance, more Natasha of "Rocky and Bullwinkle" than the "ultimate girl next door" Mattel describes in her press kit.


U.S. Indicts 2 Businessmen As Chinatown Gang Lords
Detective John Gaw accompanied Federal investigators in a raid on a Chinatown gambling den on Super Bowl Sunday in 1993, and acted as surprised as everyone else when they found an abandoned room.
Detective Gaw had helped plan the raid -- but, prosecutors said yesterday, he also tipped off the Chinatown crime boss who ran the place.
Detective Gaw was indicted yesterday on corruption charges, but Federal prosecutors said his case was only part of a far larger one, involving a complex criminal enterprise based in Chinatown but reaching as far as San Francisco and Hong Kong.


A Hatchet Buried on the Longest Border
Russian and Chinese leaders signed an accord in Moscow last Saturday to end one of the world's bitterest border conflicts.
For the first time, as President Yeltsin said, practically the entire border between the two giants, extending some 2,700 miles, has been legally settled.
The "practically" refers to the still-unresolved status of two islands on the Amur River, and another on the Ussuri River.
These are relative flyspecks, unlikely to provoke the furious confrontation that led to armed clashes in 1969.


President Mulls Deal On Trade
In a push to overcome the last major obstacle to winning Congressional approval of the new global trade accord, the Clinton Administration is considering postponing for this year a provision it wanted to help negotiate future pacts.
The Administration had been seeking to include the provision in a bill now before Congress that would approve and pay for the already negotiated General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade accord.
This new GATT accord lowers tariffs and expands free trade around the world.


Panel Names Chief Counsel For Inquiry In Espy Case
A special panel of Federal appellate court judges today named Donald C. Smaltz, a Los Angeles lawyer, as the independent counsel to investigate Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy's dealings with the nation's largest poultry-processing company.
The appointment of Mr.
Smaltz came one month after Attorney General Janet Reno asked the judges to name an outside prosecutor to examine whether Mr.
Espy broke the law when he accepted sports tickets, lodging and travel from Tyson Foods Inc., the Arkansas-based chicken-processing company, and other corporations regulated by the Department of Agriculture.


City Opera's Long Balancing Act Presenting 'Madama Butterfly'
The New York City Opera opened its fall season on Thursday night with an honest synopsis of the company's virtues and shortcomings.
The piece, "Madama Butterfly," is old and beloved, but the City Opera subjects it to unfamiliar twists.
The performance balanced the apt with the inept.
Secure in its fame though Puccini's opera may be, the description "deathless masterpiece" sits uneasily.
"Butterfly," in fact, died several times before reaching the standard repertory.
Puccini was appalled by the opera's failure in 1904, took it out of circulation and put in a call to rewrite.
The seamless melodrama, teary beauty and dessertlike sadness now so cherished by audiences worldwide were not quite so evident in that altogether tougher original.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Producer prices surged at a surprisingly sharp pace.
The Government said that the Producer Price Index rose six-tenths of a percent in August.
Stock and bond markets tumbled as the higher-than-expected rise looked as if it could be the first sign of the rising inflation that the Federal Reserve was trying to avert.  [ Page 1. ] International
The Clinton Administration may hold off on "fast track" powers it wanted to help negotiate future trade agreements.
The Administration had sought to include in a bill approving the new GATT accord a provision renewing the President's authority to submit trade accords to the House and Senate for a single vote in each chamber with no amendments allowed.
But the Administration is now considering postponing the provision for this year in an effort to win approval now for the GATT agreement.  [ 37. ]
South America is undergoing a social security revolution as millions of workers turn from state pension systems to open privately administered individual retirement accounts.  [ 37. ]  Mexico sent a two-part signal when it seized a powerful financial group and issued a warrant for its chairman: that the old ways of doing business persisted to a degree, but that the Government was willing to prosecute corruption.
News Analysis.  [ 37. ] Companies
American Express is said to be planning two deals for Thomas Cook's travel offices in the United States and international corporate travel accounts in Britain.  [ 39. ]
Fuji Photo Film has developed a floppy disk that can store more than 50 times the data that current diskettes can hold.  [ 39. ]
A Japanese company thinks it has found a use for interactive television in the United States: cable karaoke.  [ 37. ]
Mercantile Stores said it was holding discussions on a possible merger.
The company did not identify the prospective suitors.  [ 39. ]
Union Carbide has sold its stake in a plant in Bhopal, India, that was the site of the worst industrial accident in history.  [ 39. ]
The crash of USAir Flight 427 compounds a perception among many travelers that it is no longer safe to fly the airline.  [ 9. ]
Bombardier will build an assembly plant in upstate New York.
The Canadian manufacturer will build 34 new commuter trains for the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.  [ 25. ] Markets
Stocks tumbled as the report of a sharp rise in producer prices unnerved financial markets.
The Dow fell 33.65 points.  [ 37. ]
Treasury prices fell sharply as the producer price report revived investors' fears of inflation.  [ 45. ]
The dollar weakened against the German mark and other currencies, following the selloff in the bond market.  [ 46. ]
Gold prices jumped as investors, surprised by the surge in producer prices, shifted money into precious metals -- considered a safe haven from inflation.
Gasoline prices fell.  [ 46. ] Your Money
Saving for a child's college education?
A plan and an early start can make the difference.
A look at two families in sharply different situations shows that a reasonable strategy to pay for college can be created at various income levels and ages.  [ 34. ]
The Brazilian stock market has been red-hot, with the Bovespa stock index rising 90 percent in dollar terms this year.
But professional investors remain cautious because of the market's volatility and the threat of renewed hyperinflation.  [ 34. ]
Leasing may give the best tax write-offs on cars used for business.
The I.R.S. has announced depreciation limits on purchases of cars that cost more than $14,600.  [ 35. ]


COMPANY BRIEFS
FORSTMANN &amp; CO., New York, a fabric maker, said it had terminated its offer to buy certain assets of Marion Fabrics from Texfi Industries Inc. because of "difficult conditions in the equity market." LORAL CORP., New York, said its Loral Defense Systems-Akron division, based in Akron, Ohio, had won a contract valued at more than $50 million from the Royal Saudi Air Force for a ground-based training system for F-15S aircraft.


Hiroshima Bomb Display Still Distorts History; Battling for Balance
To the Editor:
"The Smithsonian and the Bomb" (editorial, Sept. 5) depicts Congress and veterans groups as needlessly short-circuiting the "process" with their complaints about bias in the National Air and Space Museum's plan to display the Enola Gay, the B-29 that dropped the first atomic bomb.
You say that months ago the museum director, Martin Harwit, "wrote to his curators telling them that the exhibition was one-sided," and "That is how the process ought to work." Maybe so -- but that isn't how it did work.
It was only because of protests by veterans groups that Mr.
Harwit re-evaluated his position last April and concluded that "we do have a lack of balance" and that "much of the criticism that has been levied against us is understandable." In June, the curators -- backed by Mr.
Harwit -- declared the exhibition plan to be final except for "minor wording changes."


Critics Warn That Immigration Pact Leaves Many Cuban Issues Unresolved
The Administration trumpeted its immigration agreement with Cuba today as a big victory, but officials warned that Cuba was not going to disappear as a nagging problem.
"We first have to see whether the Cubans are serious about enforcing the agreement," a senior Administration official said.
"And we continue to be concerned about other problems there, like human rights abuses and the lack of movement toward democracy."


Reds' Sanders Faces A Felony Charge
The police in Cincinnati yesterday charged Cincinnati Reds outfielder DEION SANDERS with a felony arising from his confrontation with an off-duty police officer at Riverfront Stadium last month.
In upgrading earlier misdemeanor charges against Sanders, WILLIAM GUSTAVSON of the prosecutor's office said the player was charged with failure to comply with an order or signal of a police officer.
Sanders was also charged with two misdemeanors for leaving the scene of an accident in the Aug. 8 incident, the police said.


Rise in Producer Prices Unhinges Bond Market
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled yesterday after a Government report showed a surprising surge in producer prices.
Although investors had expected higher wholesale prices, the sharpness of the increase -- the Producer Price Index posted its biggest monthly increase in four years -- unnerved the market, analysts said.


New Ethics in Mexico; Move in Bank Scandal Shows Willingness To Attack Corruption, Yet Old Ways Persist
By seizing one of Mexico's most powerful financial groups and issuing an arrest warrant for its fugitive chairman, the Mexican Government this week sent a pair of powerful messages to United States businesses planning to cross the border.
The first concedes that the old system of influence and corruption, which marked Mexican business while the economy was largely closed to outsiders, still exists to some degree despite far-reaching economic modernization under President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.


CHRONICLE
Most colleges celebrate milestone anniversaries with symposiums, colloquia and forums or with processions, dinners and other lofty commemorations.
Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., will be doing all of that to marks its bicentennial next February.
But Dr.
ROGER HULL, the school's president, plans to get the celebration going tomorrow by leading a flotilla of four canoes down the Mohawk and Hudson rivers to Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  ACCORD ON CUBA EXODUS
Cuba agreed to stop the exodus of its citizens in return for a United States promise to accept 20,000 Cuban refugees a year, but those who have been picked up by the Coast Guard may not be accepted.  1


Teacher Held After Angry School Dispute
A substitute teacher was arrested on Thursday on charges that she hit two 12-year-old girls and one of their mothers after a raucous community school board meeting in Washington Heights, the police said.
The teacher, Argentina Cruz, 34, was charged with three counts of third-degree assault after the altercation outside Public School 48 shortly before 10 P.M., said Lieut.
Raymond Ferrari, a police spokesman.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Named Randy Wittman assistant coach.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Named Chris Brienza director of public relations.
Football  National Football League GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Claimed Alai Kalaniuvalu, guard, off waivers from the Washington Redskins.
Placed Roland Mitchell, cornerback, on injured reserve.
Hockey  National Hockey League BOSTON BRUINS -- Returned Craig Johnson and Neil Savary, goaltenders; Darren Wright and Charles Paquette, defensemen; Brian Secord, center; and Andre Roy, Daniel Goneau and Jeremy Schaefer, left wings, to their Canadian junior teams.
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Signed Gary Suter, defenseman, to a three-year contract.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Jeff Nielsen, right wing, and Ken Gernander and Dave Smith, centers.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Assigned Martin Hamrlik, defenseman, and Jim Giacin, forward, to Peoria of the International Hockey League, and Marc Stephan, forward, to Tri-City of the Western Hockey League.
Announced that Maurizio Catenacci, forward, has left camp.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Named Paul Turner assistant director of media relations and Roger Ross media relations assistant.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Returned Yanick Jean, defenseman, to Chicoutimi of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League; Jonathan Murphy, defenseman, to Peterborough of the Ontario Hockey League; and Ryan Pawluk, left wing, to Kitchener of the Ontario Hockey League.
Horse Racing  BELMONT PARK -- Suspended Richard Migliore, jockey, for 10 days for careless riding in the ninth race Sept. 7.
Migliore appealed the ban and was granted an injunction until a hearing can be conducted.


No Headline
"Someone has to say again: 'It is simply not right. You shouldn't have a baby before you're ready, and you shouldn't have a baby when you're not married." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ 6:4. ]


The Croats Prepare for the Pope


Jordan Hasn't Lost Stuff in Basketball
He kicked up his right foot, ever so slightly, as the ball dropped through the net.
A 3-pointer from the left arc.
He winked.
He smiled.
And then he proceeded to dunk the basketball as if he had never been gone.
Six times.
No, seven, each with its own blend of artistry and power.
He winked some more, and for a few magical moments tonight, in the city where he led the way in creating three consecutive National Basketball Association titles, Michael Jordan was again the center of the basketball universe.


U.S. Open '94: Notebook; A Grand Slam In Doubles Is Foiled
The Grand Slam doubles quest of Gigi Fernandez and Natalya Zvereva was on the verge of ending in the United States Open semifinals for the second straight year when their match was suspended by a cloudburst that struck as they were two points away from being upended.
They were only temporarily saved by the rain yesterday.


Presidents Don't Ride on Coattails of Governors
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 1 front-page article on Presidential contenders and New York politics repeats the assertion that a state's governor has great importance in Presidential politics.
This myth is repeated between Presidential elections, but there is no evidence that a governor helps a Presidential candidate one iota.
In 1992, President Clinton carried 18 states with Democratic governors, 13 with Republicans and 1 headed by an independent.
President Bush won 9 states with Democratic governors, 8 with Republicans and 1 with an independent.


Cuba's Hidden Gain
To judge from everything the Cuban Government has said in recent weeks, the agreement it signed with the United States today in New York to stop the flow of undocumented migrants cannot possibly work.
President Fidel Castro is obliged under the accord to try to keep his countrymen from fleeing by sea.
But what he received in return -- mainly an assurance that at least 20,000 Cubans wishing to immigrate to the United States will be granted visas each year -- falls so far short of what Cuban officials say is needed to halt the flood as to raise questions about whether they have a vested interest in the deal's failure.


Teachers Go on Strike In Mt. Vernon
Teachers at all 15 public schools here went on strike this morning but district leaders opened school doors anyway, relying on a patched-together staff of substitutes, lunch monitors and parents to oversee the system's 9,600 children.
The resulting chaos and confusion bore more resemblance to mass baby-sitting than education for the 36 percent of the student population that showed up.
At Longfellow Elementary School, children as young as 7 ran around unsupervised during their lunch break as their teachers, wearing red-and-white placards, walked a picket line a few yards away.


Israeli-P.L.O. Squabble Delays Aid for Arabs
A much anticipated meeting of donor countries that could have freed $160 million in aid to the Palestinians was canceled today after negotiators for the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel argued over the status of Jerusalem.
Announcing the cancellation, the World Bank, which had organized the meeting, expressed "deep disappointment at the way things have evolved." The donor countries were ready to disburse some of the $2.4 billion they had pledged to Palestinians for projects in the Gaza Strip and Jericho during the next five years.


Honor Frederick Douglass With a Coin
To the Editor:
The year 1995 will mark the 100th anniversary of the death of Frederick Douglass, and many hope a circulating coin will be issued to honor him.
Douglass is best known as an abolitionist writer and editor, a former slave (who freed himself).
Through his lecture tours of England, he roused sympathy and support for the anti-slavery cause, and some historians credit him with keeping England from openly declaring its support for the Confederacy during the Civil War.
Douglass published and wrote The North Star, the widely read abolitionist newspaper, while living in Rochester.
He supported John Brown's cause to help free the slaves and later urged the enlistment of black soldiers in the war to preserve the Union.


Destruction of Smallpox Virus Backed in W.H.O. Committee
After a reprieve, the smallpox virus seems headed for destruction after all.
In a decision that seems to spell the end for the last remaining stocks of smallpox virus, a 10-member committee of the World Health Organization recommended unanimously yesterday that the virus be destroyed on June 30, 1995.


No Headline
Man Shot in Subway Indicates He Could Identify the Gunman
A man who was shot on a train at the Grand Central subway station amid a crush of morning commuters on Thursday told investigators that he did not know his attacker, but that he would be able to identify him, the police said yesterday.
Investigators had initially believed that the shooting was the result of a dispute between two acquaintances.


NATO Membership for Russia Doubted
Senior German and American officials agreed today that Russia could not become a member of NATO anytime soon, but their agreement was couched in terms suggesting that of the two allies, the United States was more open to future Russian membership.
"If Russia were to become a member of NATO, it would blow NATO apart," the German Defense Minister, Volker Ruhe, told a conference in Berlin.
"NATO would become like a United Nations of Europe. This isn't going to work, and why should we lie about it or be ambiguous about it?"


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.72
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.55
4.52
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.93
4.85
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.42
7.27
5.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.70
7.56
5.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.56
8.39
6.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.46
6.38
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Performance Is Defying Pat Explanations
It is difficult to find a theme that explains the behavior this year of the various stock fund categories.
While rising interest rates and a weakening dollar account for some of the movements, they certainly do not explain all of them.
Technology funds, which focus mainly on stocks in small United States companies, have performed well.
But aggressive growth funds, which also own small company stocks, have fared poorly.


Devils' Young Center Feels the Pressure
Jimmy Dowd is the young center the Devils are counting on to fill much of the void left by the departure of Bernie Nicholls, who signed as a free agent with the Chicago Blackhawks.
Although Dowd is virtually assured a spot on the roster after his remarkable emergence in the playoffs last spring, it is not the kind of talk Dowd wants to hear.
He knows the pressure is still on, even though the Devils showed their confidence in him this week by signing the 25-year-old New Jersey native to a three-year contract at a substantial raise.


In Baptist Talk, Clinton Stresses Moral Themes
President Clinton told black Baptists at a convention today that government alone could not halt the decline in social and moral standards.
He said that far too many young women are having abortions, and that only caring adults can rescue inner-city children, adding that it was time for Americans to revive faith in themselves -- and in him as well.
The remarks, in part a reprise of speeches about personal responsibility, sounded a familiar note that White House officials said was not intended to bolster the President's campaign-season credentials as a moderate Democratic leader.
But, they said, he will probably repeat the theme through the November elections.


Fox Outbids CBS for N.H.L. Games
Fox Sports now has a second sport, acquiring the network television rights to the National Hockey League yesterday to add to the National Football Conference rights that it purchased in December for $1.58 billion.
Once again, Fox outbid CBS for a major sports property.
Fox will pay $155 million over the next five years to broadcast games on up to 20 dates, starting with 11 in the upcoming season, according to people familiar with the agreement.
Fox's hockey schedule will start with the All-Star Game on Jan. 21, followed by regular-season and playoff games.
It will show up to three Stanley Cup Finals games, all in prime time.


Selig Holds the String, but Only Tugs at the Plug
I guess it's true. Baseball really is a sport in which you don't need a clock.
Remember that Sept. 9 deadline? Never mind.


Editors' Note
The stock tables in Business Day today apparently include incorrect final prices for more than two dozen leading stocks because of a stock trader's error in reporting some late trades.
It was unclear which stocks were affected; an explanatory article appears on page 38.
Corrected prices for any affected stocks will be published when they become available.


Australian's Numbers Add Up to a 400 Mark
John Carew had done what he usually does before his prize pupil and fellow Australian swims the 400-meter freestyle.
He had written out Kieren Perkins's optimal split times on a small piece of paper.
Tonight at the world swimming championships, the last number on Carew's list was "3:43.86," a final time more than a second better than Yevgeny Sadovyi's world record.


MacPhail to Join Cubs
ANDY MacPHAIL will leave his job as general manager of the Minnesota Twins to run the Chicago Cubs, both teams confirmed yesterday.
The Twins' owner, CARL POHLAD, gave MacPhail permission to get out of the last two years of his contract to become the Cubs' chief executive officer and president.
MacPhail was offered the position, vacant since 1991, on Wednesday.


Victory for U.S. Is Full of Pitfalls
At first glance, yesterday's agreement on Cuban immigration appears to be a triumph for the Clinton Administration.
But it does not mean that Cuba will disappear as a nagging policy problem or even that the flow of refugees will stop.
And the talks brought Cuba a greater American hearing than it had received in years for its argument that the embargo the United States has kept on Cuba's economy is senseless.


Layoffs Force Bigger Classes For New York City Students
Students who reported to New York City high schools, which opened yesterday, faced larger classes and fewer course choices because of surging enrollments and the layoffs of hundreds of teachers' aides and other personnel.
The Board of Education's budget, though larger than last year's, did not increase sufficiently to finance the growth in enrollment, a negotiated raise in teacher salaries and increased costs in special education, board officials said.


Taking On the Tough Guys: It's Idealistic, but Is It Smart?
There are two schools of thought about serving on a jury.
One side holds that it's a civic responsibility; the more cynical view is that no one should be judged by 12 people who aren't smart enough to get out of jury duty.
In the supposed thriller "Trial by Jury," Joanne Whalley-Kilmer plays Valerie, a woman who starts out in the first camp, much to the derision of all her friends.
A single mother and owner of a vintage clothing store, she could get out of jury duty in a flash.
But she's so responsible she's even willing to judge a mob boss named Rusty Pirone (Armand Assante).
Does anyone have to be told she lives to regret it?
Pirone is conspicuously guilty, but even after he has one witness killed -- a stoolpigeon called Limpy Demarco -- the prosecutors blackmail another former associate into testifying.
What's a mobster to do?
He threatens the idealistic Valerie, of course.
If she wants her son to live, she will vote to acquit Pirone.


Screeching Down That Data Highway
A Japanese company thinks it has found a use for the interactive, several-hundred-channel cable television systems being developed in the United States.
It wants to offer sing-along on demand.
The Itochu Corporation, one of Japan's largest trading companies, is planning a cable karaoke service for America.


The National Under Slatkin
The National Symphony Orchestra, which played its first concert under the musical direction of Leonard Slatkin at the Kennedy Center on Thursday night, has never lived up to the level of accomplishment one might expect from the premier orchestra of the nation's capital.
For one thing, Washington lacks the entrenched musical tradition that has buoyed orchestras in other cities on the Eastern seaboard.
And the orchestra has not had good luck with music directors.
Mstislav Rostropovich, who ended his 27-year tenure last season, proved an inspiring presence and a powerful interpreter of Russian repertory and contemporary scores, but he did not bring the technical discipline that the orchestra required.
A savior may have finally arrived in the person of Mr.
Slatkin, who has been honing the St.
Louis Symphony since 1979.


Police See No Connections Among Attacks by Snipers
FARMINGDALE, L.I., Sept. 9
Gunfire on the Meadowbrook State Parkway on Thursday morning does not appear to be related to sniper attacks in Suffolk County in July and August or to shooting incidents in Nassau County in June, the authorities said today.
A bullet struck the windshield of one car about 9:15 A.M., the police said, and two other motorists who were nearby also reported hearing gunfire.


Stocks Fall As Inflation Fears Rise
For months now, anxious traders and investors have been flinching at every apparent sign of inflation and selling stocks and bonds, only to discover sheepishly that little inflation could be found.
But yesterday, they found clear and unambiguous evidence of inflation in the Government's Producer Price Index and rushed to sell.


Jeb Bush Ignores Runoff and Focuses on Chiles in Race for Florida Governor
He may be better known as a former President's son, but Jeb Bush has demonstrated that he is more popular in his new career as a politician than many of his fellow Republicans had expected.
Mr.
Bush pulled in 46 percent of the vote in the primary for governor on Thursday, only 5 points short of winning this state's Republican nomination outright.
While he had been expected to lead the seven-candidate field, few analysts had predicted that he would draw more than 40 percent of the vote.


U.S. Hopes Talk of War Forces Out Haiti Army
With its public relations campaign to scare Haiti's military leaders into leaving, the Clinton Administration has turned the usually secret tactics of invasion planning upside down.
When United States forces invaded Grenada, only a handful of senior officers at the Pentagon were aware of the operation.
And the night American troops prepared to storm Panama, top Bush Administration aides engaged in small talk at the annual Christmas party for the White House press corps.


METRO DIGEST
SURVIVING AMID THE DRUG DEALERS On 129th Street in Harlem, a block in the America of the black underclass, the drug dealer is both outlaw and entrepreneur.
As an employer, he offers the only big money around and an array of jobs.
Page 1.
SCHOOL LAYOFFS FORCE BIGGER CLASSES Students who reported for the opening of New York City high schools faced larger classes and fewer course choices because of surging enrollments and the layoffs of hundreds of teachers' aides and other personnel.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  2 IN CHINATOWN ARE INDICTED In three overlapping indictments, prosecutors charged two leading Chinatown businessmen with racketeering and murder, charged 18 youths with gang-related street crimes and charged a man they described as a major heroin trafficker with multiple drug offenses.
Page 23. 33 DRUG GANG SUSPECTS ARE CHARGED Thirty-three men were charged with crimes like conspiracy and murder in indictments that law-enforcement authorities said destroyed a $350,000-a-week crack cocaine operation, with as many as 2,000 customers a night.
The indictments brought to 97 the number of suspected drug dealers charged in two days.
Page 23.
GUNMAN KILLS GUARD AND WOUNDS OFFICER A security guard making a money pickup was shot to death, and a police detective who came to his aid was wounded, in an attempted robbery at a supermarket in the Bronx, the police said.
A second officer was wounded in a separate shooting in mid-Manhattan.
Page 23.
ADULT PROSECUTION URGED IN CROWN HTS.
Federal prosecutors say the teen-ager charged with violating a Hasidic Jew's civil rights by fatally stabbing him during the 1991 Crown Heights violence should be prosecuted as an adult because his prospects for "successful juvenile rehabilitation is limited." Page 22.
A subway passenger shot at Grand Central station said he did not know his attacker.
Page 23.
The grand jury examining the death of a man in police custody reconvened.
Page 25.
REGION  LIGHT SPARRING BY CANDIDATES With the primary election only a few days away, the four Democratic candidates for New York State attorney general jabbed lightly at each other in a debate that underscored their basic agreement on the issues, but exposed their differing visions of the office's role.
Page 24.
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY GIVES BIG MONEY More than 25 percent of the large contributions to Connecticut gubernatorial candidates this year came from lawyers, lobbyists and people associated with the construction industry, according to a report by Common Cause.
Page 24.
RAIL CAR PLANT IS LURED TO NEW YORK Dangling a $41.5 million contract for 34 new commuter trains for the Metro-North Railroad, New York State has lured a Canadian rail car manufacturer to build a new assembly plant in upstate New York.
Page 25.
POLICE SAY SNIPER ATTACKS UNCONNECTED Gunfire on the Meadowbrook State Parkway on Thursday morning does not appear to be related to sniper attacks in Suffolk County in July and August that killed one person and wounded another or to shooting incidents in Nassau County in June, the authorities said.
Page 25.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman.....23


Corrections
An article on Aug. 15 about links between science and business in New Jersey referred incompletely to the history of color television.
The first practical demonstration was given in 1928 by John Logie Baird, a Scottish inventor; the version that is now considered the standard in the United States was developed at RCA's research center near Princeton.


When Cops Commit Suicide
Law enforcement is dangerous work.
But these days in New York City, the gravest threat to police officers' lives comes not from criminals but from themselves.
With nearly four months left in the year, 10 cops have already committed suicide, equaling the record for an entire year, set in 1987.
Several of the officers drank too much and were despondent over problems with wives or lovers.
One was under treatment for depression.
A rookie who had just joined the force was distraught over his arrest for a drunken-driving hit-and-run accident.
One of the officers was implicated in the corruption scandal that has swept the 30th Precinct in Washington Heights, where a dozen officers had already been arrested on charges of brutality and selling protection to drug dealers.
Another officer may have been guilt-ridden over his failure to block the corruption.


An Officer Who Killed His Brother Attends His Funeral


Stock Trader's Error Leads To Some Incorrect Prices
A stock trader's error led to the reporting of incorrect prices yesterday on more than two dozen leading stocks, including I.B.M. and Wal-Mart.
As a result, some final prices in the daily stock tables today and in the weekly tables in the Sunday Business section appear to be incorrect.
Some articles in Business Day today may also include some incorrect prices.
There were indications last night that the errors may range from 12.5 cents to $2 on the prices of the affected stocks.


Checkettes Continues To Look for Offense
Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, has spent the last few days meeting with the team's new ownership and discussing the future.
Coming within one victory of a National Basketball Association championship last season only made Checketts more eager to find the final pieces that could give the Knicks a title.
"My son's Little League trophy is bigger than anything we got for finishing second," Checketts said.
"When you come in second, the only thing you get are condolences. Sure, the salary cap causes us some problems, as it does every team. And it may not be easy for us to make a deal. But if we don't make a deal to improve our team before the season starts, then I'm not going to use the salary cap as an excuse."


CUBA VOWS TO END EXODUS IN RETURN FOR A RISE IN VISAS
Cuba and the United States reached an agreement today under which Havana pledged to stop its citizens from fleeing the country for Florida aboard makeshift rafts and small boats.
In return, Washington promised to accept at least 20,000 new Cuban immigrants each year.
But the 30,000 Cuban refugees who have already fled the island, most of whom are housed at the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay or at camps in Panama, appear to be the big losers under the new agreement.
American officials, briefing reporters on the results of the eight days of negotiation, indicated that the Cubans in Guantanamo and Panama would not be permitted to move ahead of applicants now in Cuba.


Transportation Officials Defend USAir's Record
Government officials today strongly defended USAir's safety record even as investigators began what promises to be a difficult inquiry into the latest of the airline's five fatal crashes in as many years.
Officials of the National Transportation Safety Board, an independent Federal agency charged with investigating accidents, cautioned against reaching any premature conclusions about the crash of USAir Flight 427, which, arriving here from Chicago, plunged to the ground in the nearby town of Aliquippa on Thursday night, killing all 132 people aboard.


Widmer Goes With Roll of the Dice
Corey Widmer's life became a lot more complicated when he moved into the starting lineup of the Giants as the middle linebacker.
It was a definite gamble by the coaching staff, no question.
But it turns out that Widmer himself had gambled a few months earlier, taking a chance with something that was a lot more personal and may prove to be worth millions to him.
The gamble has to do with his contract.
Widmer was ending a one-year deal with the team that paid him $118,000 last season.
So Widmer and his agent, Frank Bauer, had a tough decision to make.


Samuel Ervin Hill, Conservationist, 81
Samuel Ervin Hill, a conservationist and retired labor arbitrator, died on Sunday at his home in Redding, Conn.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, his son William said.


Sports of The Times; Many Roads But Only One Path
KATHY CARTER and Jimmy Jones will be only two of the 90,000 or so spectators at Beaver Stadium this afternoon watching Penn State play host to the University of Southern California in an early-season showdown.
Their paths have never crossed and perhaps never will.
Carter, 41, is a businesswoman and single parent from Columbus, Ohio.
Jones, who owns a consulting firm in Harrisburg, is a minister and former college football star.


Some Investments Tailored for Tuitions
Some investments are specifically tailored for parents saving for college.
The simplest is a United States series EE bond.
Backed by the Government, these savings bonds are readily available from most banks and through many employee payroll savings plans at no charge.
The interest on series EE bonds issued after 1989 is tax-free if it is used to pay for education and if the family's income is below a certain level.


Yichang Journal; Digging Up the Ancient Past, Before the Deluge
Digging deep into the scarlet earth along the banks of the Yangtze River, China's archeologists are in a race against time to save the relics of nearly 8,000 years of Chinese history that will otherwise be trapped forever beneath a lake created by the world's largest dam.
The project, the biggest archeological expedition ever conducted in China, is expected to bring together thousands of archeologists who will try to excavate more than 300 square miles of the river bank before it is covered by the new superdam's reservoir.


Vatican Drops Fight Against U.N. Population Document
The Vatican gave up its struggle today to significantly weaken language on abortion in a United Nations plan to stabilize population growth, clearing the way for conference delegates to declare next week that abortion should be safe in countries where it is legal.
After a five-day standoff, delegates to the International Conference on Population and Development approved a paragraph urging nations to "strengthen their commitment" to "deal with the impact of unsafe abortion."


Grand Jury Returns To Inquiry of Police In S.I. Man's Death
The grand jury examining the death of a Staten Island man in police custody last spring reconvened yesterday, after a two-month recess that some civil-liberties advocates suggested was unnecessary and would dim the memories of crucial witnesses.
The Staten Island District Attorney, William L. Murphy, said the 23-member panel heard several witnesses on its first day in session since July 16, and he predicted that the grand jury would finish its work by Oct. 31.


Guard Is Killed and Officer Is Wounded During a Bronx Holdup
A security guard making a money pickup was shot to death and a police detective who came to his aid was wounded late yesterday during an attempted holdup of a security van outside a supermarket in the Parkchester section of the Bronx, the police said.
The incident was followed hours later by the shooting of a second police officer in Manhattan, apparently with his own gun.


Hiroshima Bomb Display Still Distorts History
To the Editor:
To me, as a World War II B-29 combat pilot and a member of the Enola Gay Committee, the proposed display by the National Air and Space Museum of the B-29 that dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, on Aug. 6, 1945, will be grossly unsatisfactory, even with the proposed additions.
No matter how you look at it, it will be a "ban the bomb" display.
One year of negotiations with Martin Harwit, the museum's director, has proved that any revisions of the script are merely cosmetic and do not change the exhibition's focus.


Facing the I.R.S.
To the Editor:
"Limiting the Pain of a Tax Audit" (Your Money pages, Sept. 3) left me shaking my head in disbelief.
The gist of the article was that after two "practice audit" sessions with a certified public accountant lasting a total of 10 hours, Ilona S. Lang was able to go to an Internal Revenue Service office, spend two hours with the I.R.S. auditor and get a "no change" report from the auditor.
Obviously, they do things differently in Virginia.


'A Horrifying Scene of Destruction' Leaves Emergency Crews Shaken
When they began to gather up the 132 bodies from USAir Flight 427 today, officials realized there were so many pieces that the grisly task would take days, perhaps weeks.
Indeed, they said, some bodies would probably never be identified.
The workers sent by Wayne Tatalovich, the Beaver County coroner, pulled rubber protective boots, like those gardeners wear, over their black coveralls this afternoon before they went into the steep, dense patch of woods where the plane went down.
The force of the crash, people who viewed the scene said, had left the victims unrecognizable, with limbs hanging from trees or left in blood-smeared patches up to 200 yards from the point of impact.
Everyone who had been to the crash scene Thursday night or this morning was ordered to get hepatitis shots in case they had come in contact with contaminated blood.


American Express Deal for Thomas Cook Is Seen
Moving to expand greatly its share of the worldwide travel business, the American Express Company will announce on Monday that it has agreed to acquire large chunks of the Thomas Cook Group, people close to American Express said yesterday.
The terms of the transaction were not discussed, but people with knowledge of the negotiations said the purchase price was in the hundreds of millions of dollars.


Cuba: Keep Talking
The immigration agreement reached yesterday between Washington and Havana is a good beginning.
If humanely carried out it should bring immediate benefits, including a cooling down of anti-immigrant politics in Florida, fewer drownings of Cuban rafters at sea and faster reunifications of divided Cuban-American families.
But matters should not rest here.
The Administration, having made its point by limiting this round of talks to immigration, should now find the courage to move on to expanded discussions on all the political and economic issues dividing the United States and its largest Caribbean neighbor.


Some Light Sparring for 4 Attorney General Candidates
With the primary election only four days away, the four Democratic candidates for New York State attorney general lightly jabbed at each other yesterday in a debate that underscored their basic agreement on the issues, but exposed their differing visions of the office's role in fighting crime.
Polls show the race too close to call, but the debate was largely civilized even as the candidates scrapped for any chance to distinguish themselves from the others.
All four candidates bowed in one way or another to public concerns about the issues of crime and violence, even as two candidates criticized the others for portraying the attorney general as a crime fighter -- a role that has traditionally been ceded to the police and district attorneys.


Prosecutor in Simpson Case Won't Seek Death Penalty
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case announced today that they would seek a life sentence without the possibility of parole against Mr.
Simpson in his murder trial, instead of the death penalty.
Legal experts said the announcement was a major step in preparing the case for trial.
In particular, they said, it will probably streamline the jury-selection process because legal strategists on both sides will no longer have to be concerned about selecting potential jurors based on their attitudes about the death penalty.


Quiet Revolution in Latin Pensions
Faced with aging populations and bankrupt state pension systems, South America is undergoing a social security revolution as millions of workers open privately administered individual retirement accounts.
It is a revolution that bears economic and political consequences similar to the mass privatizations undertaken by Margaret Thatcher in Britain in the 1980's.
In one generation, waves of workers from Bogota to Buenos Aires are being transformed from victims of state pension bureaucracies to active participants in national capital markets.


Civil Court Choices
Put aside notions of real democracy or even merit.
As usual, fund-raising skills and a willingness to cozy up to party leaders are the qualities that will count most in this year's Civil Court election in New York City.
To even call it an election is something of a misnomer.
Of the 17 Civil Court seats in contention in November, only 3 in Brooklyn are being contested in next Tuesday's all-but-decisive Democratic primary.
The rest have already been parceled out by the party pros who still largely control the petition process by which candidates get on the ballot.


Plenty of Tennis, but a Dearth of Movie Stars; A Celebrity Shortage Takes Some Glitter Out of This Year's United States Open
At last year's United States Open, Margaret King, an usher in the President's Box, where guests are escorted to wicker armchairs and given straw boaters to shield them from the sun, had her picture taken with Jack Nicholson and wrapped a tie around Tom Cruise's neck when the actor showed up without proper attire.
This year, Ms.
King reports that celebrity traffic is way off.
"It's been very, very quiet," she said.
"We came sporting our cameras, but so far I haven't shot a roll."


Howard Tager, 49, A Medical Professor and Diabetes Expert
Dr.
Howard S. Tager, a researcher on diabetes and a medical professor at the University of Chicago, died at his home here on Tuesday.
He was 49.
He died of a heart attack, university officials said.


Crown Heights Prosecuters Portray Accused Man, 19, as Poor Candidate for Rehabilitation
Federal prosecutors say the teen-ager charged with violating a Hasidic Jew's civil rights by fatally stabbing him during the 1991 Crown Heights violence should be prosecuted as an adult because his prospect for "successful juvenile rehabilitation is limited," according to court papers unsealed yesterday.
Justice Department briefs also say that another justification for the prosecution of the teen-ager, Lemrick Nelson Jr., as an adult rather than a juvenile -- he is 19 but was 16 when the victim, Yankel Rosenbaum, was slain -- is that the crime was motivated by anti-Semitic bias.
History of Problems
The prosecution papers portray Mr.
Nelson as a youth with a history of academic and disciplinary problems in school who, though he had no criminal record before his arrest in the Crown Heights case, has since had run-ins with the law in an Atlanta suburb, where he went to live after being acquitted in 1992 of murder charges stemming from Mr.
Rosenbaum's death.


World War I Memorial Gets Fresh Battle Dress


Mercantile Stores Discussing a Merger
The Mercantile Stores Company, which has had a run-up in its stock price recently amid rumors of a possible merger, confirmed yesterday that it was holding discussions but did not identify any prospective suitors.
Although the department store company, which is based in Fairfield, Ohio, said in a statement that its board had not authorized a merger and gave no assurance that any would occur, its shares rose $7.625, to $54.50, in active trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, surpassing the $50-a-share level for the first time in five years.


Nicky Hopkins, 50, Studio Keyboardist In Rock Recording
Nicky Hopkins, a keyboardist who played on albums by the Rolling Stones, the Who, the Kinks and other top rock bands of the 1960's and 70's, died on Tuesday at the St.
Thomas Hospital in Nashville, where he lived.
He was 50.
The cause was complications from previous intestinal surgeries, said his stepson, Tristan Buchanan.
Mr.
Hopkins, who was born in London, began his career as a member of the flamboyant British rock band Screaming Lord Sutch and the Savages in the late 1950's.
In the 1960's, he started working as a studio musician and remains best known for playing on the Rolling Stones songs "Jumping Jack Flash" and "Sympathy for the Devil." Though he recorded with the Beatles on only one single, "Revolution," he went on to perform on solo albums by all four members of the band.
He declined offers to join the Rolling Stones and an early incarnation of Led Zeppelin because he did not want to leave session work. tktktkEarly Career
In 1967, he released his first solo album, "The Revolutionary Piano of Nicky Hopkins," and then toured briefly in the Jeff Beck Group.
After recording one album with his own group, Sweet Thursday, Mr.
Hopkins moved to northern California and worked with the Quicksilver Messenger Service, the Steve Miller Band, Harry Nilsson, Jerry Garcia and Jefferson Airplane, with whom he performed at Woodstock.
In the 1970's and 1980's Mr.
Hopkins shuttled back and forth between New York and London as a studio player and recorded two more solo albums.
In 1990, he signed with the publisher Hamstein Music Group and turned his attention to songwriting and composing for film and television.
Mr.
Hopkins is survived by his wife, Moira, of Nashville, and his mother, Freda, and two sisters, Dee and Julia, all of whom live in England, and a brother, Paul, who lives in Austria.


A Drug Dealer's Rapid Rise and Ugly Fall
It started, the brothers recall, the day Dennis caught Mel on the corner selling asthma medicine, cut up to look like crack.
Mel was 10 and Dennis was 13.
Mel said he went to the corner because there was no food and no electricity in their 129th Street apartment.
Dennis, the oldest of three children, took Mel's place on the corner because he considered himself the man of the house.
But when Mel turned 12, he went back out on the streets.


Wise Karate Master Gives Cram Course in Lovableness
"Fighting not good: someone always get hurt," Noriyuki (Pat) Morita declares in his role as a Japanese karate master who turns 17-year-old Julie Pierce (Hilary Swanka) into a teen-age lethal weapon in "The Next Karate Kid."
That saying is one of many pseudo-Zen Buddhist platitudes that the character, Miyagi, drops every two or three minutes in what may be the silliest episode yet in the popular "Karate Kid" series.


China Denies Allegations
Dennis Pursley, the national team director of United States swimming, has known Cheng Yun-Peng, China's national technical director of swimming, since 1983.
But it is safe to say they never have had a conversation quite like the one they had this morning.
After publicly accusing China's female swimmers of taking performance-enhancing drugs, Pursley decided to seek out Cheng and explain his position in person.


Ramirez Is Arrested
Cleveland Indians outfielder MANNY RAMIREZ was arrested early yesterday in Washington Heights on drunken driving charges.
Ramirez, 22, who spent the day in jail, was scheduled to be arraigned on a charge of driving while impaired, said a Manhattan district attorney spokesman, WAYNE BRISON.
Ramirez's blood-alcohol level was .07, Brison said.
In New York, .10 and above is considered intoxicated; .05 to .09 is impaired.
The Indians rookie was driving a car that the police noticed was moving erratically at about 1:20 A.M., one of the arresting officers, STEVEN GOETZ, said.
Ramirez, who grew up in Washington Heights, "mentioned something about playing in Yankee Stadium and hitting a home run," Goetz said.
"But I'd never heard of the guy."


INSIDE
Vatican Yields on Wording
The Vatican gave up a struggle, after a five-day standoff, to weaken the language relating to abortion in the statement of the United Nations' conference on population.
Page 5.
No Reprieve for Smallpox
An expert panel of the World Health Organization recommended destruction of the last remaining stocks of smallpox virus.
Page 5.
Espy Prosecutor Named
A Los Angeles lawyer, Donald C. Smaltz, was named to examine accusations that Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy broke the law.
Page 6.
Clinton Weighs Trade Deal
The White House may delay asking Congress for some negotiating powers in order to overcome an obstacle to the global trade accord.
Page 37.
Sister Parish, 84, Dies
The decorator, who redesigned White House rooms in the Kennedy years, epitomized the rise of women in 20th-century America.
Page 26.


Critic's Choices: Architecture


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: EAST RIVER PARK: The Ups and Downs (and Ups) of a 57-Acre Dream Park; Decrepit Stage Becomes Tragedy Itself
On a mild summer night in 1956, Joseph Papp presented "Julius Caesar" against the backdrop of the East River and the Williamsburg Bridge.
The following year, the New York Shakespeare Festival found a home in Central Park, but the East River Park Amphitheater went on to even greater glory, as the site of free Evenings-by-the-River, a summer concert series that drew several personal appearances by its honorary chairwoman, Eleanor Roosevelt.


CRITIC'S CHOICES: CLASSICAL MUSIC


Leaders in Their Fields, From Science to Business, Who Died in USAir Crash; Edwin K. Wiles, Energy Consultant, 50
Edwin K. Wiles, an energy consultant who once headed the West Virginia Coal Association, died on Thursday in the USAir plane crash.
He was 50 and lived in Mount Lebanon, Pa.
As a reporter for United Press International in the late 1960's, Mr.
Wiles covered the rescue of coal miners trapped underground in Hominy Falls, W.Va., prompting a lifelong interest in the coal industry.


Ms. Talbot, Mr. Sparkman
Lane Harris Talbot, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold R. Talbot of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thorne Sparkman 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sparkman Jr. of Devon, Pa.
Bishop Frank T. Griswold of Chicago, the bridegroom's godfather, performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sparkman, 27, is an associate at the Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
Her father is a managing director of Guy Carpenter &amp; Company, a reinsurance brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Louise Talbot, is the assistant to the trustees of the John Jay Homestead, a museum in Katonah.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
99.18
99.12
106.10
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5379
1.5532
1.5960
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3668
1.3073
1.3141
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5530
1.5275
1.5520
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$392.00
$387.00
$350.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


SMALLPOX IS DEAD. LONG LIVE SMALLPOX.
In his article on smallpox, Siebert refers to "the discovery of an effective vaccine in the late 18th century." In fact, a vaccine existed in Turkey in 1718, where its use was already an established practice.
Jenner's "discovery," in 1798, was the use of a less virulent analogue, making a vaccine from a virus afflicting cows.


Family Values Redux
President Clinton and former Vice President Dan Quayle both made speeches last week touching on the same themes: personal and national morality, the crisis in American families, welfare, work and the care of children.
Mr.
Clinton was at his best, exhorting rather than blaming.
Mr.
Quayle showed that, even when he is trying to be statesmanlike, he cannot quite resist the politics of division.
Mr.
Clinton's gift for empathy with ordinary people served him well during his campaign, and he used it again on Friday in his speech to the National Baptist Convention in New Orleans.
The President spoke eloquently of the postwar periods throughout this century in which the nation, freed of the burdens of war, found itself adrift and struggled to recreate itself.
He argued that America is in such a period now.


Hours for Voting in the Primary
Primary elections will be held on Tuesday in New York and Connecticut for several statewide offices and legislative and Congressional seats.
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City and in Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Orange, Ulster and Erie Counties, and from noon to 9 P.M. elsewhere in New York State.


See You in Court -- or at the Ansonia
The floridly adorned Ansonia Hotel on Broadway and 73d Street has always been a place of distinction.
When it opened in 1904, it was the world's largest apartment hotel and the city's most luxurious, with dumbwaiter room service and Turkish baths.
It was the address for the city's wealthy travelers, including Babe Ruth and Florenz Ziegfeld.


Books, or What?
To the Editor:
At the end of her article, Sarah Lyall discusses advantages still held by printed books over electronic formats, but she doesn't mention two of the simplest: sturdiness and ease of replacement.
I won't take a computer to the beach for fear of getting sand or water in it.
I won't take it on certain kinds of trips because I have to be too careful not to drop it or bang it, and I wouldn't take it out on the subway for fear of being robbed.
One CD may cost less to produce than one book, but a book is medium and content at one super-bargain price.
JONATHAN SOBEL  Brooklyn


Toledo Synagogue's New Role
Following an eight-year restoration, the 14th-century synagogue in Toledo, Spain, built by Samuel ha-Levi in the city's Jewish quarter has reopened as the new Sephardic Museum.
The new museum attempts to give visitors an overall vision of Jewish history in Sepharad, the Hebrew name for Spain, from the arrival of Jews in Roman days through the flourishing Middle Ages to their expulsion in 1492.


A Kiss Before Lying
The pleasures and perils of the new red lips.
A flirtation with glamour starts with . . . a dark voluptuous mouth and molten eyes, heavy with meaning.
Its denouement is at the fingertip.
Caught red-handed.


Walking The Walk In L.A.
BEING a right-thinking New Yorker, I should hate City Walk.
It is made out of plastic, stucco and neon.
It is suburbia trying to be urban.
Critics say that it has removed itself from urban reality, that it is a city experience for suburbanites who are afraid of real cities with all their crime and graffiti.
In other words, City Walk is accused of being safe and clean.
Worst of all, it is in vacuous Los Angeles.
And yet I love it.
What is wrong with me?
Well, first of all, this adjunct to the Universal Studio Tour in the San Fernando Valley is not quite as safe as its critics claim, having suffered one nonfatal stabbing and a gang scuffle since it opened in May 1993.
But such trouble is held to a minimum by Universal security officers plus the local sheriff's department.
And the sheriff even has a substation right on the Walk itself.
So it really is a relatively safe place.


Holly MacL. Hall, Timothy J. Smith
Holly MacLaren Hall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Clifford Hall Jr. of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Timothy John Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Smith, also of Westfield.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Ross Forbes officiated at the Presbyterian Church of Westfield.
Mrs.
Smith graduated from Lycoming College and is the general manager of the Talbots clothing store in Menlo Park, N.J.
Her father is a vice president in Westfield at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


France Bans Muslim Scarf In Its Schools
The Government said today that it would ban the wearing of Muslim head scarves in public schools, asserting that the widening practice violated a tradition of secular education in France.
The wearing of head scarves has become increasingly common among Muslim schoolgirls in France, particularly in areas with large concentrations of Arab or Turkish immigrants.
Education Minister Francois Bayrou said in a published interview that he was issuing instructions to principals of all public schools to start enforcing the ban immediately.


Data Bank/September 11, 1994
Data Bank/September 11, 1994
Consumer Borrowing
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
7.9
16.0
16.6
Producer Prices
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.5
0.0
Weekly Jobless Claims
Sept. 2
Aug. 26
Aug. 19
In thousands
330
333
323
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,894
1,858
1,809
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
21,028
21,096
20,507
3-Month Treasury Bills
Sept. 9
Sept. 2
Aug. 26
Rate in percent
4.55
4.53
4.54
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.93
4.78
4.85
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.70
7.45
7.48


Sports of The Times; Will Season Shutdown Bust Union?
THE baseball season is supposed to end with a World Series homer by Joe Carter as Mitch Williams stalks off the mound.
Or with Jesse Orosco disappearing under his celebrating Mets teammates.
Or with Reggie Jackson talking the talk after having trotted the trot of three home runs at Yankee Stadium.
The baseball season is not supposed to end in the Inter-Continental Hotel in midtown Manhattan, in a drawing room with four crystal chandeliers (instead of four bases), blue-gray walls (instead of scoreboard advertisements), a flowered carpet (instead of grass or artificial turf) and a few players standing around in sports shirts and slacks (instead of wearing their team uniforms).


In Another Epic, Dinos Face the Dwarfs
EVERY VIDEO SEASON HAS BIG titles, but later this year things will get especially crazy.
With lines still twined around cineplexes for an unexpectedly large number of big summer hits, cassettes of these films won't begin to hit video store shelves until about mid-November.
From then through the spring and possibly later, though, a steady supply of hit movies will be moving to video.
Heading the list of summer movies that will eventually come to video are "Forrest Gump," which has earned about $230 million at the box office, and roughly a half-dozen others, some of which haven't hit the $100 million mark but will be in heavy demand in stores: "True Lies," "Speed," "Maverick," "The Mask," "Clear and Present Danger," "The Client" and "Wolf."


Subsidy Cuts Raise Concern for Homeless
Housing advocates say they are concerned that the city's return to using hotel rooms for emergency shelter is a sign that cuts in cash incentives for landlords who rent to homeless families will have a damaging ripple effect.
By Sept. 1, when the city again started placing homeless people in hotel rooms without kitchens, city shelters were full and more than 150 families were sleeping overnight in the offices of the city's Emergency Assistance Unit in the Bronx.


Elizabeth Pulver, John L. Castleman
Elizabeth Ratcliffe Pulver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald W. Pulver of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to John Lauriston Castleman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lauriston Castleman Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Galloway Jr. performed the ceremony at Wayne Presbyterian Church in Wayne, Pa.
The bride, 28, is a marketing analyst in Atlanta for the MCI Telecommunications Corporation.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is the president of the Oliver Tyrone Pulver Corporation, commercial real estate developers in West Conshohocken, Pa.
Her mother retired as a teacher at the Rochester (N.Y.) School for the Deaf.


On Stage, the Shubert's 80th Season
THE Shubert Performing Arts Center is ready to unveil an 80th birthday season for the theater, once a prime stop for Broadway-bound shows but now a stage for Broadway hits.
"She Loves Me," which had its world premiere at the Shubert in 1963, plays a two-week run in New Haven starting Sept. 27.
In November there will be "Blood Brothers" with Petula Clark recreating her Broadway role and Theodore Bikel in "Fiddler on the Roof." "Jelly's Last Jam" will be one of the enticements next spring.
The Shubert's dance series encompasses visits by companies from Pittsburgh, Miami, New York and Senegal.
The opera series is presenting staged productions of "Don Giovanni," "The Barber of Seville" and "The Mikado." Other cycles offer jazz, cabaret and entertainment suitable for children.
Among the subscription benefits are a guarantee of the same seats for all shows in a series, along with a liberal exchange policy (562-5666 or 800-228-6622).


Angela Petersen, Barry J. Cerf
Angela Ann Petersen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carleton A. Petersen of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to Barry John Cerf, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward O. Cerf.
The Rev.
David B. Rivers officiated at Gloria Dei Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Cerf, 31, is a senior writer at the American College of Physicians, a medical society in Philadelphia.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as a budget analyst with the Philadelphia School District.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HUDSON RETROSPECTIVE
A major retrospective of more than 70 works by Thomas Cole will have its only New England showing at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, opening today and closing Dec. 4.
It is a particularly fitting venue for the exhibiton, in view of the close friendship between Daniel Wadsworth, founder of the museum in 1844, and Cole, the landscape painter who is regarded as the father of the Hudson River School.
As a result of that friendship the Atheneum contains one of the country's largest collections of Cole's work, and that of his contemporaries: Frederic Church, John Kensett and Albert Bierstadt.


ROBERT REDFORD'S 50'S, THEN AND NOW
I'm glad that director Robert Redford is revisiting the 1950's with "Quiz Show," recounting a scandal that sapped the moral confidence of so many Americans ("Robert Redford's 50's, Then and Now," by Dan Wakefield, Aug. 21).
We had survived the histrionic lies of McCarthy, but he was a politician.
Charles Van Doren, a charming young professor, seemed to us the personification of intelligence, sincerity and integrity.
His exposure delivered the coup de grace to the optimism of the 1950's, and to expectations about honesty and accountability.
Those of us who stopped buying products of the sponsor are regarded as quaint.


Hudson Rafting
To the Editor: Amy Engeler's "On a Rafting Trip, Running Into Trouble" (July 31) presented a scary picture of a thrilling, primitive and pristine section of the Hudson.
The Hudson River gorge is the best white water in the East and relatively safe if you are prepared, have an experienced guide and avoid overloading the raft.
Before the advent of commercial rafting trips in 1979, I guided numerous trips down the river accompanied by both experienced and neophyte friends.
Starting from Indian Lake or Newcomb, N.Y., we would spend two to three days shooting the rapids, fishing for our dinners and camping along the Hudson.
Spills, punctured boats, sinkholes and ice-coated shorelines were all part of the excitement.


Topics of The Times; Anastasia Lives
An abiding mystery has been the fate of Grand Duchess Anastasia, who was 17 when she was supposed to have been murdered by Bolsheviks in 1918 along with the Czar, Czarina and their four other children.
Since then, literally dozens of Anastasias have turned up, the best known being a woman named Anna Anderson.
So did Anastasia escape?
Apparently not, according to a new examination of bones found in an old mine shaft near Yekaterinburg, where the bodies of the royal family were dumped.
Will that persuade those who believe otherwise?
No.
Anastasia's fate will never be settled by the forensic evidence gathered afresh by a commission led by Russia's Deputy Prime Minister, Yuri Yarov.
Nor will it be resolved by an odd legal case in Virginia involving Anna Anderson's heirs.
Anastasia's life and death belong in that misty cyberspace where normal rules do not apply, where suspicious gaps in biography are papered over to explain how various claimants to the imperial title turn up alive in the West.


The French Keep Africa Under Wing
Nine months after France, as a spur to economic reform, devalued a West African currency it had long supported, foreign businessmen and diplomats say that Paris is sending ambivalent signals to its former colonies over their efforts to open up to more international investment and trade.
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur of France has said the devaluation was an attempt to reinsert Africa "in the grand commercial currents of the world." The International Monetary Fund and others had called for a devaluation of the currency, the African franc, which is used by 11 countries in the region.


A Bold Amalgam of Regional Diversity
AMERICAN food once meant chicken pot pie and meat loaf.
At Fusion Grille, a sophisticated new restaurant in East Setauket, the choice is much like America itself -- wide, bold and rich with ethnic and regional diversity.
A diner is able to begin a meal with tuna sushi tempura and go on to filet mignon with a Gorgonzola crown, a pinot noir sauce and basil-mashed potatoes.
Or the opener could be New Orleans-inspired screaming oysters followed by grilled black tiger shrimp mated with a jicama-melon salsa and Thai jasmine rice.


A Child's Funeral Warns Children About the Streets


Amy A. Klinges, Paul C. Harden
Amy Adelia Klinges, a daughter of Dr.
Karl G. Klinges of Paramus, N.J., and the late Maureen D. Klinges, was married yesterday to Paul Caldwell Harden, a son of Patricia Harden McConnell of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Frank E. Harden.
The Rev.
John T. Carty performed the ceremony at St.
Augustin's Roman Catholic Church in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Harden, 31, is the executive assistant to the president of the Repligen Corporation, a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from the Katherine Gibbs School.
Her father is a gynecologist and obstetrician in private practice in Englewood, N.J.


Laura A. Zaccaro, Joshua S. Lee
Laura Anne Zaccaro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Zaccaro of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Joshua Samuel Lee, a son of Todd G. Lee of Boston and Madeline R. Lee of New York.
The Rev.
James Massa performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Lee, 28, graduated from Brown University.
She is entering her second year of medical school at the University of Chicago, where the bridegroom is to begin studying later this month for a joint master's degree in business administration and public policy.


O.K., It's Not November. But It Is Time to Vote.
SO it doesn't seem quite up to the Nov. 8 main event.
Yet, in truth, the round of primaries on Tuesday includes several interesting and important races at every level.
Though the serious run at Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will not come until November, the primary will decide which of two Republicans will make that challenge.
In the Democratic primary against Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the Rev.
Al Sharpton will be seeking to build on his surprising showing in the 1992 Senate primary.
Three fellow Democrats are seeking to wrest the job that the Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, only recently took over.
And in addition to the several competitive Congressional primaries, there are a number of races to watch in the State Legislature.


Golf; For Them, No Evil in Shadowy 'Valley'
They call it "The Valley" here at Glen Abbey Golf Club.
It is a collection of five holes that runs along a 16-mile creek, a beguiling and befuddling stretch of golf where the wind darts and swirls.
In this shadowy corridor starting at the 11th hole and ending at the 15th, a golfer's round can either snap into focus or veer out of control.
Today, on a cool and bright afternoon in the third round of the Bell Canadian Open, Mark McCumber and Nick Price took different paths through the valley of the shadow of death, but neither of them feared any evil.
That's because they were the toughest -- and luckiest -- guys in the valley.


Family Affairs
SLEEPLESS NIGHTS By Andrew Bergman. 218 pp. New York: Donald I. Fine. $19.95.


At 2-0, Hard Part Comes Next For Rutgers
The way the crowd roared and the players hugged one another at the end, it was possible to believe that Rutgers had beaten Miami today.
Well, it was West Virginia, the defending Big East champion, in the Scarlet Knights' first conference game in their new Rutgers Stadium, and they had lost to the Mountaineers a year ago, 55-22.


A Death in the Family
ONE TRUE THING By Anna Quindlen. 289 pp. New York: Random House. $22.


SEPT. 4-10: Not Quite Goodbye; Berlin's Western Allies Get a Warm Sendoff
With a torchlit fife-and-drum ceremony that struck some observers as appropriately historic and others as needlessly militaristic, Berlin last week bade a final farewell to the American, British and French armies.
Russian troops had been sent off with a lower-key ceremony a week earlier, so there are now no foreign soldiers in Berlin for the first time since the Red Army fought its way into the city limits in the spring of 1945.


Shelter Counts Its Successes
EDWARD TELEGA, a tall, genial man with a ponytail and an easy smile, apologized for his late arrival the other day when meeting a visitor to a shelter for homeless men where he works.
The stress of working two jobs, juggling family obligations and pursuing further training in his field had conspired against his efforts to be as punctual as he would like, he said.
Mr.
Telega's struggle to balance his professional and personal lives may not seem remarkable.
What is remarkable about the challenges he faces daily is that until a few years ago, he was a client at the shelter.


F.Y.I.
Sidewalk Gumshoe
Q.
What are those black flattened globs all over the sidewalks?
I always thought it was dirty chewing gum.
But not that many people chew gum.
Is it tar?
Congealed gunk?


Jetliner Was Closely Monitored for Rudder Problems
The USAir jetliner that crashed on Thursday, killing all 132 aboard, had been repeatedly inspected in recent months to make sure it did not have a rudder problem that has caused safety concerns about the Boeing 737, a Federal aviation official said today.
Nothing was found to be out of order in the inspections that were performed by USAir after being ordered last March for all similar planes until the manufacturers change the design of a rudder mechanism and replace the part, said Donald Riggin, the manager of the F.A.A. office in Seattle that oversees safety rules for Boeing aircraft.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CALIFORNIA NOVEL  HOME AND AWAY  By Joanne Meschery. Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.


Luxury for the Young
Children of all ages, including babies, are now welcome year round at two luxurious resorts in the Virgin Islands run by Rosewood Hotels and Resorts.
Little Dix Bay on Virgin Gorda in the British Virgin Islands and Caneel Bay on St.
John in the United States Virgin Islands recently lowered their age limit, previously set at 8.
Besides baby-sitting services, the resorts offer tennis, sailing lessons and sailing trips to see tropical fish.
To reserve, call Little Dix Bay at (800) 928-3000; Caneel Bay at (800) 928-8889.


'Late Night' Snack? Rivals and Stomachs Grumble
CBS seems to be starting a new game show in midtown: Call it Food Fight, or maybe Battle of the Theme Restaurants.
Earlier this year, CBS literally made a Federal case out of a dispute, suing in Federal District Court to block the use of "Television City" as the name for a TV-theme restaurant planned by David Liederman, of David's Cookies and the Broadway Grill, and his brother William, who runs Mickey Mantle's Restaurant.


As Lyme Disease Rises, Research Expands
THE summer of 1994 appears to be the worst in many years for Lyme disease, according to public health officials.
In Westchester by the end of July, the latest period for which figures were available, there were 697 confirmed new cases of the disease -- a 45 percent increase over the same period last year.
And with a dense snow cover incubating insects over a long and severe winter, this summer has also seen a fourfold increase in the number of ticks, which carry the disease, thriving in woodlands, meadows and backyards countywide, researchers report.
Mary M. Landrigan, a spokeswoman for the County Department of Health, who described the disease as "continuing unabated" in Westchester, said there were 480 Lyme disease cases in the county by the end of July last year, and 551 confirmed cases for that period in 1992.
"It's an all-year-round problem, with the peak being the summer months," she said.


'A Terrible Moment'; Two Young Children of a Slain Mother Are Told That the Nightmare Is Real
When the moment came to tell Lisa the truth, the job fell to Ondur Yarlug, a cousin of the little girl's mother.
His voice struggled to cushion the hammerlike blows of five words.
"Lisa," Mr. Yarlug told the 6-year-old girl, "your father killed your mother."


Victoria E. Love and Yuri Salnikoff Victoria Elizabeth Love, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Howard M. Love of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to George Nicholas Salnikoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Oleg P. Salnikow of Chappaqua, N.Y. The Rev. Pamela Foster performed the ceremony at the Calvary Episcopal Church.   Mrs. Salnikoff, 27, and the bridegroom, 28, graduated from Colgate University. She is an art consultant in Chicago and was until recently a director of the Elkon Gallery in New York. Her father, now retired, was the chairman and chief executive of National Intergroup Inc., a steel manufacturer and pharmaceutical distributor in Pittsburgh.


Call It Medical Care, Not Health Care, and Then Let's Discuss It; Affordable Right Now
To the Editor:
Affordability is an issue those pushing for a state or Federal government takeover of health care would like to use as justification for their attempts.
Well, it isn't.
Most of us, if we need it, can have truly affordable, reliable medical insurance right now.
We're talking $39 a month in the San Francisco Bay area if you're younger than 30; $55 to age 40, and $66 to age 50.


A Peace Deal Today Really Is a Bargain
MORE than 200 years ago, the economist Adam Smith wrote about how the "invisible hand" of the free market produced certain unexpected beneficial economic effects.
Watching how peace has unexpectedly broken out in the Middle East, South Africa and even Northern Ireland in the last 12 months, one is tempted to ask whether Adam Smith's invisible hand isn't busy producing certain beneficial political effects as well.
Is it simply a coincidence that the three most irreconcilable ethnic conflicts on the face of the earth have all taken giant steps toward reconciliation at the same time?
Or have Afrikaners and black South Africans, Arabs and Jews, Protestants and Catholics all been compelled to beat their swords into plowshares simultaneously by economic forces acting on each of them in different ways?


Vail's New Darwinians: Even Leisure Turns Pro
It was the quintessential Vail date.
In a town where the skiing is the predominant social institution and dinner-and-a-movie evenings are rare, Mike Harvey invited his new flame, Lanell Avery, to compete on July 3 in the Vail Hill Climb, the annual 10-kilometer run that rises 3,000 grueling feet up the side of Vail Mountain.
As usual, more than 600 residents, about a quarter of the town's permanent population, showed up to compete.
Mr.
Harvey, 31, and his svelte companion jockeyed for a starting position at the front of the pack and began to jog.


It's Sanchez Vicario


Rosalie Buenaventura, Philip J. Miller
Maria Rosalie Locsin Buenaventura and Philip Jeremy Miller, associates at New York law firms, are to be married today at Oxon Hill (Md.) Manor.
Rabbi Harold S. White is to perform the ceremony, and the Rev.
Jerome Hill, a Roman Catholic priest, is to take part in it.
The bride, who is known as Rosalie, works at Brown &amp; Wood.
She graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Lourdes and Jose Buenaventura of Manila.


Understanding Seles
To the Sports Editor:
The only mystery surrounding Monica Seles (Sports of The Times, Aug. 30) is why anyone should think her reluctance to return to professional tennis is mysterious.
Seles was stabbed in the back by a crazed fan who wanted Steffi Graf to be No. 1.
The German courts gave him no jail time, and the tennis authorities rewarded him by stripping Seles of her No. 1 ranking and giving it to Graf.
Surely, we should see she might be reluctant to return to the scene of the crime.
JEREMY WEIR ALDERSON  Hector, N.Y.


A Changed Landscape
To the Editor:
In "Getting Beyond the Gay Ghetto With Gay Films"  [ Aug. 21 ] , Howard Feinstein hints at some emerging truths concerning the market for gay-themed motion pictures.
The most important is that "Philadelphia" and the crop of recent and forthcoming gay films have changed the gay marketing landscape forever.
A more crowded market means each film will have to work harder to establish awareness in the gay and lesbian community, with gay attendance no longer taken for granted.
The gay community will end up being treated like other market segments, with standard marketing and advertising techniques replacing the emotional judgments and token promotion that have been the rule.


Viewpoints; A Moral Workout for Big Money
CALL it an exercise plan for institutional investors.
The Clinton Administration wants to help pension funds flex their financial muscles.
These funds are the stewards of more than $4.8 trillion in workers' money.
When they act like canny owners, they lift prospects not just for their many beneficiaries; the whole economy is helped.


A Theater in Berlin That's Off-Off Runway
Tavelers waiting for a plane in Tempelhof Airport in Berlin -- or those who just want to expand their cultural horizons -- can now see theatrical performances that range from light fare like "Play It Again, Sam" by Woody Allen to more adventurous productions like "Die Klofrau" (The Toilet Attendant) by Brigitte Schwaiger, where the audience sits on 80 real toilets to "eavesdrop" on a confrontation between two women in a public restroom.
The Fly and Dream Goethe Theater, housed in a former briefing room for the United States Air Force near the airport's main hall, is the brainchild of Boris von Emde, an arts entrepreneur who has had success in Munich and Frankfurt with the German equivalent of Off-Off-Broadway.


Jane A. Bell, J.G. Casagrande Jr.
Jane Allison Bell and John Guy Casagrande Jr., lawyers in Boston, were married yesterday in Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Kowalski performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Luke's Parish.
The bride, 35, is an associate in the Boston law firm of Choate, Hall &amp; Stewart.
She graduated from Denison University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and her husband received law degrees from Boston College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Bell of Darien.


Rosa Parks Leads Again on Civil Rights; She Shaped Zeitgeist
To the Editor:
Following up on your Sept. 1 editorial on Rosa Parks and on how her refusal to vacate her seat had been a response to the spirit of the times, it is well to recall Goethe's dictum, to wit, in translation: "What people call the spirit of the times is mostly their own spirit in which the times mirror themselves." So it was her courage that shaped the spirit of the time, more than being a mere response thereto.
RICHARD A. MUSGRAVE Hartland Four Corners, Vt.
Sept. 2, 1994 The writer retired as professor of political economy, Harvard University.


Town Finds Rare Way To Protect Farms: Tax
The loss of scenic farm land to real estate development is a familiar story across much of the nation's rural landscape.
But here on Old Mission Peninsula, where Center Road winds through cherry orchards and vineyards above the striking blue expanse of Grand Traverse Bay, a community has taken an extraordinary step in an effort to halt the trend.
For more than 100 years, the peninsula's long frost-free growing season and its sandy loam soils have supported a thriving farm economy.
Roughly half the $14 million fruit harvest of far larger Grand Traverse County comes from this 16-mile-long spit of land, no more than 3 miles wide at any point, near the top of Lake Michigan.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Laynie Browne, a poet, teaches her craft at a high school in Bushwick.
Writing, she says, "is a place to go. It is a refuge."  NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Alphaville, where baby boomers replay their wonder years by paying grown-up prices for stuff Mom threw away.


Thorny Session Ahead
As Congress returns for tail end of its session, several of President Clinton's main legislative proposals seem in danger of dying.
Page 12.


For Spring, the Little Bulbs That Count
BULBS grow wild in the Mediterranean countries, where the winters are cool but not frigid and the summers are hot and dry.
This sort of environment has generated thousands of wild bulbs, which have become the source material for many popular garden hybrids in this country.
But life has not been easy for the wild bulbs.
If they are not the object of animal grazing, then they are a source of income for human collecting.
As a result many have been dug almost to the point of extinction.


Substation: Battle Nears End of Tunnel
A six-year battle may be wrapping up next month when the Transit Authority decides whether to build a subway power substation at Houston Street and Broadway.
The focus of a grass-roots battle that turned a fruit and vegetable stand into a symbol, the $14 million substation project "is in holding pattern," said a Transit Authority spokesman, Jared Lebow.
He said the agency was considering using a new site or redesigning the transmission lines to mollify the project's opponents.


Marley Rabstejnek, Jonathan Isaac
Marley Ann Rabstejnek, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Rabstejnek of Cohasset, Mass., was married there yesterday to Jonathan George Gower Isaac, a son of Victoria Cope Isaac of Monmouth, Gwent, Wales, and Lieut.
Col.
George Isaac, Royal Welsh Guards, retired, M.B.E., of Bettws, near Abergavenny, Wales.
The Rev.
Edward Atkinson officiated at the First Parish Unitarian Meeting House.
Mrs.
Isaac, 29, is the Oriental art specialist at Skinner Inc., an auction house in Bolton, Mass.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in politics from Queen's University in Belfast, Northern Ireland.
Her father retired as the chairman and chief executive of Harbridge House, management consultants in Boston.


Can They Make The Leap?
THEY'RE the new kids on your political block -- ambitious, impatient with old notions of apprenticeship and eager to turn brief tenures at City Hall into tickets to Capitol Hill.
They're members of the City Council, and in three of the four contested races for Congress in the city this fall, they are using newly prominent perches to challenge incumbents for bigger jobs.
Such hubris would once have been rare for members of the Council, an institution so weak-kneed and lily-livered that it was derided as all but a joke for much of this century.
But three years ago, changes in the City Charter gave the Council sweeping new powers of partnership with the Mayor in passing the budget and approving zoning changes, and expanded it to 51 members, from 35.


Wall Street; Keeping Mum About Bond Prices
THERE is the right to free speech and the right to bear arms.
And, if you're in the brokerage industry, there is apparently the right to conceal the price of the bonds you trade for customers.
Or so it would seem from the sound of 348 letters to the Securities and Exchange Commission blasting the idea of 'fessing up to bond commissions.
The S.E.C. last March published a proposal that brokers begin divulging the markups -- or costs to customers -- on some of their bond trades.
Innocuous as the suggestion might sound, it elicited a hue and cry from the securities industry, which apparently has a lot to lose should the public get smarter about what it costs to buy a bond.


Nancy S. Wu, Robert D. Henry
Nancy Stephanie Wu, a daughter of Vincent and Patricia Wu of East Hanover, N.J., is to be married today to Robert Donald Henry, a son of Donald and Cora Henry of Joliet, Ill.
The Rev.
Brian Brennan is to perform the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The bride, 29, is an architect in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received a master's degree in architecture from the New Jersey Institute of Technology.
Her father, now retired, taught Chinese, French and Italian at the Colonia (N.J.) Senior High School.
Her mother is the coordinator of medical records at Roseland Surgical Center in Roseland, N.J.
The bride is a granddaughter of Dr.
John C. H. Wu, the diplomat and legal scholar who was the principal author of the Chinese Nationalist Constitution.


Tracy Reynolds, Timothy J. Paisley
Tracy Lynn Reynolds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Reynolds of Wichita, Kan., was married on Friday to Timothy Joseph Paisley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Paisley of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert Clerkin performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City.
Mrs.
Paisley, 30, is a telecommunications support analyst at Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
She graduated from the University of Kansas.
Her father is an owner of Reynolds/Architects in Wichita.


In America; Profits Before Patients
The doctors at Karin Smith's health maintenance organization kept telling her she was fine.
She knew that wasn't true.
She was sick and getting sicker.
Frustrated and frightened, she went to an independent physician.
The news couldn't have been worse.
Ms.
Smith had advanced cervical cancer.
If she had been properly diagnosed when she first sought help, at age 22, her chances of survival would have been 95 percent or better.
Now she is 28 and doctors say it is unlikely she will see 30.
Ms.
Smith (her real name) is a certified public accountant who lives with her husband, Pete, in Nashotah, Wis.
Her H.M.O. is the Family Health Plan Cooperative of Milwaukee.
Testifying in July before a Congressional committee investigating health care fraud, Ms.
Smith said:


Irishman Puts British on the Run, Diplomatically
Behind the high perimeter fence, double-locked gates and vigilant security cameras of Sinn Fein headquarters in West Belfast, Gerry Adams sat under an engraving of Irish patriots from a century ago, sipped a mug of tea and must have been savoring the sensation that, diplomatically at least, he had the British on the run.
But he gave little outward indication of it.


Linda J. Hoertel, John McCammond
Linda Jeanne Hoertel, the daughter of Gloria and Harold Hoertel of Harrington Park, N.J., was married yesterday to John Day McCammond, a son of Nancy D. McCammond of Richmond and the late Donald B. McCammond.
Bishop G. P. Mellick Belshaw of New Jersey performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in Prouts Neck, Me.


SUNDAY, September 11, 1994; Day of the Living War Toy On Carrier Intrepid
The old boy toy G.I.
Joe will never die.
A touchstone for a generation of American men who wasted hours in suburban basements playing with the foot-high plastic action figure, G.I.
Joe went through a period when he was only 3 3/4 inches tall, and he even disappeared for a few years.


The Castor Bean Plant: So Striking, So Poisonous
EARLY last summer, at an herb festival in Maryland, I stumbled on a four-inch castor bean plant.
As I admired its purplish-green, red-veined leaves, which are shaped like starfish, I wondered how castor oil could come from such a cute plant, and took it home to grow.


SEPT. 4-10: Death Over Iraq; The Air Force Cracks Down About Friendly Fire
In a shot heard around the Pentagon, the Air Force last week charged an F-15 pilot with negligent homicide and dereliction of duty in the accidental shooting down last April of two Army helicopters over the Kurdish enclave in Iraq.
The charges against Lieut.
Col.
Randy W. May, who is accused of failing to report that he couldn't confirm the identity of the Blackhawks, were the most serious ever by the Air Force as a result of a friendly fire incident, Pentagon officials said.
The mistake killed 26 American officials, Western officers and Kurdish workers.


His Home, His Castle And His Obsession
In a warrenlike den in the cavernous Ansonia, in a location he diligently tries to keep a secret, Thomas Soja is running his fingers over a piece of history.
It is a velvet-covered brochure, published in the early 1920's, trumpeting the Beaux-Arts hotel, then newly renovated.
"Those fortunate few who travel the world expect more of a hotel than just a place to sleep and leave their luggage," announces the booklet, with pictures of the hotel's 10-chair barbershop and its finely appointed suites.
"That is why so many Celebrities choose the Ansonia."


There's No Place Like . . .
BEDFORD CORNERS, 10549 simple, yet elegant.
But the new address is the product of nearly a year of wrangling between two relentless Bedford residents and the United States Postal Service, a battle that underscores the time-honored real estate maxim that location is everything.


U.S.-CUBA ACCORD SETS OFF A SURGE OF NEW REFUGEES
The tide of people fleeing Cuba surged again today as hundreds rushed to beat a 72-hour deadline set by the Government after its agreement with the United States to halt the exodus.
Cuban Coast Guard officers in green fatigues patrolled the shore on foot, but seemed to be making little effort to block the motley procession of homemade vessels into the sea.


J. R. Matthews, Gerard G. Frost Jr.
Jennifer Ross Matthews, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William O. Matthews of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gerard Gregory Frost Jr., the son of Mr.
Frost of Rockville Centre, L.I., and the late Ellen Frost.
The Rev.
Edward Hanrahan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride is an assistant to the vice president of advertising sales at ESPN, the cable sports network.
She and her husband graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a managing director at Cowen &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York.
Her mother, Janet R. Matthews, teaches English at the Albert Leonard Middle School in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride is a descendant of Daniel O'Connell, the 19th-century Irish political leader.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 27 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the movie "Quiz Show" misidentifies the actor at the left.
He is Hank Azaria, not Christopher McDonald.


As Cuomo Waits, the Republicans Battle
THE gubernatorial primaries in both major parties have had a strange rhythm, largely because the leading contenders have barely acknowledged that they are opposed.
The race to watch is in the Republican Party, where State Senator George E. Pataki, who was designated the choice of party leaders at their state convention in May, faces a pesky challenge from Richard M. Rosenbaum, a former state Republican chairman from Rochester.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14  CUBAN EXODUS SURGE  The number of people fleeing Cuba surged again as people tried to beat a 72-hour deadline, even though those picked up at sea are not eligible for refugee status.  1  AD-LIBBING ON CUBA  News analysis: The victory in talks with Cuba on Friday came about as a result of a policy that was ad-libbed even more than usual for the Clinton Administration.  8


Using Stock Portfolios to Save the Planet
IN the late 1980's, when more was more and preserving the planet was not a top priority, two money managers, Peter W. Adolph and Marc E. Komorsky decided to concentrate on choosing socially responsible companies for their clients' portfolios.
"The environment was something we felt strongly about personally," Mr.
Adolph said.
"So we decided to do more to preserve it than give it lip service. We started screening companies and recommending the stocks of those that were making a positive contribution to society and the environment.


Without a Trace
The other day I went to a lipstick brunch.
A lot of magazine editors and some television crews crowded into a restaurant to watch Cindy Crawford demonstrate Revlon's Colorstay Lipcolor, a lipstick that will take us into the next millennium.
You put it on, let it set for 60 seconds and voila!
It will not come off on your teeth, or on the rim of a glass, or on someone you kiss, until you rub it off.
To demonstrate, Cindy planted her famous mouth on a nice-looking man's cheek.
The cheek came away absolutely lipstick-free.
The kiss might never have happened.
We applauded wildly.
As I looked around at tables strewn with lipstick-smeared cups and glasses, I felt I was witnessing the birth of a great invention.
No longer would women in the workplace feel the shame of leaving oblate stigmata of their sex on coffee mugs, or know the agony of looking in a washroom mirror and seeing their teeth -- recently displayed in the course of making an important presentation -- smudged with carmine.


La Dolce Vita
L'Uomo Vogue salutes Barneys New York, Sept. 7.


Streetscapes:/7 East 10th Street; A Greenwich Village House Awash in Indian Detailing
EVEN on the picturesque streets of Greenwich Village, people stop and stare at the Lockwood de Forest house, at 7 East 10th Street.
Now New York University has bought what is certainly one of the most unusual buildings in New York and is turning it into a Jewish student center.
Lockwood de Forest was born into a socially prominent family that had made its money in South American and Caribbean shipping.
He studied with Frederic Church and had a moderate success as a painter.
But he was also interested in decoration and architecture, and in 1879 he joined Louis Comfort Tiffany and others to found Associated Artists.


How Much New Board In Nassau Will Cost
"Referendum on Nassau Legislature Faces an Uncertain Future"  [ Aug. 7 ]  seems to say it all.
However, what was not discussed, nor have most others writing on this topic, will be the costs of the new County Legislature.
One of the most heavily taxed areas of the United States will be hit again and hard.
Whether upholding the constitutional principle of one person one vote is worth the financial bill is something that should be considered well before the referendum.
Nineteen part-time legislators at $39,000 per year comes to more than $740,000.
Throw in salaries for staff members, and the sum will be close to $2 million.
Add the basic necessities of stationery, postage, printing, office supplies, etc., and the bill keeps mounting.
It is doubtful that dissolution of the Board of Supervisors will cover all of these costs.


Political Notes; A Not-So-Warm Meeting of Two Former Opponents
Geraldine A. Ferraro and Elizabeth Holtzman have not precisely seen eye to eye since the slashing Democratic primary race two years ago, when the two politicians failed in their quests to become the first woman elected senator from New York.
Ms.
Ferraro, who took the brunt of the campaign attacks, lost to Robert Abrams by 1 percentage point.
Ms.
Holtzman, who did much of the attacking, lost her own re-election bid for City Comptroller one year later in a race in which her Senate campaign tactics came back to haunt her.


Jordan Bids Farewell With a Dunk and a Kiss
Horace Grant was hoisting his arms, taking in the boos as gracefully as someone who helped lead this city to three National Basketball Association titles could.
B.
J.
Armstrong, a babykins smile stamped across his face, spotted up from beyond the 3-point line.
Scottie Pippen laughed and tugged on his shorts, awaiting the most arduous defensive assignment of his life.
And you-know-who winked at them all, scored 52 points in 48 minutes and kissed the old building goodbye as nearly 19,000 people stood, roared and kept roaring until he disappeared in a sea of yellow-jacketed security guards underneath a stadium tunnel, as if he were some medieval prince vacating his castle.


The Drying Game
If only life were as kind to its youth as a slow oven is to summer produce.
Gently dried and thoughtfully seasoned, the brash, young vegetables and fruits of summer can be tempered without becoming withered, can be made more complicated and interesting without becoming bitter.
Dried tomatoes seasoned with rosemary and orange, for instance, have a youthful vigor that lends a sunny disposition to fall dishes.
Yet, like a mature person, they are less demanding -- oven-dried tomatoes will keep for several weeks in the refrigerator, while fresh ones on a windowsill can go bad in a day.


Complementing Salmon, Baked or in Cakes
IN Colonial America, salmon was so plentiful that servants had contracts stipulating that they could not be served it more than so many times a week (Elizabethan servants had the same understanding with oysters).
In the spawning season, salmon once glutted the rivers of the Pacific Northwest so densely that traders claimed they could cross the river on the backs of the fish.
But because of pollution and overfishing, supplies eventually dwindled and salmon became a luxury.


Primary Tests Strength of Troubled Party
Two months after winning the Democratic Party's endorsement for his bid to become Connecticut's next governor, John B. Larson is waiting to see what that support is worth.
Mr.
Larson, the president pro tem of the State Senate, is facing a tough primary election on Tuesday against an insurgent candidate, State Comptroller William E. Curry Jr.
The two men have approached the contest with different strategies, and the election has turned into something of a bellwether of the future of the state's Democratic Party.


THEATER
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
1994 INTERNATIONAL FESTIVAL OF PUPPET THEATER With the actors in New York musicals seeming increasingly less human ("Cats," "Beauty and the Beast"), it feels weirdly appropriate that puppets should be taking on the weightier stuff.
Living dolls from around the world do their own versions of Strindberg, Buchner and Gertrude Stein, among others, via the Jim Henson Foundation.
Through Sept. 18 at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, with cabaret and children's fare at Performance Space 122.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Brian Henesey, running back, to the practice squad.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed Lincoln Coleman, running back, to a two-year contract.


What High-Tech Cartoonists Do With the Leftovers
THE company boss is standing in his office, poker-faced, as an employee cringes before him on hands and knees, like a peasant before a king.
The employee wimpers: "Corporate raiders, sir . . . one, maybe two companies away."
In another drawing, a man on vacation is lying serenely on the beach, wearing a mile-wide smile as he savors the salt air and sun.
An airplane passes overhead towing a banner that reads: CALL YOUR OFFICE.


Co-op Repairs
To the Editor:
I believe that the answer given to "Who Must Pay For Floor Repair" on Aug. 21 is incorrect.


Call It Medical Care, Not Health Care, and Then Let's Discuss It
To the Editor:
In the dialogue essential to reform of our medical system, we must exorcise the euphemisms in which we clothe our discomfort with disease and death.
Consider the very word "health," as in "health care," "health center" and "health insurance." Does not the word "health" in all these contexts really mean "illness"?
We should separate the concept of "illness insurance" -- insurance to assist with expenses consequent to illness or injury -- from prepaid medical care.


POP MUSIC
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
MAHRAJAN AL-FAN -- A DAY OF ARAB WORLD CULTURE Unified by its winding melodies and drone harmonies, Arabic music remains exotic to mainstream pop listeners, but its passion and intricacy come through.
A five-hour festival will present Simon Shaheen's Near Eastern Music Ensemble and singers representing traditions from Syria, Egypt, Lebanon, Yemen and elsewhere.
The Ethnic Folk Arts Center is the co-producer.
Today, Brooklyn Museum.


THE NEVER WIFE
As one of the "witnesses" called upon by the Catholic Church to "help" dissolve my brother's previous marriage so he could "legally" remarry within the church, I plowed through five pages of questions, venting my anger at the hypocrisy of demeaning joy, birth and pain to nothingness to get around antiquated laws, to let the church save face and allow its members to remain guilt-free -- and tithers.


For Next 2 Years, The Digging Up Of Smith Street
Smith Street, one of the major roadways linking Sunset Park to downtown Brooklyn, will get a much-needed facelift when workers begin tearing up asphalt and concrete next week.
The $9.9 million project -- which includes the excavation and removal of abandoned trolley tracks, replacement of existing sewers, installation of water mains, construction of catch basins, new curbs and sidewalks, installation of streetlights and trees -- aims to restore almost the entire length of the street from Hamilton Avenue in Carroll Gardens to Fulton Street downtown.
The construction, however, will exclude Atlantic Avenue.


As Primary Nears, Barry Runs Hard
In the final weekend before a Democratic primary virtually certain to produce the District of Columbia's next mayor, Marion S. Barry Jr., the man driven from that office by a drug conviction, is close to achieving what many residents once thought unimaginable.
With the city reeling from a serious budget deficit, an eroding quality of life and strained relations with Congress, he finds himself a leading contender to be returned to office, despite having ended his last term four years ago with a six-month jail sentence.


Anne M. Taylor, Sean P. Madden
Anne Marshall Taylor, a daughter of Marion M. Taylor of Summit, N.J., and Arthur R. Taylor of Salisbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Sean Patrick Madden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Madden Jr. of Flanders, N.J.
The Rev.
Donal Fox performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Abbey in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Madden, 30, is an associate at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
She graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father, a former president of CBS Inc., is the president of Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pa.
Her mother is a marketing writer at Dean Witter, the New York securities brokerage.


Popular Music Everywhere
To the Editor:
I have read with great interest at least three reviews of Martha Bayles's "Hole in Our Soul: The Loss of Beauty and Meaning in American Popular Music." The first sentence of Jon Pareles's last paragraph in his review (Aug. 14) really struck a nerve for me.
He said, "Popular music gives the audience what it wants, always offering a full spectrum of attitudes." From my standpoint, I am all too often the audience of pop music without wanting to be: on beaches, parks, in the woods, in our own gardens and certainly on the street, it is everywhere, as if nature needed a soundtrack.
I am not alone when I describe the anguish such intrusions bring me, but we are truly a minority, we who enjoy plain old quiet.
PAT CLOPPER  Alexandria, Va.


Electra McDowell And Peter A. Lang
Electra Vanderbilt McDowell, a television graphics producer at Pittard Sullivan Fitzgerald in Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Peter Alfred Lang, a partner in Siegel Nelson Films in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
The Rev.
Mark Bowles performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in Charlotte, Vt.
Mrs.
Lang, 34, graduated from Stanford University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Fletcher H. McDowell of New York and the late Electra Bostwick McDowell.
The bride's father is a neurologist at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and the executive director of the Burke Rehabilitation Center in White Plains.


Hilary H. Ward, Joseph Murphy 3d
Hilary Haxall Ward, the daughter of Michael and Alexandra Ward of New York, was married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn., to Joseph Francis Murphy 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murphy Jr. of Barrington, R.I.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Robert Weiss, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Mrs.
Murphy, 26, and her husband, 31, are associates at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the Eastern sales manager in New York for Time International, an international edition of Time magazine.
Her mother is the director of alumni affairs at St.
Bernard's School in New York.


Neighbors Remember 'Wonderful Family'
The normal rhythms of life in this comfortable, middle class Pittsburgh suburb -- family, work, school and church -- were interrupted for one family last week by death at a distance.
Then those rhythms were abruptly ended, leaving a neighborhood in tears as the five Weavers were returning from a family funeral and died on Thursday along with 127 other people in the crash of USAir's Flight 427.


A Figure In White
MARPINGEN Apparitions of the Virgin Mary in Nineteenth-Century Germany.
By David Blackbourn. 510 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


Delta to Ban Smoking On Atlantic Routes
Delta Air Lines plans to ban smoking on its trans-Atlantic flights beginning in January, making Delta the first American carrier to impose such a ban.
Delta's decision is the latest move among many major carriers to prohibit smoking on some international routes.
Smoking has been banned on flights within the United States for years, and legislation is working its way through the House of Representatives that would extend the ban to all flights to and from the United States.


It Was a Psmall Fringe Benefit
To the Editor:
The article on the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank ("Inside the World's Most Profitable Bank," Aug. 21) failed to mention the bank's most famous employee, P. G. Wodehouse.
He was employed there from September 1900 to September 1902.
He, perhaps, benefited from the relationship more than the bank did.
In addition to his $:80 salary, he obtained much of the background for his novel "Psmith in the City." D. S. OWINGS  Brooklyn, Aug. 22


Giants Fear Temperatures Reaching 100 Degrees in the Pocket
Dan Reeves remembers what real heat is.
In 1966, as a scrawny halfback for the Dallas Cowboys, Reeves was playing the Minnesota Vikings at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas.
The game-time temperature hovered around 105 degrees.
It was so hot the band that was supposed to perform at halftime decided that instead of boiling their tubas it was better to stay in the air-conditioning.
They canceled their performance.
"I must have lost 10 pounds and I didn't have 10 pounds to lose," said Reeves.


Complementing Salmon, Baked or in Cakes
IN Colonial America, salmon was so plentiful that servants had contracts stipulating that they could not be served it more than so many times a week (Elizabethan servants had the same understanding with oysters).
In the spawning season, salmon once glutted the rivers of the Pacific Northwest so densely that traders claimed they could cross the river on the backs of the fish.
But because of pollution and overfishing, supplies eventually dwindled and salmon became a luxury.


Inflation Is Back, At Least at A Crude Level
WHEN an entire segment of the world economy is starved for investment for more than a decade, problems start to develop.
That may well be the lesson behind the sharp increase in producer prices reported Friday.
The rise -- of six-tenths of one percent in August -- was the biggest monthly gain in four years.


Behind the Pope's Unyielding Urgency
FROM the ramparts of Sarajevo to the corridors of the population conference here, Pope John Paul II last week confronted some of the most galling reverses and hard-fought battles of his 16-year papacy.
In the Balkans, the Pope was forced to postpone a so- called pilgrimage of peace to the Bosnian capital because Bosnian Serbs would not, or could not, guarantee safe passage.
In Cairo, the Vatican stood virtually alone against the world at the United Nations population conference, opposing to the last the very idea that abortion be included in a final declaration nurturing far broader ambitions: the prevention of cataclysmic global overpopulation through sweeping development and health measures and advances in women's rights.


Fashion Folderol
The femme-fatale drag dressing at Wigstock in Greenwich Village last Sunday was right in step with -- and often ahead of -- fashion's revival of glamour.
Many participants wore witty, inventive wigs and over-the-top costumes.
Some wore adaptations of ensembles by Chanel, Herve Leger, John Galliano, Gianni Versace and Marc Jacobs.


No Headline
"We have no mission, no tools, no leadership, so where are we?" JUAN BUSTOS, an Immigration and Naturalization Service employee.  [ 24:1. ]


Susana Castro and Nelson Alcaraz
Dr.
Susana Castro, an intern in pediatrics at Babies Hospital in New York, and Dr.
Nelson Alcaraz, a resident in otolaryngology at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, were married yesterday in Jamaica Estates, Queens.
The Rev.
Thomas Joyce, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Church.
Dr.
Castro-Alcaraz and her husband, both 26, received their medical degrees from Yeshiva University.
She graduated cum laude from Hunter College, and he graduated from Cornell University.


Share the Wealth
On Wall Street, there is a saying that goes, "Bulls make money; bears make money; hogs get slaughtered." When you look at the Orioles (if you can believe them) it is abundantly clear that revenue sharing already exists.
The line item "road game receipts" shows the Pirates getting $800,000 and the Orioles getting $4.5 million.
The rich get richer.
Whatever the outcome of the strike, the fat hogs are going to have to move over and let the skinny hogs get their feet in the trough.
How about sharing "road game receipts" equally across the board?
There's enough slop in the trough for everybody.
KEN MACKENZIE  Guilford, Conn.
The writer pitched for the New York Mets in 1962-63.


An Identity Crisis?
To the Editor:
I may not be up to speed on the recent work of the architects Frank Gehry and Peter Eisenman, but the illustrations that accompanied Paul Goldberger's criticism of their recent projects in Japan seemed to indicate an identity crisis rather than a "quick and dirty synopses" of their past designs  [ "When Your Own Initials Aren't Enough," Aug. 7 ] .


2 New Guides: Boston And New Orleans
New Orleans's African-American attractions and Boston's Freedom Trail are described for tourists in two new booklets.
"1994-95 Soul of New Orleans," 96 pages in a narrow format, is the first guide published by the Greater New Orleans Black Tourism Network, a nonprofit organization that promotes African-American tourism in the New Orleans area.
Folded into the center is the official tourist map, with black history sites keyed.
The book includes short essays on local topics from the jazz musician Jelly Roll Morton to Homer Plessy, the loser in Plessy v.
Ferguson, the 1896 Supreme Court decision upholding Jim Crow.
The booklet is free from the network, 1520 Sugar Bowl Drive, New Orleans, La. 70112; (800) 725-5652 or (504) 523-5652.


An Earlier Precedent On Partnerships
To the Editor:
"When Partners are in Name Only" (At Work, Aug. 21) reported that a decision against Ernst &amp; Young was the first in which a partner had successfully claimed employee status under the discrimination laws.
That case, however, was not the first time a partner in a large accounting firm was permitted to sue as an employee.


Bum Steer
To the Editor:
In Vicki Goldberg's article "In Search of Diana of Ephesus"  [ Aug. 21 ] , there is a bit of a clinker.
In reference to Diana, we read: "The steer was symbolic of fruitfulness." This is strange since a steer is a male bovine animal castrated early in its life; in other words, an ox.
I suspect the symbol Ms.
Goldberg meant was the bull.
JOHN WAGNER  Ann Arbor, Mich.


Sound Bytes; The Superhighway Patrol
SGT.
Jim McMahon is a Harry Callahan for the information age.
A 18 1/2-year veteran of the San Jose, Calif., Police Department, Sergeant McMahon heads a four-person high-tech crime unit responsible for investigating computer crimes in the heart of Silicon Valley.
The unit investigates thefts of computer components and trade secrets, hackers and crackers, cellular phone fraud, distribution of pornography over electronic networks -- even murder.
Question.
Why won't you disclose where or when you were born or anything about your family?
Answer.
Because a person's place of birth and date of birth can be used to go through computer data bases and get information on individuals.
There are people who'd do this as a way of getting back at cops and anybody else.
A police officer I know was investigating an individual who used this information to cancel his plane tickets -- while he was on the plane.


'94 Federal Handbook
The writing is clinical, straightforward and, well, a little dull.
But the information in the recently updated "Health Information for International Travel, 1994," compiled by the Centers for Disease Control, is as up-to-the-moment and detailed as a concerned traveler could wish.
Besides a 48-page section on vaccination requirements for specific countries, from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe, the 188-page book highlights diseases travelers should look out for in specific regions.
The book can be ordered from the Government Printing Office in Washington: (202) 783-3238.


Volunteers Are Joining Global Coastal Cleanup
FROM Argentina to Australia and in 53 other foreign countries and 35 American states, a massive global coastal cleanup will take place next Saturday and Sunday.
Barbara Cohen, coordinator of the New York State coastal cleanup, reported that what began eight years ago as a statewide effort to clean up 122 miles of Texas shoreline led to the first nationwide coastal cleanup operation two years later.


Cuban Detainees Protest Accord
Two Cuban refugees were injured today at the Guantanamo Bay naval base in Cuba as thousands of detained boat people protested an agreement between Havana and Washington that could leave them at the detainment camps indefinitely, officials there said.
The demonstrations began peacefully Friday night when some of the roughly 25,000 Cuban refugees there learned of the accord through radio broadcasts, but by this afternoon the protests turned violent, and involved about 2,500 Cubans, said Army Major Rick Thomas, a spokesman for the multiservice task force that runs the refugee operation.


Johanna Geoghan and C. J. Magovern
Johanna Marie Geoghan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Geoghan of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Christopher Jude Magovern, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Magovern of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Louis Padovano performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church in New York.
Mrs.
Magovern, 30, is a lawyer at Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons, the beverage manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Fordham University, from which she also received a law degree.
Her father is the general counsel and corporate secretary for the Union Carbide Corporation, the chemical company, in Danbury, Conn.


Vikings' Gerak Is Hit With Hefty Fine
Minnesota Vikings guard JOHN GERAK has been fined $7,500 by the National Football League for a chop block against defensive end REGGIE WHITE in the Vikings' 16-10 loss to Green Bay last week.
Gerak committed the infraction while teaming with center JEFF CHRISTY to keep the pass-rushing White away from Vikings quarterback WARREN MOON. (AP)


Cadets Lose Star, but Crush Holy Cross
Army Coach Bob Sutton's indecision over which of two good quarterbacks to use as a starter was settled, albeit unpleasantly, early in the game today and the Cadets went on to crush Holy Cross, 49-3.
Sutton's plan was to alternate Rick Roper, the starter the last two years, with another senior, Mike Makovec, who was the first-string quarterback until sidelined with a chronic knee injury in the second game of the 1992 season.
Under the plan, each quarterback was to work two consecutive series against Holy Cross, with Roper as the starter.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  HERO  By Frederick G. Dillen. Steerforth Press, $17.


9 Artists in a Show That's Both Conventional and Eccentric
THE setting is again the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island, but the attraction, "New Island Views II," is a very different proposition from the sculpture reviewed here last week.
For one thing, the display, which hangs in the Newhouse Center for Contemporary Art, consists mostly of paintings and work from paper; for another, the majority of the nine artists involved live and work on Staten Island.
Alice Yang, who normally works at the New Museum in Manhattan as an assistant curator, did the honors, achieving a show that is both conventional and eccentric.
Thus, "Of Mountains and Molehills," a room-sized installation by Milenka Berengolc, addresses the well-worn subject of a woman's self-image and, in Ms.
Yang's words, "the way it has been defined by her physical attributes."


The Lasting Exile Of Cuban Spirits
FOR many Cuban exiles, Cuba is like a long-lost lover in a faded photograph for whom they try to maintain their passion during decades of marriage to someone else.
It is barely a reality, and almost a dream.
As yet another exodus from Cuba reminds them of their original journey, many exiles are focusing with a kind of melancholic clarity on the fact that a reverse migration grows more unlikely with every year.
Most Cubans will never return to live in their island homeland.


A Few From the Heart
There was the time Laynie Browne read a poem to her class, "why some people be mad at me sometimes," and a black student asked, "Why is that white man trying to write like a black woman?" The student was astonished to learn that the poem was indeed written by a black woman, Lucille Clifton.
The sense of dispossession is the kind of thought unearthed in Laynie Browne's writing class at Bushwick Outreach, an alternative public high school in Brooklyn.
In Ms.
Browne's class, the act of writing is a light scanning the psychological hieroglyphics of teenage-hood.
But she offers the written word more as an island of relief.


Freewheeling Ways Pay Off for the White House
The Clinton Administration was able to claim a triumph Friday in its talks with Cuba, although its policy-making process on the immigration crisis was undisciplined and untidy even by the Administration's freewheeling bureaucratic standards.
Many Administration officials acknowledge that the last five weeks of policy-making on Cuba have been marked to an unusual degree by ad-libbing, domestic politics and a constantly changing cast of characters.
Adding to the confusion, several new voices on foreign policy were involved because the Cuba crisis so heavily involved immigration matters and because so many officials were on vacation.


The Royal Accountant Has a Headache
Once more, London's newspapers were frothing last week over the seeming profligacy of Britain's royal family.
This time it was a House of Commons report that revealed some of the expenses paid out of the $30 million in taxpayer funds set aside each year to run Buckingham Palace and three other royal properties.
The report cited nearly $1.2 million in telephone bills, generous rent subsidies to servants, and about $400,000 in royal water bills (although the London water utility later rebated about $120,000 after confessing it had misread royal water meters).
The press bannered the numbers, and the Queen's aides cried foul, saying important business was being conducted over those phones and in those castles.
But what really drove the aides ballistic was a suggestion in several newspapers that palace bookkeepers might have diverted nearly half the $7.3 million raised among tourists who paid to visit Buckingham Palace last year -- money that is pledged to repair fire damage at Windsor Castle.
Arguing that some newspapers were wantonly confusing gross receipts with profit, the palace said it was asking its lawyers to consider filing lawsuits against those who suggested the Queen was misappropriating public money.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
LIKE the leaders of other memorable movements, he is known by one name -- Perry.
His telephone listing may read Dr.
Perry Starer, in deference to his medical degree and his parents in Searingtown, but to the tens of thousands of Fire Island singles who have followed him from party to party, he is simply Perry.
As Socrates was to philosophy, Perry is to partying.
He is the soul of the singles, the guru of the groupers.
When he is not matchmaking or announcing what parties are where and when on the western end of Fire Island, he is organizing his own parties in Manhattan.
In the world of unwed revelers, Perry is a legend in his time.


The Fashion Firmament
The 11th annual Night of Stars, at the 69th Regiment Armory, Sept. 8.


Julia H. Zinke, E. R. Stikeleather
Julia Harrison Zinke, a daughter of Barbara R. Zinke of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and William K. Zinke of Boulder, Colo., was married yesterday in Mount Kisco, N.Y., to Edward Rook Stikeleather, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Stikeleather of Canton, Mass.
The Rev.
Jack S. Miller performed the ceremony at the Mount Kisco Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 27, graduated from Amherst College.
She is an assistant editor at Educators Publishing Service in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is the president of Human Resource Services Inc., a management consulting concern in Boulder.


Krone's Generosity
To the Sports Editor:
On a cool afternoon at Saratoga, Julie Krone was walking slowly to the walking ring as she anticipated her next race.
As always, children surrounded her for autographs, and she beamed, signed all available programs, talked with the children, and seemed to radiate.


Evans Escapes With Gold In the 800
Janet Evans was trying to explain how it felt to win her 21st consecutive 800-meter freestyle race, but the Chinese kept interrupting.
Evans was in the interview room at the Foro Italico, basking in the afterglow of the first and, in all probability, only, gold medal for an American woman in the swimming world championships.
From her seat, she could lean over and see the electronic scoreboard as the first leg of the 400-meter medley relay came to an end.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
TOUGH BORIS  By Mem Fox.
Illustrated by Kathryn Brown.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.


Sarah Nagourney, Yossy Benderly
SARAH NAGOURNEY, a singer-songwriter in her early 30's, can often be found onstage with her band at Sin-e, a storefront cafe and nightclub in the East Village with about a dozen small tables, homemade pies on the menu, literary graffiti in the bathrooms and peach-colored walls that look as if they were finger-painted by a bunch of friends.
Ms.
Nagourney fits right in.
A graduate of Oxford College who grew up in Connecticut, she performs in little black dresses and construction boots, describes her work as "art pop" and is often called a thinking person's songwriter.


Habitats/Old Lyme, Conn.; Roots in Summers Past
"THERE are people around here who still call me Jacky," said Jack Murphy, a 32-year-old Wall Street equities analyst, as he strolled down the sand-strewn beach road where he's spent his summers since he was 5 years old.
Now Mr.
Murphy has bought his own unwinterized cottage -- he paid the $143,000 in cash, no mortgage -- only about 100 feet from his parents' summer house, purchased in 1967.


A BUDDHA AND HIS BEAR
I was amused and strangely reassured to note that the caretakers of the little Buddha also saw fit to take care of his damask throne by placing plastic slipcovers on the seat, arms and back, not to mention the screens behind it (Sunday: "A Buddha and His Bear," Aug. 21).


Botanic Anarchy
The nights are beginning to chill; you can almost feel the season shifting gears under your feet.
The impatiens and begonia are breathing their last around the trunks of side-street trees.
But between cracks in the sidewalk, hardier things are growing with no help from humans.
Along the disused ramp between Riverside Drive and the 79th Street boat basin, pigweed flourishes everywhere, along with delicate pink lady's thumb.
The berries of pokeweed are just starting to turn from green to deep purple.
Red clover and purplish-blue chicory grow on the scruffy hillside, and tiny blue Asiatic dayflower, with its petals like mouse-ears.
Down along the river you can find white clover and peppergrass, and even a brave, stunted white wood aster.


FILM
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
"QUIZ SHOW" Robert Redford finds a fascinating subject in the scandals that rocked 1950's television game shows and prefigured greater disillusionments on America's horizon.
With Ralph Fiennes, John Turturro and Rob Morrow.
Opens Wednesday.


China Warns U.S. on Relations With Taiwan
China registered another "strong protest" today over the Clinton Administration's decision to upgrade unofficial ties with Taiwan, warning that Taiwan was a potentially "explosive issue."
A senior Foreign Ministry official summoned Ambassador J. Stapleton Roy and accused Washington of "taking steps" to create "two Chinas, or one China, one Taiwan," and said this would not only stall the development of relations but would also lead to their deterioration.


The Executive Computer; From Novell, a Customer-Designed Wordperfect 'Suite'
EVER since the software "suite" wars flared up two years ago, customers have embraced the idea of suites, or packages of programs, as a way to save money, even if it meant they would be buying some software they didn't need.
After all, if they were getting five programs for the price of three, could they complain if they were using only four?
But Novell Inc.'s newly acquired Wordperfect unit wants to change the rules of the game.


Q and A
Crossing Into Jordan
Q.
Now that Israel and Jordan are on the verge of peace, what are the prospects of traveling to the ruins of the Nabatean city of Petra in January 1995?
Will one be able to enter Jordan at Aqaba after visiting Eilat? -- Prof.
Arthur Glenberg, University of Wisconsin, Madison


League Tactics Upset Rangers and Other Players
The Mark Messier contract holdout isn't the only grumble of discontent from the Ranger training camp as players prepare for the first official workouts today in Glens Falls, N.Y.
Many members of the Stanley Cup champions, as well as their co-workers on other teams, are irked by recent actions of National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman, who significantly slashed benefits as a bargaining tactic in negotiations toward a new collective bargaining agreement.


Tough Tactics on Crown Hts. Are Typical for Defense Lawyer
When a defense lawyer challenged the judge last week in the latest prosecution of Lemrick Nelson Jr. stemming from the 1991 Crown Heights violence, it was no surprise to those who have followed the career of the lawyer, Michael W. Warren.
By standing up in a Brooklyn courtroom and asking the judge to step down from the new case, charging a conflict of interest, Mr.
Warren signaled at the outset the aggressive tactics the defense would use in battling the Federal charges.


K. S. Merrell, James Denny Jr.
Katherine Stuart Merrell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley W. Merrell of Rochester, was married there yesterday to James McCahill Denny Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Denny of Wilmette, Ill.
The Rev.
Robert M. Wainwright officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Thomas Ventura, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Denny is the Southeastern sales manager in Atlanta for Better Homes and Gardens magazine.
She and the bridegroom graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father retired as a senior vice president at Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., in Rochester.


Commercial Property/Personal Guarantees; Assuring Rent Payments Without Tangible Assets
ROBERT MILLER and his partners at Blutrich Herman &amp; Miller were happy with their space at 2 Park Avenue, at 34th Street, but not with their lease.
It made each partner personally responsible for rent payments should the firm default.
When it came time to renew, the partners were willing to agree only to a security deposit large enough to cover any additional build-out work.
The landlord gave up total guarantees, but insisted on a letter of credit that would cover not only construction, but also commissions and the cost of rent concessions to new tenants.


Developer Betting on a Comeback of the House
Once a middle-class resort with easy access to the ocean and Jamaica Bay, Arverne began to decline in the 1950's as public housing projects were built nearby and vacationers fled to distant hideaways.
Nowadays, the poor live year-round in summer bungalows that are often rundown and inadequately winterized.
With its vacant lots and crumbling streets, Arverne sometimes seems bleaker than any other part of a city with many bleak parts.


'Virtual Love'
To the Editor:
I am grateful for Rosemary L. Bray's many kind words about my E-mail novel, "Virtual Love." However, in the first paragraph of her review (Aug. 7), she defines an inaccurate premise that tarnishes much of her commentary.
She writes, "The two 'meet' after Aphra's husband, a pathologist, refers a patient to Marc, a heretofore unseen colleague."


Once and Again, a Flatiron Boom
DON'T ask directions to the Flatiron District; you'll wind up in a discussion about whether it even exists, except in the minds of the local merchants, and then you won't have time to shop for stuff you never knew you needed in the superstores along the reconstructed Ladies' Mile, or sit in Madison Square Park and watch the color drain out of the sky at the hour when the neighborhood gets all moody and restless.
The park is just across the street from the Flatiron Building, the ornate, improbably slender wedge of limestone with such a lot of terra-cotta detail that it almost resembles a 21-story sliver of birthday cake, served up on the tiny triangle of land where Fifth Avenue and Broadway meet at 23d Street.


Critic's Choices: Theater


Asia by Wheelchair
More than 100 hotels throughout Hong Kong, Macao, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand can accommodate wheelchair-bound guests, and Ed Hansen and Bruce Gordon list them all in their new book, "Exotic Destinations for Wheelchair Travelers" (Full Date Limited; $14.95).
Mr.
Hansen, who began using a wheelchair after an industrial accident, has frequently visited Asia in his wheelchair for 16 years.
For each hotel, he offers straightforward information on ramps, steps, shower dimensions, toilet heights, the availability of physicians and other details helpful to wheelchair travelers.
To order call (800) 247-6553.
TERRY TRUCCO


Leaders in Their Fields, From Science to Business, Who Died in USAir Crash; Manville J. Mayfield, Engineer, 68
Manville J. Mayfield, an engineer at the Department of Energy who helped develop fuel cells, died on Thursday in the USAir plane crash.
He was 68 and lived in Morgantown, W.Va.
Mr.
Mayfield was the engineering project manager of the fuel cells research and development program at the Energy Technology Center in Morgantown.
He was on his way home from an energy conference in Chicago when the plane crashed, said Michael Gauldin, a spokesman for the Energy Department.


C. C. Nettesheim, Dennis F. Miller
Judge Christine Cook Nettesheim of the United States Court of Federal Claims in Washington was married there yesterday at the Renwick Chapel to Dennis F. Miller, an environmental scientist based in Washington.
Judge Helen W. Nies of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
Timothy Cadigan, a Roman Catholic priest, participated.
Judge Miller graduated from Stanford University and received her law degree from the University of Utah.
She is a daughter of the late Carolyn Odell Cook and Leo M. Cook 2d.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: EAST RIVER PARK: The Ups and Downs (and Ups) of a 57-Acre Dream Park; Decrepit Stage Becomes Tragedy Itself
On a mild summer night in 1956, Joseph Papp presented "Julius Caesar" against the backdrop of the East River and the Williamsburg Bridge.
The following year, the New York Shakespeare Festival found a home in Central Park, but the East River Park Amphitheater went on to even greater glory, as the site of free Evenings-by-the-River, a summer concert series that drew several personal appearances by its honorary chairwoman, Eleanor Roosevelt.


Critic's Choices: Dance


PHOTOGRAPHY
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
"EYEWITNESS 1994" The best press photographs of 1993 according to the World Press Photo Foundation, not a disinterested judge, is having its East Coast premiere at the World Financial Center.
Through Oct. 2, World Financial Center, Battery Park City. (945-0505)


Pamela Sigal, Paul Kraszewski
Pamela Sigal, the advertising director of Child Magazine in New York, and Paul Henry Kraszewski, a vice president of Lexington Management, investment advisers in Saddle Brook, N.J., were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Charles G. Agin performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Pierre.
The bride, 36, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is the daughter of Nancy Horwitz Sigal of Boca Raton, Fla.
The bride's father, the late Harry Horwitz, owned Martin H. Horwitz Insurance Agency, formerly in New Britain, Conn.
Her adoptive father, the late Irvin M. Sigal, was the chairman and an owner of W. W. Mertz, a department store in Torrington, Conn.


Leaders in Their Fields, From Science to Business, Who Died in USAir Crash; Deborah Norden, Arts Administrator, 40
Deborah Norden, an administrator for the New York State Council on the Arts, died on Thursday in the USAir plane crash.
She was 40 and lived in Manhattan.
Ms.
Norden was also an architect and worked for the firms of Paul Segal, Richard Dattner and Charles Boxenbaum in New York City before joining the arts council in 1985.


A Decade of Debate
The question of whether electromagnetic fields are capable of causing or promoting cancer has been debated since 1979, when Dr.
Nancy Wertheimer and Dr.
Ed Leeper of the University of Colorado reported that children exposed to higher than average magnetic fields had an increased risk of leukemia.
The Denver study has generally been discounted by the scientific community, though a handful of studies have found similar results.
The term electromagnetic field refers to the interaction of electric and magnetic forces.
A changing magnetic field produces an electrical field, and conversely, a changing electric field produces a magnetic field.


SMALLPOX IS DEAD. LONG LIVE SMALLPOX.
Your comprehensive article on smallpox did contain one incomplete statement.


Breaking the Ice With Syria
So gradual is progress toward an Israeli-Syrian peace treaty that an inch looms like a mile.
Last week the process seemed to move ahead by two, three, maybe even four inches, a monumental leap by past standards.
For the first time, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has put forward a specific timetable for the initial phase of an Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights.
He talks of a "slight pullback" that would last three years, adding that Israel expects that full and normal relations would develop with Damascus during that trial period.
This has the tone of an opening bid.
So does the response of Syria's Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, who said he saw no need for so long a trial period given the smallness of the Golan Heights.
Notably missing in his remarks to a Dutch television interviewer was the ritual castigation of Israel.


Political Memo; Primary Foes Try to Escape the Pod
Political primaries rarely draw crowds, especially primaries for mid-term elections.
But New Yorkers may be about to set a new record for low turnout on Tuesday when both the Republicans and the Democrats hold their primaries.
It was, after all, a miserably hot summer -- poison for campaigning.
The Jewish holiday of Rosh ha-Shanah cut two days out of the already compressed post-Labor Day campaign week, when voters traditionally start to pay attention.
And the leading candidates at the top of their tickets -- Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Senator George E. Pataki -- feel so sure of victory on Tuesday that they're already running against each other.


More Clinton Proposals Face Danger in Congress
Several of President Clinton's main legislative proposals, which attracted relatively little attention while the spotlight was on his plan for universal health insurance, now seem to be in danger of dying in the five or six weeks remaining in the 103d Congress.
Republicans in the Senate are trying to block a bill that would permit a global free-trade agreement to go into effect.
House and Senate negotiators are miles apart on a measure to rewrite campaign finance rules.


Elizabeth Kotler, Theodore Hayes
Elizabeth Anne Kotler, a daughter of Helen Kotler of the Bronx and Dr.
Martin Kotler of Manhattan, was married yesterday to Theodore Laurance Hayes, a son of the late Josephine and John Hayes.
Mayor Phyllis Marchand of Princeton Township, N.J., officiated at the Nassau Inn in Princeton.
Mrs.
Hayes, 28, is a management consultant for Sibson &amp; Company, a consulting firm in Princeton.
She graduated magna cum laude from Colby College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received both master's and Ph.D. degrees in industrial and organizational psychology from Rice University.
Mr.
Hayes, 32, is an adjunct professor of that subject at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio.
He graduated from Johns Hopkins University.


Living on Nothing
THE TIME: NIGHT By Ludmilla Petrushevskaya.
Translated by Sally Laird.  155 pp.
New York:  Pantheon Books. $20.


CRITIC'S CHOICES: JAZZ


Setting Facts Straight on the European Union
To the Editor:
"Why Brussels Has 10,000 Lobbyists" (Viewpoints, Aug. 21) states that "four Scandinavian nations are expected to join the European Union by 2000, and the new Eastern European democracies will probably follow."


Jets' Defense Has a New Man in the Middle in Marvin Jones
If history treats the Jets kindly, today could be memorable.
An optimistic and confident bunch these days, the team plays its home season opener at Giants Stadium against quarterback John Elway and the Denver Broncos.
And the Jets unveil a new starting middle linebacker in Marvin Jones.
They were poised, smart and skilled in their opening-day rout of the Buffalo Bills last Sunday.
If this does, indeed, turn into the season that first game suggests, then Kyle Clifton will savor it.
There have been too many seasons when he hasn't.


Complementing Salmon, Baked or in Cakes
IN Colonial America, salmon was so plentiful that servants had contracts stipulating that they could not be served it more than so many times a week (Elizabethan servants had the same understanding with oysters).
In the spawning season, salmon once glutted the rivers of the Pacific Northwest so densely that traders claimed they could cross the river on the backs of the fish.
But because of pollution and overfishing, supplies eventually dwindled and salmon became a luxury.


Here Come New Neighbors, Rated X
The Erotic Boutique, an X-rated video store, is nestled between a bodega and residential apartment complex near Fourth Avenue and 32d Street in Sunset Park.
A block away is Adult Videos.
The stores, which opened less than a month ago, are two of more than a dozen sex-video stores, topless bars and nude dance clubs that have sprung up between 30th and 40th Streets and Third and Fourth Avenues in the last two years.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
BEETHOVEN SONATAS New York, which tends to come late to early-music trends, has yet to hear the complete Beethoven sonatas on period pianos.
Malcolm Bilson and six of his students from Cornell University play catch-up in eight concerts.
Today to Sept. 25, Merkin Concert Hall.


THE NEVER WIFE
I was luckier than Patricia Bardon Cadigan (Hers, "The Never Wife, Aug. 21). Probably because I am Protestant, it took me only about two months to get the Catholic Church off my back.
Several years ago, I was notified by a certain archdiocese that my ex-husband of some 25 years wanted to annul our marriage, which included 13 years and four children.
He wanted to remarry (for the fourth time) and she was Catholic.


Technology; Rethinking Plastics From the Ground Up
FROM diapers to fast-food packaging, plastics have long been reviled by the environmentally conscious for their propensity to sit in landfills for decades without breaking down.
Yet some say the pollutants and waste created in the process of manufacturing plastics pose a greater environmental threat than what happens to them after they have been discarded.


Carol F. Lee, David J. Seipp
Carol Frances Lee, the general counsel to the Export-Import Bank of the United States in Washington, was married yesterday to David John Seipp, a professor of law at Boston University.
Judge Patricia M. Wald of the United States Court of Appeals in Washington officiated at the Woman's National Democratic Club there.
Ms.
Lee, 38, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Oxford University and summa cum laude from Yale University, from which she received her law degree.
She was a clerk for Justice John Paul Stevens of the Supreme Court from 1982 to 1983.
The bride is the daughter of Frank Bing-Siu Lee of Granada Hills, Calif., and the late Mary Q. Lee.


Perot Bidding to Influence Congressional Elections
Ross Perot is out on the campaign trail again, his short-term goal to influence the 1994 Congressional and state elections, his long-term goal still a tightly wrapped secret.
After lying low politically for the better part of a year after a precipitous drop in the polls and a high-profile failure to defeat the North American Free Trade Agreement, he thundered noisily back into public view this weekend, beginning here on Friday night with the first of 10 rallies leading up to the Nov. 8 elections.


'The Only Childhood I Ever Had'
A BUNDLE FROM BRITAIN By Alistair Horne.
Illustrated. 333 pp.
New York: A Thomas Dunne Book/St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.


CRITIC'S CHOICES: POP


Tilting at the Same Windmill, but on a Faster Steed
Lenora B. Fulani parades slowly through downtown Brooklyn in a three-car motorcade festooned with balloons and hand-painted signs.
Like a high-school beauty queen, she sits on the hood of a Mustang convertible and waves at people while a loudspeaker on the back of the car blares, "Isn't it time for a change?"
"You should wave at me," Ms.
Fulani told several people along Fulton Avenue.
"I'm running for governor."


Owners' Motives Becoming Clear
When the major league team owners declared the season all but dead Friday, the common lament was that a players strike could not be resolved because there was no common ground.
Well, if there wasn't common ground, how come there was a three-letter word -- tax -- that was found last week in both the middle-ground concept brought into play by Jerry McMorris of Colorado and an adjunct concept offered up by the union?


Hotels Fit for Fitness
IN RECENT years, fitness centers have joined the list of expected hotel amenities, right up there with bathroom telephones and minibars.
Many travelers, like me, are reluctant to check in for more than a night at a place that doesn't offer at least the barest essentials, namely, a treadmill, an exercycle and a stair climber.
Whether most guests actually use a hotel's fitness facilities is another matter.
In a recent survey of business travelers by the Novotel New York -- which, incidentally, has a good, if windowless, exercise room -- 71 percent said hotel fitness centers were "somewhat-to-very important." But 54 percent also confessed that they rarely, if ever, took advantage of such offerings.


The Latest in Public Spectacle


CORRECTION
An article last Sunday about living in the Flatiron District of Manhattan referred incompletely to the occupation of David Doty.
He is a freelance journalist and publisher of Flatiron Communications, which publishes travel-promotion material.


Foes of Smoking Deserve Support
I was deeply saddened and angered to read the article "Smoking Ban Legislators Targeted"  [ Aug. 28 ] .
It seems that Paul Tonna of Huntington Station and Nora Bredes of Stony Brook have become personal targets of the powerful cigarette lobbies, simply because they had the courage and foresight to initiate the recent law that bans smoking in most public restaurants.
The bottom line is simply this: everyone has the right to breathe clean air, and all other rights are secondary to that of the common good.
Ms.
Bredes and Mr.
Tonna recognized that and did the responsible thing and are now being punished for it.
To attempt to harass and threaten these two is unconscionable, but par for the course when dealing with the villainous, unscrupulous monsters Philip Morris and the R. J. Reynolds tobacco companies have become.


A First: Dual Gubernatorial Primary Fights
AFTER a summer when it barely attracted the interest of voters, the 1994 contest for governor will make history on Tuesday, as Republicans and Democrats decide each on a candidate Connecticut's first dual gubernatorial primary battle since the state authorized primaries nearly 40 years ago.
The primaries are aftershocks of Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s victory as an independent in 1990, which established a third major party, A Connecticut Party.
Just as Mr.
Weicker injected a new dimension of choice into the state's politics then, this year Republican and Democratic challengers fought off party leaders' efforts to decide nominations at convention, insisting that party members be given a direct voice.


'Important Question' Gets a Reply
Your issue of Aug. 14 contained a letter expressing concern about the way in which I responded to a question in Bea Tusiani's insightful interview with me on the subject of women priests in the Roman Catholic Church, "Campaigner for Ordaining Female Priests"  [ July 17 ] .
The letter ran under the headline, "Can Advocate Answer Important Question?"
The "important question" on the mind of your letter writer missed the actual question posed to me, which focused on the essence of priesthood, a leadership role in our community from which women are excluded solely and unjustly on the basis of gender.


From Survivors, Taxi Solutions
To the Editor:
What is needed is to have every taxi cab driver and all new drivers go to London and Geneva and ride the taxis there to see how the job is done right -- or, at least, have management make the trip.
Drivers in those cities know the territory very well, they are neat, clean and well dressed and they keep their taxis neat and clean.
STEWART M. LEE  Beaver Falls, Pa., Aug. 22


SUNDAY, September 11, 1994; Designer Snakes
Once it was exotic just to have a pet boa constrictor.
Now herpetophiles are breeding boas, pythons, corn snakes, California king snakes and others in designer colors and patterns, and producing some rather striking reptiles.
The snakes in the photo, all pythons, are an albino Burmese (head stretching down), $150; a rare albino labyrinth Burmese (smaller pale snake), $5,000; a labyrinth Burmese (on the top of the pile), $1,500; a patternless green Burmese (pale with dark spots), $750; and a normal Burmese python, the snake from which the others were derived (large, dark squares), $65.


Rice Won't Forget His Former Partner in the Sublime
It was a magical week for Jerry Rice.
It began with his season debut, a three-touchdown night on Monday night in the San Francisco 49ers' 44-14 victory over the Raiders.
That performance earned Rice the National Football League record for most touchdowns in a career (127), topping Jim Brown's mark that had stood for 29 years.
Later in the week, he was named the N.F.L.'s offensive player of the week.
Then "ABC World News Tonight" chose Rice as its person of the week.
And even Wheaties joined in the salute, announcing that Rice's picture would be placed on its boxes of cereal.


Complementing Salmon, Baked or in Cakes
IN Colonial America, salmon was so plentiful that servants had contracts stipulating that they could not be served it more than so many times a week (Elizabethan servants had the same understanding with oysters).
In the spawning season, salmon once glutted the rivers of the Pacific Northwest so densely that traders claimed they could cross the river on the backs of the fish.
But because of pollution and overfishing, supplies eventually dwindled and salmon became a luxury.


Cordelia Grimm, Darren McGregor
Dr.
Cordelia T. Grimm, a daughter of Teresa and Jay V. Grimm of New York, was married yesterday to Darren James McGregor, a son of June Thiele of Southampton, L.I., and Elwood McGregor of New Port Richey, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Warren Ost officiated at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Dr.
Grimm, who is keeping her name, is an internist at the Sepulveda (Calif.) Veteran's Administration Medical Center and an assistant clinical professor at the University of California at Los Angeles.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
She also received a master's degree in public health from the University of California at Berkeley.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an entry in the New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks column of The Times Book Review on Aug. 28, about the novel "Bittersweet," misspelled the author's surname.
She is Leslie Li, not Lee.


Exclusive Club Finding Mansion a Tad Too Spacious
For almost a century, a stately four-story brownstone mansion in Brooklyn Heights, which housed the Brooklyn Club, was the gathering place of the borough's elite and its power brokers.
It was a place where people like the Vanderbilts and the Jeromes gathered to smoke the finest Cuban cigars, sip the smoothest Cognacs and talk about business.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
AVERY EXHIBITION
The paintings of Milton Avery, one of America's best-known 20th-century artists, are in a new exhibition opening today at the Neuberger Museum on the campus of Purchase College.
When Avery died in 1965 at the age of 80, he had established himself as a leading colorist and compositional purist in the tradition of Matisse.
The show, gleaned from the museum's own collection, contains 29 of his figurative and landscape paintings, including two typical works in which he depicted scenes of personal significance: "The Group," a picture of friends around the dinner table in 1939, and "Three Friends" from 1944.


Collapse of Bill On Health Care Relieves Fears
Anyone who still hopes that major health care legislation can be saved this year by an uprising from the grass roots will draw little solace from the experience of Senator Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico.
Mr.
Bingaman, a Democrat, worked hard for a health care bill this year and was sorry to see it fade; he thought a bill would benefit his state, which has one of the nation's highest percentages of uninsured people.


Miss Gibson, Dr. Sciales
Irene Margaret Gibson, a daughter of Richard and Mary Gibson of Arlington, Va., was married yesterday to Dr.
Christopher Sciales, a son of Drs.
Nancy and William Sciales of Flushing, Queens.
The Rev.
Konstantine Tsigas performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Greek Orthodox Church in Randolph, N.J.
Mrs.
Sciales, 32, is a marketing manager at the Haagen-Dazs Company in Teaneck, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and received a master's degree in French studies and an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the president of Alfa Services, an import company in Arlington.


SEPT. 4-10: Peace Poker; Rabin Gives Syria A Hint at How To Come to Terms
For all its complexities, the core issue is rather basic in the negotiations over the fate of the Golan Heights.
Syria says it is ready for full peace with Israel, but insists on first hearing that it will get back all of the strategic plateau.
No, Israel replies, Syria must first spell out its peace terms; only then will the depth of withdrawal be discussed.
In this close-to-the-vest poker game, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin turned over a hole card last week.
Publicly, he offered a three-year timetable for a "very slight" pullback.
During that period, Syria would be tested on its commitment to peace, as Egypt was in the early 1980's before it got Sinai back.
If all goes well after three years, Mr.
Rabin said, further withdrawals would be negotiated.


Hazard at the Crash Site Is of Many Different Kinds
They pull on plastic coveralls, rubber gloves and yellow rubber booties, then carefully seal the whole ensemble together with duct tape at the wrists and the ankles, before going anywhere near the site of the crash of USAir Flight 427.
And after those investigators, morgue technicians and body-recovery crews leave the site, they wash down their boots and gloves, then themselves, and throw the disposable gear into a refrigerated truck at Command Post Beta, at the edge of an old logging road near the rugged ravine where the Boeing 737-300 plunged to earth on Thursday night, killing all 132 people aboard.


For Spring, the Little Bulbs That Count
BULBS grow wild in the Mediterranean countries, where the winters are cool but not frigid and the summers are hot and dry.
This sort of environment has generated thousands of wild bulbs, which have become the source material for many popular garden hybrids in this country.
But life has not been easy for the wild bulbs.
If they are not the object of animal grazing, then they are a source of income for human collecting.
As a result many have been dug almost to the point of extinction.


So Many Minds To Be Changed, So Little Time
PRESIDENT CLINTON plans to address the public's dwindling regard for his performance this week in the time-honored manner of every poll-plagued modern President: by shaking his staff up, booting some advisers out and shuffling others around.
President Bush did this, ditching his chief of staff when his ratings and the economy sagged in 1991.
President Reagan tossed his top aides overboard to relieve public distress over the Iran-contra scandal.
President Carter fired half his Cabinet when inflation and voters' anger ran amok in 1979.
Sacking the staff is Washington's folk remedy for the pain of inflamed public opinion.
It only has one drawback: too often, the cure doesn't take.
That is the Democrats' fear of the month.
Mr.
Clinton came home from the beach last week, tanned of face but electorally as pallid as ever, convinced that a fresh slug of discipline and Washington know-how from Leon Panetta -- his new chief of staff, a career Democrat and professional whip cracker -- is enough to steady his Administration.
But increasingly, Mr.
Clinton's loyal critics in Congress and Democratic research circles are unconvinced.
And they are starting to advance the notion that what ails the White House is systemic, not localized, and that only a basic change of direction will revive his political fortunes.


MANHATTAN MINUTE . . .
FAIR'S FAIR: The city decides to turn the huge shell on Piers 35 and 36 near the Manhattan Bridge -- the site abandoned for a fueling station after a "fair share" fight -- into a youth center and a garage for the neighborhood's sanitation trucks . . .
LET THE BIDDING BEGIN: The City Council unanimously approves the creation of a Business Improvement District for Lower Manhattan, which aims to clean up and revive the downtown area . . .
AT C'EST MAGNIFIQUE: A large piece of cardboard decorates the security gate at the Village shop at 120 Macdougal Street where Alfonso Albrizio, 79, was killed on Aug. 29.
It's covered with headlines ("Beloved Jeweler Slain"), bouquets and handwritten messages.
One read: "With love to a saint -- you were the Village. May G-d hold you close to His heart" . . .
THOSE WILY VENDORS: Book vendors forced off the Avenue of the Americas a few weeks ago have moved around the corner to Greenwich, where wide sidewalks make them "perfectly legal," says Sgt.
Edgar Rodriguez of the Sixth Precinct . . .
THE BAD APPLE: Several bikini-clad dancers dash from the Harmony burlesque club at 161 West 22d Street shortly before 11 P.M. on Thursday, shrieking about a man with gun.
A man runs out with a bloodied head.
Police cars arrive; eventually, they say a suspect has been caught.
But the next day, the police said they have no record of the incident . . .
FUEL TO THE FIRE: Upper West Side residents angry about the placement of social services in their neighborhood make a discovery that adds to their ire: the three men arrested last month in the stabbing of a homeless man on West 95th Street lived in three adjacent city-financed single-room-occupancy hotels.
AND MORE IRE: On Thursday, more than 200 people, carrying picket signs and chanting, protest in front of Euclid Hall, an S.R.O. 86th Street and Broadway, demanding that the hotel's managers stick to their intention to house only people over 50.
That, they hope, will keep the hotel from becoming a magnet for drugs . . .
MARQUEE MARKED: After a nearly two-year dispute, the marquee jutting out from the Flaming Embers restaurant at 206 East 86th Street, and violating building and zoning codes, is about to come down . . .


An Impressionist Can Still Make a Splash in Old Lyme
THE Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme, a mansion that once served as a boardinghouse for Impressionists, is radiant with "William Chadwick: A Connecticut Impressionist at Home and Abroad." It is the first retrospective by the artist to be held at the museum and, evidently, it has been a smash all summer.
William Chadwick (1879-1962) first visited Old Lyme in 1902, the year before Childe Hassam arrived bearing the Impressionist word.
Chadwick had been well prepared by his studies at the Art Students League, notably with John Twachtman, and by his friendship with Will Howe Foote and Harry Hoffman, painters who had already tested Lyme's esthetic waters.


From Cubans in the U.S., Pact Draws Both Praise and Scorn
In South Florida's Cuban neighborhoods, the United States' immigration accord with Havana is being received as both political and personal news, garnering praise and derision from different exile factions while drawing tears from Cuban-Americans who learned that relatives detained at the Guantanamo Bay naval base would not be admitted to the United States.
The politics, however, meant little to Blanca Maria Bacallao Barros, 22 years old, who cried when she heard news of the accord on Spanish-language television.
Her husband, Jesus Perez Macon, is one of the roughly 25,000 Cubans held at Guantanamo.


Joan Honig, William Marden
Joan Honig, a daughter of Lillian Honig of Miami and the late Louis Honig, was married yesterday to William Charles Marden, the son of Mary L. and Charles F. Marden of North Port, Fla.
The Rev.
Herbert Draesel, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Holy Trinity in New York.


Nature-Reserve Tours Offered in Russia
Priroda Rossia, a Moscow-based environmental organization, is offering 10- to 21-day tours of Russia's nature reserves, which were off-limits to foreigners and even most Russians until three years ago, when the Russian Government lifted restrictions.
A 15-day volcano tour of the Kamchatka Peninsula, including a visit to the Valley of Geysers in the Kronotsky Nature Reserve, costs $2,750 a person for groups of six and $2,090 a person for groups of 12.
A 15-day tour of three parks in Central Russia, including the Czar's Forest, costs $1,410 a person for groups of six.


What's a Good Fence? Neighbors Disagree.
It's not the Berlin Wall or the Walls of Jericho.
But to residents of Williamsburg it might as well be.
A 10-foot battleship gray fence erected in 1991 by Nekboh Recycling Inc., a garbage and construction waste transfer station at Kent Avenue and North Fifth Street in Williamsburg, has bothered residents, who have complained to Community Board 1 that the two-block-long fence blocks their views across the East River and access to its piers.


Books, or What?
To the Editor:
Perusing shelves of shrink-wrapped CD-ROM's, Sarah Lyall might well wonder "Are These Books, or What?"; but the future isn't as difficult to imagine as it might seem.
While the interim evolution over the next few years might be a bit murky, here, free to all those scratching their heads in the publishing industry, is a description of what books will be like 25 years from now. (As a brief preface, I'll mention that I'm a reader and book lover whose interest in writing led to a career in computer technology early in the PC era.)


Hudson Rafting
To the Editor: I read with interest the article on white-water rafting on the upper Hudson.
I must take exception to some of the author's comments.
As a yearly customer of Hudson Whitewater World, I have found it to be an excellent outfitter.
It is the only one on the Hudson using a self-bailing raft, and I find their concern for client safety exemplary.
All the accidents I have seen on the river have involved people who assumed they were going on a theme-park ride, and need not treat their adventure seriously.
Others refused to heed instructions of their guide.


Mozart Was Here
THE SPELL OF THE VIENNA WOODS  Inspiration and Influence From Beethoven to Kafka.
By Paul Hofmann. 260 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.


Celeste Sweeney, Mark Richardson
Celeste Margaret Sweeney, a daughter of Rita and Harry A. Sweeney Jr. of Haverford, Pa., was married yesterday to Mark Stephen Richardson, a son of Ana Richardson of Bethesda, Md., and William Richardson of Keedysville, Md.
Msgr.
Kenneth W. Roeltgen performed the ceremony at Old St.
Joseph's Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Richardson, a graduate of Mount Vernon College, is a senior account executive at Earl Palmer Brown, an advertising agency in Bethesda.
Her parents are owners of Dorland Sweeney Jones, an advertising agency in Philadelphia.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Louisa L. Daley And Jay Winthrop
Louisa Lewis Daley, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert Lewis Daley of Milton, Mass., and the late Mr.
Daley, was married yesterday to John Winthrop Jr., a son of Deborah H. Winthrop of Greenwich, Conn., and Mr.
Winthrop of Charleston, S.C.
The Rev.
Alexander Daley, the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Winthrop, 29, was until recently a clinical social worker at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in social work from Boston University.
Her father was a professor of classics and languages at Milton Academy, where her mother, Jennie-Lee Daley, teaches voice and piano.


Pushing to Make Park Avenue Safer
The trees along Park Avenue's median set it apart from other Manhattan streets, both for grace and, from 47th to 56th Street, for danger.
"It's a very attractive boulevard, esthetically pleasing -- but not safe," said Joseph P. McCluskey, Community Board 5's transportation co-chairman.
Michael Primeggia, a deputy city traffic commissioner, said studies show significantly more accidents on that strip than on other parts of Park.


Role Models To Many
To the Editor:
In his attempt to explain the appeal of the superhero mutant group known as the X-Men, Douglas Martin outlines parallels between the lives of the fictional characters and their many readers.
He makes several observations about the disapproval, intolerance, alienation and rejection faced by mutant and reader alike.
He makes no mention, however, of one obvious reason some readers are drawn to the characters.
In fact, it is the reason I have been reading the various X-titles for close to 20 years.


Tana E. Wright, William N. Dye
Tana Elizabeth Wright, the director of marketing at Parfums Givenchy in New York, was married yesterday to William North Dye, a partner in the New York law firm Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
The Rev.
Charles A. Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Dye, 31, graduated from the University of Pittsburgh.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
John Chmelynski and Herbert Lee Wright, both of Pittsburgh.


A Popular Senator and a Pesky Challenger
THE thought of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and the Rev.
Al Sharpton debating the issues of the day on the same stage is a tantalizing one, but it was not to be.
Mr.
Moynihan, annoyed to be facing a primary at all, particularly from a candidate determined to focus on the Senator's approach to racial issues, has until recently stayed away from the campaign trail and declined to debate Mr.
Sharpton.
As the most popular politician in the state, and probably the most powerful, Mr.
Moynihan felt secure in devoting his attention to his manifold responsibilities in Washington, where he is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.
He has only campaigned intensively for the last week or two, while running brief television spots about his accomplishments.


Giving Equal Time To the Sightless
To The Editor:
When we read Martin Sternberg's article about being deaf in New York (Aug. 21), or more accurately when it was read to us, we decided that the blind deserve equal time.
After all, we experience the flip side.


Wishing Behind the Footlights
AUDIENCES.
It seems performers can't live with them and can't live without them.
Like wary lovers, artists and their public bring high expectations and unspoken demands to the live performance theme, sharing passion one moment and seething disappointment the next.
These volatile trysts will ignite new sparks in the county this month as another season of events gets under way at the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College here.


At Immigration, Disarray and Defeat
The Immigration and Naturalization Service does not bother to collect as much as $23 million a year in fees, easy money that could be gathered with just a letter here or a phone call there.
That is because, officials say, the agency cannot afford to hire the accounting clerks to write those letters and make those calls.
Yet each month the immigration service finds a way to allow dozens of its inspectors to take round-trip, all-expenses-paid cruises to places like Nassau in the Bahamas and Cozumel, Mexico, often accompanied by friends or family members whose expenses are also paid by the cruise lines.
The inspectors' job is to check the passengers' travel documents on the return trip.


Christine Hayter, Jonathan S. Brody
Christine Lynne Hayter, a daughter of Olga and William Hayter of Eatontown, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Scott Brody, the son of Ruth S. Brody of New York.
Msgr.
Paul F. Bradley officiated at St.
John the Baptist Roman Catholic Church in Long Branch, N.J.


POSTINGS: Call It Alliance Capital; A New Name for a Building
Alliance Capital Management, the growing mutual funds company, has had its headquarters at 1345 Avenue of the Americas, the old Burlington House at 54th Street, for eight years.
But that seemed destined to be one of New York's better-kept secrets.
For years, Burlington Industries had a lock on the building's name.
And then, in what may have been one of midtown's most on-again-off-again recent deals, Mastercard International signed on for enough space to warrant its name's going on the front door.
"I was always envious of these other companies that had their name on our building," said Dave Williams, Alliance's chairman of the board.
"It's just such excellent advertising."


SMALLPOX IS DEAD. LONG LIVE SMALLPOX.
Siebert's excellent article omitted one of the most compelling reasons not to destroy the last vestiges of this dreadful virus: gene therapy.
Swift advances in identifying disorders and therapies, in terms of molecular sequences in the DNA of the human genome, have outstripped the methods of delivery.
Viruses made harmless and harnessed by medical science are the ideal "cruise missile" to transport a corrected gene to its chromosomal destination.
Yet obstacles abound.
This genetic baggage can sometimes alter the essential characteristics that target the virus, rendering it useless.
Moreover, most common viruses are recognized and immediately attacked by the immune system.
A repertory of rare exotic human viruses is essential for the development of successful therapy at the genetic level.
This has the potential of curing cancers, inherited genetic disorders and even some forms of heart disease.


HOBBIES
Call and collect: Prepaid phone cards are hot collectibles among young adults.
Especially popular are those that feature well-known brand names or pictures of celebrities or that are tied to cultural events (below, the New Music Seminar card).


A Seaworthy Retreat
DOORS have distinctive sounds.
Long ago, I lived with a screen door in a beach house that swung shut with a twang, a thwack and a ting of the dangling hook.
It imprinted itself on me as the heart of summer, distilling memories of ice cream, hammocks, breakers over the feet and a child padding into the kitchen in a sandy bathing suit.
Now, a year or so after a trip to the Rosario Resort in the San Juan Islands of Washington State, my memories focus on the door sounds at the Moran Mansion there: authoritative, heavy, tight clicks of solid mahogany doors built in the first decade of the century for maritime people who liked things seaworthy, even on bedrock.
Cupboard doors in the mansion were so airtight their closing whoosh sent children's crayon works fluttering from the table to the floor.


Chinese Women Flex Muscles in Sculls, Too
At the world rowing championships in Indianapolis this week, the Chinese women's crews are certain to be scrutinized if they have anywhere near the success their compatriots have had at last week's world swimming championships in Rome.
The remarkable performances of Chinese female swimmers have been questioned and one American official, the national team director Dennis Pursley, contended that the Chinese athletes were helped by performance-enhancing drugs.


Elizabeth Miller, Christian Puffer
Elizabeth Miller, a principal dancer with the Feld Ballets/NY, was married yesterday in Calais, Vt., to Christian Puffer, a writer and an assistant managing editor at Viking Penguin USA in New York.
Olivia Gay, a justice of the peace in North Calais, officiated at Memorial Hall.
The bride, 25, is known professionally as Buffy Miller.
She studied at the New Ballet School in New York.
She is a daughter of Susan Miller of Freeport, Fla., and the late Marvin Miller.
Her mother is a music teacher at Freeport High School.


In the Region/Connecticut; New Milford May Be Ripe for Major Development
WITH 64.8 square miles of mostly undeveloped countryside, this Litchfield County town -- the largest municipality in Connecticut -- has a key ingredient for explosive development.
Moreover it is the geographical heir to spillover from Fairfield County just to the south.
As is customary when towns find themselves at a crossroads, there are those who want development and those who don't.
How it is controlled will depend on a new Plan of Development required of each town in the state every 10 years.
New Milford's is due for completion late in 1995.


Bridge-Widening Plan In Tinton Falls
Re: "Tinton Falls Journal: Bridge- Widening Plan Is Stirring Discord" (Aug. 7), which concerned a Monmouth County proposal to improve an intersection and reconstruct a bridge in the Tinton Falls Historic District.
In my opinion as Monmouth County Engineer, the article was a misrepresentation of the facts.
Focusing on the emotional issues inherent to constructing an improvement of this nature in a historic area ties in with local project opponents and historic special-interest groups in ignoring the technical issues that directly affect public safety.
This type of myopic point of view is the reason that the county's deteriorating bridge remains in service, and why safety problems at this intersection remain uncorrected.


THE NATION: Baseball 'n' Bombast; The Blowhards Have a Shot This Year
IF Ken Burns, the gifted film documentarian, can romanticize something as ugly as the Civil War, let's all dearly hope he can do no less for the pathetic and ugly contest that has become lately of major league baseball.
Mr.
Burns's 18-hour series on baseball begins on public television next Sunday, with management and players of the big leagues failing thus far to negotiate the game back to life and come out of the megamillion-dollar sulk over profit- sharing that has left Americans closer to embracing that growing alternative national pastime, cynicism.
Even President Clinton, with his vaunted weakness for talking his way into high-profile dilemmas only to retreat in irresolution, will remain well clear of this one for some while longer, according to newspaper interviews with his aides.
And the best the TV highlights could offer last week was a minor league clip of some rookie on a bench suddenly leaping about the dugout after a teammate snuck a hotfoot onto his cleats.
Yuk-yuk.
At least that spared us another Michael-Jordan-at-bat clip and was a decided improvement over those closeups of Tommy Lasorda lounging like a surly odalisque in the Dodger dugout while his boys of summer slobber tobacco juice and pluck at themselves.
Windbag Alert
But one real risk in the absence of the major league game is that the vacuum may be filled by still another outburst from the literary cottage industry that has been profitably wringing baseball as a subject for gross esthetic monographs and nostalgic piffle, for prurient confessions of male bonders and liberal arts graduates on the commercial make for Life's meaning -- in general, for reducing a game of great fun to something that smacks more of the Proustian counterpane than of the vacant lot.


The Cuing, the Wooing, The Redoing of Fashion
UPTOWN -- The Jewish New Year was coinciding with the Fashion New Year, and Matthew Shuster, 14, was dressed for the occasion.
On Sept. 7, the second day of Rosh ha-Shanah, he wore a white cotton wraparound shirt from Jean-Paul Gaultier's controversial 1993 Hasidic-inspired collection to a party and fashion show at Charivari on West 57th Street.
Like other true believers in the viability of deconstructed fashion, Matthew had waited on the sidewalk to pay homage to Martin Margiela, the Belgian godfather of deconstructionism, who once worked for Mr.
Gaultier.
Mostly in black, they had all shown up to see the first public appearance of Mr.
Margiela's collection on live models in Charivari's window (and to sample the first free cocktails and canapes of the fall season).


Islanders' Plante Sprains a Knee
The Islanders lost right wing DAN PLANTE indefinitely yesterday when he suffered a sprained left knee during training camp workouts at the Rinx complex in Hauppauge, L.I.
Last season, the 22-year-old Plante scored 7 goals and had 17 assists in 66 games, while logging 148 penalty minutes with Salt Lake City of the International Hockey League.


Victoria Scarmazzo, Francis Cuttita  1
Victoria Scarmazzo and Francis Vincent Cuttita, associates at New York law firms, were married yesterday at the Church of Our Saviour in New York.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Vincent W. Hevern.
Mrs.
Cuttita, 26, graduated from Pennsylvania State University and works at Mendes &amp; Mount.
She and her husband received their law degrees from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Emil and Esther Scarmazzo of Montville, N.J.
Her father is a police officer in Paterson, N.J., and her mother is a social worker there, for Passaic County.


THE NEVER WIFE
I am not Catholic, but I am a 58-year-old woman who at one point in my life was a member of the church.
I did have to chuckle when I read Cadigan's essay.
My advice to her would be to take the proceedings with a grain of salt.
If the annulment had been worth the price to the church, I dare say her "ex" would have gotten it.
If I've learned anything over the years, it is that the dogma of most organized religions is for, by and about men.
I have found most organized religions are not really relevant to women's lives.
LOIS H. GRUNDER Ridgewood, N.J.


Not a Pretty Picture
HARMS WAY Lust &amp; Madness, Murder &amp; Mayhem.
A Book of Photographs.
Edited by Joel-Peter Witkin.
Illustrated.
Unpaged.
Santa Fe, N.M.: Twin Palms Publishers. $60.


Judge Opens 7 More Public Schools in the District of Columbia
A Superior Court judge here today approved the reopening of seven more public schools, leaving 11 schools still closed because of fire code violations two days before students return.
Classes are scheduled to begin on Monday, three days later than the school district had originally planned.


Murder in the Ozarks
BABY, WOULD I LIE?
A Romance of the Ozarks.
By Donald E. Westlake. 291 pp.
New York: The Mysterious Press/Warner Books. $19.95.


Arrests Expose Tiffany Holdup As Inside Crime
Crediting crucial tips, a stakeout in Harlem and tenacious sleuthing, the police exposed last weekend's $1.9 million jewelry robbery at Tiffany &amp; Company as an inside job yesterday and announced the arrests of six men, including a security supervisor and a guard employed by the fabled Fifth Avenue emporium.
The sixth man surrendered last night and turned in what the police said was a significant portion of the missing loot.


Mara L. Flynn, John D. Poutasse
Mara Louise Flynn, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William F. Flynn of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John David Poutasse, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
David Poutasse of Pittsfield, Mass.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors performed the ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Heart of Mary.
Ms.
Flynn, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross and is a senior editor for the Thompson Publishing Group, legal publishers in Washington.
Her father is the director of otolaryngology at the New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital Medical Center and an assistant clinical professor at Cornell University Medical College in New York.


Chat Me Up
The columnist Richard Cohen, writing about that unabashed advocate of traditional virtues William Bennett, noted, "Few members of what the Brits call the chattering class hail from conservative Christian backgrounds."
Evidently a need exists for a phrase that columnists, pundits, commentators and other harangutangs can use to flagellate themselves and one another.
Punditocracy, a 1988 coinage of Eric Alterman, and mediacracy, blending media bureaucracy with mediocrity, are too intellectual.
Talking heads is limited to television and lacks zing.
Besides, with the rise of the radio talk shows (chat shows in England) as well as the televised food-for-thought fights, commentary today has become more oral than written; to characterize the participants in this panelization of opinion-mongering, Americans have seized on this Britishism, which has become the most important contribution of the mother country to the lingo we call Merkin since not to worry and spot on.


Hudson Rafting
To the Editor: Amy Engeler's article may have been more aptly titled "On an Ego Trip, Running Into Trouble."
She speaks of her group of 16 "neophyte rafters" who exhibited varying degrees of optimism and bravado.
Sadly, they did not exhibit common sense.
The rapids she speaks of are designated Class 4 and 5 for a reason.
These are not meant for beginners.
The rating system is not meant as a marketing ploy to lure unwitting city dwellers, but to rate the degree of difficulty in navigating.


Hey, Big Spenders
A CRISP, cool Sunday morning in September -- the perfect time to load the little ones into the car and head for that huge new store at the mall.
The cavernous building is a cornucopia of consumption, offering a range of items to fill even the most imaginative shopping list.
There are basic groceries and gourmet goodies like pricey peanut butter cookies and soda water in offbeat flavors.
The freezer case holds all manner of frozen entrees and desserts.
Down one aisle are health and grooming products like toothpaste, deodorant and apricot-scented shampoo.
In the clothing aisle, you find a trendy new outfit in a neon Navajo pattern, a matching backpack, sunglasses -- and look, Halloween costumes already.


Cairo Parley Hits a New Snag on Migrants
After six days of snail's-pace maneuvering over abortion, the United Nations population conference ran into fresh problems tonight when developing nations revolted over the refusal of the United States to agree that migrants have a right to be united with their families.
People taking part in the gathering said about 60 delegates from Latin America and other parts of the developing world rose in a closed committee meeting to protest the American move, which assumed added significance in light of the recent flood of Cuban and Haitian refugees seeking to reach the United States.
Many of the Cubans in particular are seeking to join relatives.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Two South Africans Take Titles  Elana Meyer and Okkert Brits became the first South Africans in more than 30 years to win titles at a major international track and field competition yesterday.
Meyer won the women's 10,000 meters with the fourth-fastest time in history and Brits took the pole vault at the World Cup at Crystal Palace in London.
South Africa was banned from international competition for three decades because of its policy of apartheid.
The country returned to the world sports stage at the Barcelona Olympics in 1992.


When Is a Coincidence Too Bad to Be True?
WITH the crash outside Pittsburgh that killed all 132 of the people aboard last week, USAir gained the terrible distinction of having been involved in four of the last seven major air disasters in the United States.
In fact, the last three fatal crashes of regularly scheduled commercial airliners in this country were of USAir planes.
Altogether the airline has had five fatal crashes in five years.
Faced with these statistics, would it be a rational decision to avoid flying USAir in favor of its competitors?
Or, considering the vast number of passengers carried by airlines, can USAir's tragic losing streak be attributed to the vagaries of chance?


Where Versailles Grew Its Veggies
THE VERY scale of Versailles makes it hard to imagine the life of the men and women who inhabited its gilded attics.
Between 1682 and 1789 (except for the eight years of Louis XV's minority), the palace had a constant population of some 3,000 people.
To feed these multitudes, Louis XIV employed 2,000 people in the vast kitchens south of the chateau.
Provisioning was no less gargantuan in scale.
Most of the food was purchased by public tender, but the pride of the King's table was the vegetables and fruits grown in the Potager du Roi.


ARTS/ARTIFACTS
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
"HERTER BROTHERS: FURNITURE AND INTERIORS FOR A GILDED AGE" The opulent taste of the late-19th-century robber barons comes alive in the first major survey of the sumptuous and glittering furniture of Gustave and Christian Herter, the German-born cabinetmakers of New York.
Borrowing freely from Gothic, Renaissance, Louis XIV and Moorish modes, they produced some of the period's finest inlaid furniture.
Among the 58 mirrors, chairs and tables are dazzlers once owned by the likes of William H. Vanderbilt.
Through Oct. 23, Museum of Fine Arts, Houston. (713-639-7300) (Traveling to Atlanta and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in March)


Rosa Parks Leads Again on Civil Rights
To the Editor:
I take exception to your Sept. 1 editorial and Bob Herbert's Sept. 4 column, commenting on the mugging of the civil rights heroine Rosa Parks.
Mr.
Herbert says "we are in the dark night of the post-civil rights era" and "have disgraced the legacy of Rosa Parks." He lays responsibility for ending the violence in urban slums upon the new leadership of the African-American community, who should "recapture the high ground" taken by Mrs.
Parks and the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. when they originated the nonviolent civil rights movement in 1955.


College Stresses Primary Care
A MAJOR initiative by New York Medical College is under way to encourage its students to become generalist doctors and not swell the ranks of specialists and subspecialists who now dominate the practice of medicine.


Let the Show (Finally) Begin
Charivari previews Martin Margiela's fall collection, Sept. 7.


Penn State Defense Is No Longer In Question
Whenever Joe Paterno gave a preseason analysis of his team, he spoke assuredly of Penn State's offensive line, glowingly of his receivers and running backs and went out of his way to praise quarterback Kerry Collins.
But Paterno was uncertain about Penn State's defense.
The Nittany Lions lost key starters from last year's front wall and Paterno knew that much of their success this season will be determined by relatively untried replacements.


DANCE
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
SEPTEMBER DANCES WITH CAROL BLANCO, MARY LISA BURNS, CURT HAWORTH, EDWARD WINSLOW AND SEFA JORQUES These emergent choreographers speak with a low but resonant voice, in a program that opens the season at this downtown space.
Today, Cunningham Studio, 55 Bethune St. (924-0077)


Martien A. Taylor, Neal D. Halvorson
Martien Alexandra Taylor, a daughter of Frederieke Sanders Taylor and Willard B. Taylor, both of New York, was married yesterday to the Rev.
Neal David Halvorson, a son of Twila and the Rev.
Arvin Halvorson of Detroit Lakes, Minn.
The bridegroom's father, a Lutheran pastor, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Church on Nantucket Island, Mass.
The Rev.
Heather Kirk-Davidoff, a minister of the United Church of Christ, also took part.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from Yale University and is studying for a Master of Divinity degree at Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, a New York law firm.
Her mother is a founder of Tz'art &amp; Company, an art gallery in New York.


A First Lady Publishes Mild Memoirs
BIOGRAPHERS claim Jack Kennedy was obsessed with sex, Lyndon Johnson was intoxicated by power and Richard Nixon craved adulation.
Now comes a new political kiss-and-tell that lays bare the real George Herbert Walker Bush: a man who gave away overcoats to old ladies, doted on the wild ducks in the White House pond and was utterly devoted to his pet springer spaniel Ranger.
The book is "Barbara Bush: A Memoir," by Mr.
Bush's wife, and if it does not rewrite history, it does seem to belie one adage: that anyone crazy enough to seek the Presidency has to be a little cuckoo himself.
The Bushes come across as reasonably human -- perfectly normal millionaire lifelong national political figures.
Mrs.
Bush's account is not meant as a treatise on world affairs, and no one will mistake it for one, though it may well be confused at times with a back issue of Town and Country.
The Kohls, Majors and Mitterrands make frequent cameo appearances, but mostly at Bush clambakes in Kennebunkport, in windbreakers and deck shoes, rather than at high-level summits.
World affairs are for "the men," Mrs.
Bush says, and she leaves it at that.
Just Folks, Really
More important are first-person accounts of the blisters on Raisa Gorbachev's feet and the unending stream of celebrity visitors to the various Bush homes: Andre Agassi, Arnold Palmer, Bon Jovi and on and on.
In Mrs.
Bush's world, virtually everyone is dear, great, a favorite or a lifelong friend.
The book's few sharp words are pointed solely at those interests -- Democrats, right-wing Republicans, the press -- who would hurt the President she loves.


From Survivors, Taxi Solutions
To the Editor:
I read "New York's Terror Taxis, Explained" (Viewpoints, Aug. 21) with a great sigh.
As someone who was born and raised in New York, I have seen the taxi ride go from being a pleasant part of city life to the horror story Sheryl Fragin describes.
After years of tolerating bumper-car rides with these lunatic drivers, in cabs with partitions, tiny back seats that are entirely too small for anyone over the age of 6 and cigarette smoke thick enough to contact Cochise, I have found the solution.
We have a public transportation system that works quite well.


The Series That Never Was; 90 Years Ago, the Event Was Canceled Because of an Owners' Feud
If striking baseball players and team owners are unable to reconcile their differences and resume the tarnished season, the World Series will be doomed for the first time in 90 years.
In 1904, revenge taken against Byron (Ban) Johnson, the American League president, by New York Giants Manager John J. McGraw, and John T. Brush, the Giants' owner, prevented the Giants from facing the Boston Pilgrims (as the Red Sox were then known).
The year before, the American League champion Pilgrims defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates 5 games to 3 in the first World Series of the 20th century.
Although the leagues had settled several years of conflicts earlier that year, no formal rules yet existed to require a World Series.


Leaders in Their Fields, From Science to Business, Who Died in USAir Crash; Walter F. Heiligenberg, Scientist, 56
Dr.
Walter F. Heiligenberg, a scientist who learned about animal behavior and the nervous system by studying electric fish, died on Thursday in the USAir plane crash.
He was 56 and lived in Del Mar, Calif.
Dr.
Heiligenberg, a professor of behavioral physiology at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California at San Diego, was on his way to deliver a lecture to graduate students at the University of Pittsburgh.
His wife, Wendy, is expecting a baby in two weeks.


Acting Out
BRANDO Songs My Mother Taught Me.
By Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey.
Illustrated. 468 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


S. Carolina Tries to Halt Old Fuel Rods
The Energy Department has decided to accept the first shipment of spent nuclear fuel rods from four European countries in several years.
A shipment of 159 rods, about two feet long and three to four inches square, is expected next week at the department's Savannah River Site, 55 miles south of here, for storage.


El Salvador Struggles to Impose Justice
When a drug dealer was recently stopped with a large bundle of marijuana, he handed a bribe to the officer, who returned the money and arrested him.
Recounting his bewildering experience with the country's new police, he said: "Then three more cops showed up. One took out a sheet of paper and started reading me my rights. I never heard of anything like that. I thought I was in another country."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE BUTCHER BOY By Patrick McCabe.
Cutting Edge/Delta, $9.95.
This novel depicts the transformation of a disturbed and abused young boy into a brutal killer.
Francie Brady, resident of an Irish town in the 1960's, becomes progressively unhinged by the deaths of his beleaguered parents and the presence of smug middle-class neighbors who are everything the Bradys are not.
It is "a stunning picture of the desperation of the unloved," Rosemary Mahoney said here last year.
THIS I CANNOT FORGET: The Memoirs of Nikolai Bukharin's Widow By Anna Larina.
Translated by Gary Kern.
Norton, $15.
The couple at the center of this story were children of the Russian Revolution: Anna Larina, daughter of one of the original Bolsheviks, and Nikolai Bukharin, a protege of Lenin and later of Stalin.
But in 1937, only three years after their marriage, Bukharin was arrested on trumped-up charges; he was executed the following year.
Ms.
Larina, separated from their son, endured more than two decades of persecution before she was able to help redeem her husband's memory.
Last year our reviewer, Harlow Robinson, said, "Surprisingly lyrical and free of bitterness, her tale belongs to the unfortunately rich and long tradition of Russian prison literature."


Talking About What You're Thinking About
THE tanned and the restless are back from the East End, clogging up the East Side, and there is much less Swedish spoken in the subways.
Lunch boxes, clothes with tags, book editors at their desks on Friday afternoons and Coping crusaders getting aggressive.
You don't have to be Jewish to mark the new year, or the beginning of a second year for this space.
So pick up the beat; it's time to derail the trolley, dump Trump and find a mensch -- three random and unsolicited submissions from you.
Caryl Ehrlich is determined to derail the trolley, even if she has to catch her foot in the tracks.
There are no tracks yet, but just the threat of a tourist trolley trolling 42d Street makes her "irate." She wonders if it is already too late.
The City Council has approved money for a study.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
TO CROSS A LINE By Karen Ray. 154 pp. New York: Orchard Books. $15.95. (Ages 11 to 14)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LITERARY CRITICISM  THE STYLE'S THE MAN  Reflections on Proust, Fitzgerald, Wharton, Vidal, and Others.
By Louis Auchincloss.
Scribner's, $21.


Critic's Choices: Arts/Artifacts


For Spring, the Little Bulbs That Count
BULBS grow wild in the Mediterranean countries, where the winters are cool but not frigid and the summers are hot and dry.
This sort of environment has generated thousands of wild bulbs, which have become the source material for many popular garden hybrids in this country.
But life has not been easy for the wild bulbs.
If they are not the object of animal grazing, then they are a source of income for human collecting.
As a result many have been dug almost to the point of extinction.


Lylla Demeny, Noah Carter
Lylla Demeny, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Demeny of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Noah Carter, a son of Irene Carter of New York and William Carter of Albany.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mr. and Mrs.
Carter, both 31, graduated from Vassar College.
She owns Parallax Artist's Representatives, an agency in New York.
Her father is the founder and editor of the Population and Development Review, a quarterly publication, in New York.
Her mother, Lynn Demeny, is an artist.


Cynthia C. Harper, Paul Sigmund 4th
Cynthia Channing Harper, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Harper of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday in Wilton, Conn., to Paul Eugene Sigmund 4th, a son of Dr.
Sigmund 3d of Princeton, N.J., and the late Barbara Boggs Sigmund.
The Rev.
Alan Mather performed the ceremony at the Wilton Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in it.
The bride graduated from Middlebury College, from which she also received a master's degree in Spanish.
She received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in public policy and demography at Princeton University.


CRITIC'S CHOICES: ART/PHOTOGRAPHY


A Building Of Harmony
To the Editor:
I heartily disagree with Herbert Muschamp's critique of Robert A. M. Stern's design of the Brooklyn Law School building  [ "If You Squint, This Is Not a Faulty Tower," Aug. 21 ] .
Every time I pass the building, I feel Brooklyn is blessed by having a building of such elegance and fine workmanship.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ASTORIA  'Arbuckle and Friends,'  A Silent Era Retrospective
Roscoe (Fatty) Arbuckle was a pioneer of movie comedy, and one of the most popular performers of the silent era, said David Schwartz, the head of film and video for the American Museum of the Moving Image.


S. W. Gledhill, John Conzelman
Stephanie Williams Gledhill, the daughter of Patricia K. Gledhill of Little Silver, N.J., and the late Sidney W. Gledhill, was married yesterday at All Saints Memorial Church in Navesink, N.J., to John Shepley Conzelman, a son of Clare S. Conzelman of Fairfield, Conn., and James G. Conzelman Jr. of Shelton, Conn.
The Rev.
Lois Schembs performed the Episcopal ceremony, in which the Rev.
James Clark, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.


Christina Baltz, Vincent Casey
Christina Maria Baltz, a daughter of Janet M. Baltz of Berkeley, Calif., and Dr.
Davis A. Baltz of El Cerrito, Calif., was married yesterday to Vincent de Paul Casey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benedict A. Casey of Haverford, Pa.
The Rev.
Ralph Peterson, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the House of the Redeemer in New York .


Sarah Stein, Adam S. Cifu
Dr.
Sarah Stein, an intern in pediatrics at New England Medical Center in Boston, was married on Wednesday at City Hall in New York to Dr.
Adam Seth Cifu, a resident in internal medicine at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
Dr.
Stein, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Haverford College and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is the daughter of Cecile Stein of Santa Fe, N.M., and the late Nelson Stein.
The bride's father was a physicist at Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory.
Her mother is an administrator at the School of American Research, an anthropological institute in Santa Fe.


Soothsayers as Business Advisers; You Are Going to Go on a Long Trip . . .
ZAP, zap, zap, sometimes it seems the same thing is on every channel.
Whether it's 3 P.M. or 3 A.M., there's Dionne Warwick and her psychic friends selling advice on love, money and success.
In a nation where the power of crystals and the likelihood that angels hover nearby prompt more contemplation than ridicule, it may not be surprising that one million people a year call Ms.
Warwick's friends.
But couch potatoes aren't the only people seeking the counsel of psychics and astrologers.
Clairvoyants have a booming business advising Philadelphia bankers, Hollywood lawyers and CEO's of Fortune 500 companies, whom they charge between $100 and $250 an hour.


Some Movement in Midst of Strike: Talk of a Rival League
If major league baseball is prepared to fade from 1994 without a World Series, maybe it's ready for another new and unusual development: a new rival league.
The baseball establishment hasn't had one since the Federal League lived briefly 80 years ago.
Given the monthlong strike that is on the verge of wiping out the rest of the baseball year and the prospect of a continued shutdown into next season, talk has stirred about the resuscitation of a plan that was looked at but didn't remain viable five years ago.
A replacement league could be on the horizon.


'Mirage' Beneath the Bridge
NEXT to a sign that says, "278 West Bklyn-Qns Expwy," in what looks like a deserted parking lot tucked under the Brooklyn end of the Brooklyn Bridge, appears a large, heavy metal door on a huge cement wall.
Open the door and enter a dark, cool catacomb of red brick with monastery-high ceilings.
On a second tier is the kind of arches that a Shakespearean character might leap from during a duel.
In front of the dimly lighted room, a woman with feathers over half of her body, and in a G-string and pastie, is flapping around to a Frank Sinatra recording of "I've Got You Under My Skin."


TELEVISION
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
New Series  ABC  "ON OUR OWN" ABC's fondness for killing off parents reaches its apex in this "comedy," which centers on a black family of seven orphans.
Their plan to stay together hinges on the ability of the eldest, played by the stand-up comic Ralph Harris, to fake out a bumptious social worker by dressing up as his Aunt Jelcinda.
Mrs.
Doubtfire, what have you wrought?
Premiere, tonight.
Sundays at 7:30.


Where Has the Northern State Gone?
WHEN Robert Moses thought up the Northern State Parkway in the 1920's the road was to be a linear park running through some of the lushest North Shore estates.
Although pressure from estate owners persuaded Moses to reroute the parkway to bypass them, the road had many parklike characteristics when it opened in the 30's.


SMALLPOX IS DEAD. LONG LIVE SMALLPOX.
Siebert's article on smallpox left me with one question: How long would we wait to throw the switch on the last vial of H.I.V.?
Just do it.
LYNNE GOMEZ Milford, N.J.


Lucy M. Herman, Matthew Moog
Lucy Morton Herman, the daughter of Leonard Herman of Chicago and the late Jill Kraft Herman, is to be married today to Matthew Moog, the son of Shirleigh and Robert A. Moog of Asheville, N.C.
Judge Joan Corboy of the Circuit Court of Cook County in Skokie, Ill., is to officiate at the Chicago Historical Society.
The bride was until recently a senior legislative assistant in Washington to Representative Alcee Hastings, Democrat of Florida.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the president of the Fairmont Corporation, carpet padding manufacturers in Chicago.
Her mother was an actress.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Hy Kraft, a New York playwright, was the author of "Cafe Brown" and "Top Banana." Her stepmother, Eileen Herman, is an interior designer in Chicago.


Airport Fiasco Hastens New York's Decline
To the Editor:
The proposed multibillion-dollar monorail system between Kennedy International Airport and Manhattan's Upper East Side, which promises years of gridlock to go with its extravagant price tag while construction goes on and over the country's most crowded highways, is just the latest ploy by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to avoid providing a connection between our airports and the central city.
The Port Authority has been under a mandate to connect Kennedy and Newark Airports with this city by rail since 1962.
This mandate is not a suggestion; it is the law.


The Boards Are Back; First Meeting Schedules
MANHATTAN  DISTRICT 1: Battery Park, TriBeCa.
Next meeting Sept. 20, 5:30 P.M.; Chemical Bank, 55 Water Street; (212) 442-5050.
Chairwoman: Anne Compoccia; District Manager: Paul Goldstein.


CHLOE WOFFORD Talks About TONI MORRISON
THE WOMAN BREEZING INTO A Princeton, N.J., restaurant in a brilliant silk caftan and with salt-and-pepper dreadlocks is Toni Morrison, 63, the Robert F. Goheen Professor in the Council of the Humanities at Princeton University and the 1993 Nobel Prize winner for literature.
Heads turn as she moves to a table.
Princetonians in khaki stare.
Since her Grand View-on-Hudson, N.Y., home burned to the ground last Christmas, Morrison has been living in this very Anglo-Saxon American town.
"Princeton's fine for me right now," she explains as we sit down to lunch.
"I have wonderful students and good friends here. Besides, I'm in the middle of a new novel and I don't want to think about where I'm living."


Experts Join In Studying Lorenzo's Oil
An international group of researchers who met in Scotland last week decided to pool their data on a treatment known as Lorenzo's oil to see whether they could find evidence that it can prevent the onset of a severe inherited disease.
The disease, adrenoleukodystrophy, strikes males almost exclusively.
About half of the boys who inherit the gene for adrenoleukodystrophy develop the disease, which inevitably leads to severe nerve damage and, eventually, death.
The hope is that if the children consume a restricted diet and Lorenzo's oil -- a mixture of erucic and oleic acids, which are present in natural cooking oils like rapeseed oil -- they may never develop the disease.


Christel Laine And Keene Kelley
Christel McRae Noe Laine, the daughter of Linda Noe Laine of New York, was married yesterday to Keene Richards Kelley, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Kelley of Natchez, Miss.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
The bride, 30, is a third-year law student at Tulane University.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late James Albert Noe, was a governor of Louisiana.


Home Equity Loans Back in Fashion
BETTE CONNER and Ruth Jansson bought a tugboat.
Leon Medvedow put a Jacuzzi in his bathroom.
Alfonso Barba Jr. is developing what he hopes will be the next Thigh-Master.
Where did they find the money? In their houses. They took out home equity loans.


Business Diary: September 4 - 9
COMPANIES Is Ford a Monarchy or Not? (Check Back in a Few Years)  "There are no crown princes," Henry Ford 2d once said.
Hmmmmm.
Was it pure coincidence, or pure merit, that put the founder's grandson on top for a generation?
Or, in true kingly fashion, was he exempting himself but saying family ties would carry no weight in the next generation?
So it's been for over a decade, with commoners running the show after 75 years of monarchy.
The catch is, the princes and their cousins own the place, or enough of it to call the shots.
So everyone's been scanning the family tree for the one true heir.
Two possibilities: Edsel 2d and William Jr.
Both became directors in 1988, creating an instant horse race.
It was neck-and-neck until last week, when William Jr., 37, was named to head the powerful finance committee.
Is all now crystal clear?
One observer called it "excellent preparatory ground for his becoming chairman," while others thought Ford's managers were merely appeasing the family.
American Express, Off Its Perch  As revolving credit rolled across the land, American Express, with its high annual fees and schoolmarmish insistence on paying off balances every month, started falling behind.
The public wanted credit, not cachet.
So last week American Express got off its perch and offered its first card with no annual fee.
What's more, the Optima True Grace Card -- no, salvation is not included -- offers a "true" grace period before the interest monster starts chewing, rather than having interest start on the day of purchase for those who keep a balance.
It had to have some gimmick.
Ozzie and Harriet They Aren't  One wonders what the Haft family dinner table was like in happier days.
Were there battles over who sat at the head, who got the biggest piece of pie?
If so, that past was small-potatoes prelude; the squabbles get bigger by the day.
Let's see: when last we tuned in to this executive-suite soap opera, Herbert Haft had fired a son and a wife and installed another son, Ronald, as Dart Group's president.
But now Ronald, in an effort to oust his father as chairman, exercised options to increase his voting power to 44 percent.
To get control, though, he'll need other family members' support; remembering the past, they may just nibble their own pie.
In a truce last week, Dart decided a group of outside directors would run things for a while, and stockholders liked that idea fine.
Just look below.
Inching Away From Bhopal  For a decade now, the names Bhopal and Union Carbide have been stuck together with the glue of nightmare.
A gas leak from a Carbide pesticide plant in 1984 killed 4,000 and caused lingering health problems for thousands of others, making it the worst industrial accident in history, so that glue will hold in memory for decades more.
But now at least the business bonds have been severed.
Last week Carbide sold its stake in the plant to a Calcutta company, with the $90 million in proceeds set aside for thousands of victims and survivors.
More than $20 million will go for a 500-bed hospital to be built in Bhopal.
Barbarians at Old Gates  The 90's must be sadly short of takeover battlegrounds, because two of the biggest dealmakers of the age are now forced to refight a battle from the glorious 80's.
Kohlberg, Kravis, led by Henry Kravis, bought a Florida company called Walter Industries in 1987 with the investment-banking help of Leon Black.
But things soon got messy: after Walter was forced into bankruptcy, Mr.
Black -- now calling himself an empire builder in the Warren Buffett mold -- started buying its debt.
But Kohlberg, Kravis now says Mr.
Black is using confidential information to help him grab the company, and last week it filed suit to try to stop him.
THE ECONOMY Car Buyers: Yes, Still There  Car buyers didn't disappear, they just took July off -- mainly because the cars weren't there.
After July's weak sales, car makers blamed low inventories, while others sniffed cooling economic winds.
But Detroit was right: in August the cars were back in showrooms -- and buyers showed up.
Figures out last week showed a 10.3 percent rise from the previous August.
The auto industry is counting on more of the same; a quarter of the vehicles on the road are at least a decade old, and enough is fast becoming enough.
What's That?
Inflation?
The statistics gods must have decided that things were getting too quiet, that people were getting too blase about inflation.
For last week, out of the blue, came word that producer prices took a 0.6 percent leap in August, the biggest monthly rise in nearly four years.
Yes, one month's data mean nothing; no, rising producer prices don't automatically mean higher overall inflation.
But the markets have to react to something, so stock and bond prices plunged on the news.
So if inflation does in fact appear, does that mean the Fed rate increases have failed?
Not really, for economists say it takes six months or so for rate tinkering to make itself felt.
Is the Fed's Voice Cracking?
We hear it all the time: the Fed does this, the Fed's about to do that.
And the image that comes to mind is either of Alan Greenspan, the chairman, or of a monolithic body, acting in resounding unity.
It ain't necessarily so.
Alan Blinder, the vice chairman, made some remarks recently that suggested that Fed interest-rate policy was not all sweetness and harmony -- that he might be a bit less willing to raise rates when unemployment is high.
This naturally caused an uproar, because when the Fed mops its brow, a million fans go on.
So last week, Mr.
Blinder rushed back into line, denying any policy differences.
One moral, he said: "If you are on a central bank board, you ought to keep your mouth shut." Health Care: No Band-Aids  If a dike has two holes, it does no good to fix just one.
That was the argument used by Representative Jim McDermott last week as he urged Congress to do nothing on health care this year, saying a piecemeal approach would make things worse.
Uninsured patients are "the leak in the dike," he said.
"Either you fix the dike or you face the flood. And without universal coverage, the flood is uncontrollable health care costs." His is a potent voice on the issue, for Mr.
McDermott had gathered wide support for his own plan, a sweeping "single payer" system -- Government pays the bills.
INTERNATIONAL  Statistics Don't Lie, People Do  Finally, someone said it.
Ever since the first economic statistics bubbled forth from that primordial computer, politicians have twisted them, put bows in their hair, buried them or shouted them -- always making the facts fit their fancy.
But Brazil's Finance Minister, Rubens Ricupero, recently spoke a rare, glorious truth when he said of economic data: "What is good, we take advantage of. What is bad, we hide." And though it was all too redundant: "I have no scruples." An uncontrollable urge to come clean, a yearning for a new era of honesty?
Hardly.
After a TV interview, he thought the cameras were off.
They weren't.
Brazil has a new Finance Minister.
Bank of Cards in Mexico  Things have been hopping in Mexico since Nafta, and Carlos Cabal Paniche was in the thick of it, creating the nation's No. 4 bank and making deals to buy big American food companies.
But the bubble burst last week: the Government took control of the bank, a warrant was issued for Mr.
Cabal's arrest on charges that he fraudulently lent himself up to $700 million, and Mr.
Cabal was nowhere in sight.
Now, as one Mexican consultant put it, "A lot more questions are going to be asked" about cross-border deals.
What Is a Car Anyway?
Surely the oddest skirmishing in the auto wars with Japan is the endless bickering over whether those odd hybrids that make suburbanites feel as if they're on safari -- "sport-utility vehicles" -- are meant for people or cargo.
They didn't become such hot sellers by hauling hay, but Customs still slapped a 25 percent "cargo vehicle" tariff on two-door imports (vs. 2.5 percent for cars).
Last week, though, a Federal court ruled that a two-door Nissan Pathfinder was wrongly classified as a cargo vehicle.
So, Ford Explorer and your rugged friends, watch out: you may not have a lock on this market for long.


World Markets; Still Ungainly, Sweden Holds Promise
THE days are growing shorter in the land of the midnight sun, but for investors in Sweden, there are still a lot of sleepless nights.
It was bad enough when the Swedish central bank shocked the markets last month by raising interest rates in what it described as a preemptive strike against inflation.
Now the markets are being roiled by uncertainty over national elections to be held next Sunday.
And once they are over, investors are certain to begin worrying about a referendum in November to determine whether Sweden should join the European Union.


Pamela S. Picker, Walter Matweychuk
Pamela Sue Picker, a daughter of Jennilind and Dr.
Arthur F. Picker of Baldwin, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Walter John Matweychuk, a son of Marie and Walter Matweychuk of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Thomas A. Nielson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The bride and bridegroom work at the New York Pain Treatment Program of Lenox Hill Hospital, she as the nurse manager, he as a psychologist.
The bridegroom also has a psychotherapy practice in New York.


Jacqueline Derrey, Spencer F. Segura
Jacqueline Sturmer Derrey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Derrey of Westfield, N.J., was married on Friday to Spencer Francisco Segura, the son of Virginia Giesbert of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Pancho Segura, the former professional tennis player and coach, of La Costa, Calif.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Segura, 29, is an interior decorator for Bunny Williams Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father is the president of Barr Brothers &amp; Company, a municipal bond firm in New York.


Hudson Rafting
To the Editor: Your article on rafting reminded me of a trip I took recently along the Sunwapta River in the Canadian Rockies.
The guide, critical of white-water companies that do not provide helmets, required each person to wear one and suggested a law requiring them on white water.
I agree.
White-water rafting is dangerous.
Sometimes people fall overboard.
Head injuries can cause death or severe brain damage.
The helmet I wore made me feel safer, enabling me to relax a little bit more while I enjoyed the exciting and sometimes scary rapids and the scenery.


Terps Hold Seminoles, But Just For a Half
The national spotlight has dimmed.
The attention has faded.
Florida State may be the defending national champion, but something is missing from last year.
The Seminoles feel it.
Players have been suspended for National Collegiate Athletic Association violations.
There is no Heisman watch now that Charlie Ward has moved on to the New York Knicks.
And the concentration is not what it used to be.
It wasn't there today in the first half.


Stage Season Offers New, Old and Bold
THE genesis of a mega-musical.
A stage re-creation of a screen gem.
A new production of a new drama that's made a significant noise in the last year.
A new look at a stirring play by the theater for which it was created almost a decade ago.
To activate the new season, four major theaters in New Jersey have what look like sure things.


Cartwright and Sonics May Have a Deal
BILL CARTWRIGHT, who won three National Basketball Association championships with the Chicago Bulls before becoming a free agent after last season, says he is close to signing a multiyear contract with the Seattle SuperSonics.
The Seattle Post-Intelligencer said the deal is expected to be completed by next week.
The Sonics have a $1.5 million slot under the salary cap to fill this year after the departure of MICHAEL CAGE. (AP)


Four Who Would Be Attorney General
THE most interesting race of the day is the four-way Democratic primary for attorney general.
Last year, Robert Abrams resigned the job he had held for 15 years, and the Legislature picked one of its own, Assemblyman G. Oliver Koppell of the Bronx, to fill the last year of Mr.
Abrams's term.
Mr.
Koppell's nine months of incumbency were not enough to scare away challengers, particularly since the job has opened up only twice in 35 years.
On Tuesday, he will face Karen S. Burstein, a former Family Court judge, Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, and Eliot L. Spitzer, a former prosecutor.


Profile; Adding Some Prime-Time Sizzle to Product Safety
ROMPERS and drawstrings, paint cans and fruit-scented crayons.
Lyrics to a spoof of "My Favorite Things"?
Possibly, but Julie Andrews wouldn't be singing.
The voice might belong, however, to Ann Brown, head of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
And if she were singing the song, she'd be lying.
Those items, far from being her favorite things, have all come under the commission's scrutiny recently for a variety of hazards they pose.


SUNDAY, September 11, 1994; To Buy or Not To Buy?
What goes on in these new bookstores?
They present themselves as oases of tranquillity, libraries of a sort that will sell you books -- but only if you insist.
Do most customers buy, or just hang out?
The latest unscientific "Sunday" survey, conducted at the Barnes &amp; Noble on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, suggests that many browse, but a few do buy armfuls of books.
Employee: "They forget it's a bookstore. I'm often asked where the copy machine is."


Return of Homeless Sets Off Local Alarms
For years, Beach 116th Street, the commercial spine of Rockaway Park, had been declining with the rest of the Rockaways as a seaside draw.
Precipitating its fall, many neighborhood residents charged, was the Lawrence Hotel.
Various city agencies had housed people in its rooms for the last 11 years -- homeless families for the last three -- and businesses said the Lawrence attracted drugs and prostitutes and discouraged visitors.


Devon M. Smith, James C. Menges
Devon Maguire Smith, a daughter of Gerard L. Smith of New York and Valerie H. Smith of East Hampton, L.I., was married yesterday to James Christian Menges, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl B. Menges of New York.
The Rev.
Charles Haskins officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton.
Msgr.
J.
Joshua Mundell took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Menges, 23, was until recently a saleswoman at the Polo/Ralph Lauren store in East Hampton.
Her father is a managing director of Salomon Brothers in New York.
The bride's paternal grandfather, the late Gerard C. Smith, was a principal atomic arms negotiator in the Nixon and Carter Administrations.


Holly Peterson, Richard A. Kimball Jr.
Holly Peterson, the daughter of Peter G. Peterson and Sally H. Peterson, both of New York, was married yesterday to Richard Ayer Kimball Jr., the son of Mr.
Kimball and the Rev.
Anne Kimball of Darien, Conn.
The bridegroom's mother, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Ms.
Peterson, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University and is a producer for the "World News Tonight" program at ABC News in New York.
Her father is the chairman of the Blackstone Group, a New York investment bank, and was the Secretary of Commerce in the Nixon Administration.
Her mother is a psychologist in New York.
The bride's stepmother, Joan Ganz Cooney, is a founder and the chairwoman of the executive committee of the Children's Television Workshop in New York.


When Mr. Potato Head Was a Real Idaho
YOU can find out some interesting things about people just hanging out at Alphaville, a new shop in the Village.
If you'd been there around lunchtime just the other day, you would have seen Jeff Thomas stop at the window display of yellowed board games.
"They're certainly not high-tech," he said.
"We're kind of caught on the horns of high-tech, and I don't like it." Mr.
Thomas, it turns out, is 40ish and works as a (slightly ambivalent?) computer instructor.


THE NEVER WIFE
The Catholic Church's annulment process is primarily a spiritual experience -- not a legal or psychological one.
It is an opportunity for Catholics who have experienced a failed marriage to reflect, in light of church teaching, on the meaning of a sacramental union between two persons.


MAILBOX
Dear Editor
I am really really mad about the stike.
Now my mom doesn't let me watch that much T.V.
I would really like the strike to end.


Richardson May Get Shot Versus Cowboys
At week's end, Oilers quarterback Bucky Richardson, who has become something of a folk hero in Houston in his three years with the team, stood a 50-50 chance of starting his first game.
Starter Cody Carlson is questionable for the Cowboys game with a second-degree separation of his left shoulder (nonthrowing arm).
Although Carlson practiced with the team, Richardson worked with the first-team offense for most of the week.
Oilers Coach Jack Pardee doesn't want to risk further injury to Carlson that could knock the quarterback out for the remainder of the season.
With the way that Dallas defensive ends Charles Haley and Jim Jeffcoat rush the passer, Pardee might elect to have Richardson, who is more mobile than Carlson, play the bulk of the game.


Pina Bausch: Catching Intuitions on the Wing
ON THIS HOT SUMMER evening, the beautiful central piazza is humming with excitement.
The cause, at least so far, is not the imminent performance of "Orpheus and Euridice" by Pina Bausch's Wuppertal Tanztheater but the fact that the World Cup match pitting Italy against Spain has just begun.
Booming loudspeakers make intermittent announcements; from one of the buildings flanking the square, collective shouts rise up through the thick walls.
Motorbikes cruise, tooting their horns, and some strollers wield small banners.
In the midst of this mild melee, Pina Bausch, sitting in an outdoor cafe, seems enclosed in a circle of calm.
At 53, she is a strikingly elegant figure, thin and angular, dressed on this occasion in black pants with a black chemise flowing nearly to her ankles.
Her face is austerely beautiful, planed and bony like an early Picasso, with enormous pale blue eyes and graying hair pulled back tightly from her high cheekbones.
The serenity, however, cloaks an alert receptiveness.
She contemplates the waning light, the imposing Renaissance palaces, the animated strollers, and declares that it's difficult for her to talk with so much going on.


A Repressed World Says, 'Beam Me Up'
FREEDOM is heaven-sent, or so it would seem to anyone scanning the red-tiled rooftops of this southern Chinese city.
The skyline of Guangzhou, one of China's free-market boomtowns, is covered with a forest of satellite dishes that allow television viewers here to enjoy the antics of Bart Simpson and Oprah Winfrey; NFL football and Australian cricket; the scantily clad lifeguards of "Baywatch" and the unclad models of a Japanese pornography channel; CNN and the uncensored local television news from across the border in Hong Kong.
And while almost every one of those satellite dishes is illegal under an 11-month-old decree, the Government seems unwilling to force the owners to take them down.
Wang Bin, a shopkeeper, said that while his 12-year-old son does not understand a word of English, "he still loves 'The Simpsons,' " the American cartoon show beamed to China by Star TV, a pan-Asian satellite service.


Westchester Philharmonic to Offer Tribute to Rudolf Firkusny
THE death last July of Rudolf Firkusny has turned his scheduled guest appearance with the Westchester Philharmonic into a memorial tribute next weekend at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College when the former New Orchestra of Westchester opens its subscription series under the music director Paul Lustig Dunkel.
Peter Serkin will play Mozart's "Coronation" Concerto in memory of the Czech-born pianist, which fits in with the orchestra's focus this season on the heritage of music from various nationalities.
The 8 P.M.
Saturday program and its repeat Sunday at 3 P.M. will also feature music from the Czech Republic with performances of Janacek's "Moravian Dances" and everybody's favorite Dvorak symphony, "From the New World."


Looking Beyond an Invasion, U.S. Plans Haiti Police Force
Clinton Administration officials say they are worried that an invasion of Haiti could set off a wave of assassinations and reprisals, and are scrambling to create a police force that would maintain law and order after any military action.
Senior Administration officials said the maintenance of civil order after an invasion was the current focus of preparations and a major concern.


New York Apple Growers Anticipate Better Crop Than in '93
On the mountaintop farm of the Stanley Orchards the branches of the trees sag toward the ground, laden with large bright red and golden yellow apples waiting to be picked.
As the harvest opens, the size and color of the apples here and at other orchards around the state indicate a very good crop this year, growers said.
"For the state as a whole it's one of the best and most beautiful crops we have ever had," said Michael Durango, president of the New York Apple Institute, a growers' group.


Tie With Northwestern Has Stanford's Walsh Frustrated
Stanford 41, Northwestern 41
Steve Schnur, a late first-quarter replacement, passed for two touchdowns, and Dennis Lundy ran for three others, as pesky Northwestern tied Stanford, 41-41, yesterday in Evanston, Ill.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
JOURNALISM  THE AIRPORT  Terminal Nights and Runway Days at John F. Kennedy International.
By James Kaplan.
Morrow, $23.


Superliners in the East
Amtrak's Capitol Limited, the overnight train between the District of Columbia and Chicago, gets a dash of glamour on Oct. 30, when double-decker Superliner cars are added to the service.
Though in use for more than a decade on runs west of the Mississippi, the two-story cars, with a circular staircase connecting the two decks, are new to Eastern routes.
The new service also features a lounge, sleeping cars and a dining car, with food prepared by graduates of the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y.
Sleeping cars range from economy rooms ($116 for two adults, one way) to larger deluxe rooms outfitted with toilets and showers ($231 for two, one way).
Room accommodations include breakfast and dinner as well as wake-up service with newspaper, coffee and orange juice.
A round-trip fare between Washington and Chicago costs $128, sleeping accommodations extra.
To reserve, call (800) 872-7245.


Ahead Of the Beat
To the Editor:
In his article on Virgil Thomson as music critic for a daily newspaper, "A Critic's Creed: Plug Yourself and Your Fellow Americans"  [ Aug. 21 ] , Anthony Tommasini tells us that Thomson sometimes covered "more unconventional and interesting" events than standard classical concerts, and cites a review of "a black preacher in New Jersey who played swing music on electric guitar for his congregation."


SUNDAY, September 11, 1994; Phantom of the Operator
If you'd like to make a call, please hang up and try again. . . .
The number you requested, 555-2222, has been changed.
The new number is. . . .
" For some, her cool promptings may stir memories of a forgotten third-grade teacher. Others believe the sound is computer generated. In fact, the voice of directory assistance for Nynex and many other phone systems is that of Joan Kenley, a middle-aged San Francisco Bay Area psychologist who has turned her voice into a cottage industry.
"What the phone clients want is a voice that's friendly . . . not too much like a mother, not too much like a boss, but somewhere in between," says Kenley, who transformed herself from an Ohio girl who said "warsh" and "git" to the self-described "queen of the digitized voice."


Affairs Both Foreign and Domestic
NO ORDINARY TIME Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II.
By Doris Kearns Goodwin.
Illustrated. 759 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


In Fighting Racism, Is Sexism Ignored?
IN Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr's., turbulent 16-month tenure as executive director of the N.A.A.C.P., one of the more bizarre -- and telling -- events occurred during a press conference on Aug. 4.
Stung by reports that he had agreed to a $332,400 out-of-court settlement with a fired female aide, Mr.
Chavis angrily told reporters that the payments were made to head off a threatened lawsuit involving sexual discrimination, and not sexual harassment as had been widely reported.
Though he denied both allegations, Mr.
Chavis was insistent that he not be linked in any way to a charge that he had attempted to use his position for sexual favors.
But to some women, Mr.
Chavis seemed to be saying that while it is terrible to be accused of making unwanted sexual advances, being charged with firing a person because she is a women is not so bad.
"It was like saying that that was no problem," said Emma Coleman Jordan, a professor at Georgetown University Law Center.
"It was only discrimination."


Power Dressing Now
As parents shopping for back-to-school musts know well, the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers -- those karate-kicking superstars of children's television -- did not lose any of their merchandising might over the summer.
Witness this lineup at St.
Gabriel's, a Catholic school in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, on Wednesday when first graders arranged themselves at the beginning of their first day of classes.


Leaders in Their Fields, From Science to Business, Who Died in USAir Crash; William T. Langan, Energy Official, 57
William T. Langan, who worked to develop clean-burning coal for the Department of Energy, died on Thursday in the USAir crash.
He was 57 and lived in Morgantown, W.Va.
Mr.
Langan was the director of the department's Clean Coal Technology Division at the Morgantown Energy Technology Center.
His wife, the former Charlotte Lorraine Warczynski, 55, was with him on the flight.


Science Fiction
Science fiction as a commercial genre was born in 1926 with the publication of a magazine called Amazing Stories, which reprinted the short fiction of H. G. Wells and Jules Verne and solicited new stories in the same vein.
Despite the efforts of readers, writers, editors and critics -- and, in recent years, literary historians and scholars -- no one has yet succeeded in defining just what that vein is.
Common sense tells us that science fiction has a special relationship to the ideas and products of modern science.
But specifying the relationship has proved difficult; we obviously cannot accept as science fiction every story that acknowledges the existence of electricity and the internal combustion engine.
In the absence of a persuasive definition, the label "science fiction" has remained largely a marketing tool, deployed by publishers, distributors and booksellers to attract a loyal but limited body of readers.
My own criterion for deciding if a story is science fiction is how strongly the writer relies on the authority of modern science to induce a state of mind -- Coleridge spoke of a "willing suspension of disbelief" -- that lets a reader take seriously the product of someone else's imagination.
The machines that transport Wells's time traveler and Verne's space travelers draw their power ultimately from the authority of science; so, in a different sense, do the telescreens and brainwashing techniques used to control thought in George Orwell's "Nineteen Eighty-four."


The Chinese Voyagers
To the Editor:
Norman Weisberg (letter, Aug. 7) agrees with the author of "When China Ruled the Seas," Louise Levathes, that "early Chinese sailors could have crossed the Pacific." He cites many "striking similarities" between the civilizations of China and Central America.


In Croatia, a Frail Pope John Paul II Urges a 'Culture of Peace'
Looking frail and walking with the aid of a cane, Pope John Paul II arrived here today on his first foreign trip in a year and called on the people of Croatia to shun nationalism and pursue a "culture of peace."
The Pope, who broke his right leg in a fall in April, did not kneel to kiss the ground, a gesture that has marked all his initial visits to foreign countries over the last 16 years.
Instead, he kissed an urn of Croatian soil that was presented to him.


For Spring, the Little Bulbs That Count
BULBS grow wild in the Mediterranean countries, where the winters are cool but not frigid and the summers are hot and dry.
This sort of environment has generated thousands of wild bulbs, which have become the source material for many popular garden hybrids in this country.
But life has not been easy for the wild bulbs.
If they are not the object of animal grazing, then they are a source of income for human collecting.
As a result many have been dug almost to the point of extinction.


Parade Underlines Chinatown Split
Long a staple in New York politics, ethnic parades have generated their share of battles over the years.
The latest is below Canal Street and is a sign of a rising challenge to the established leadership in Chinatown.
The situation reflects a major split in the politics of Chinatown -- between supporters of the Republic of China, commonly known as Taiwan, and the growing community of newer immigrants from the mainland.
The recent spark came when the mainlanders sought to run a parade through the heart of Chinatown: the Bowery and Mott Street, the stronghold of Republic of China supporters, who are the governing elite of Chinatown.


At Work; A Big Union Win in the South
IT came down to money and fairness, and maybe not in that order, when the workers at the Tultex Corporation voted to join a union last month.
True, the lost wages and benefits hurt.
Clifford C. Broady and his wife, Deborah, both work at the company's Martinsville, Va., textile plant, he as a materials handler in the knitting department, she as an automated screen printer.
They say they have seen their household income drop by almost a third since Tultex made cutbacks it contends were needed to cope with an unexpected drop in profitability.
"We're struggling to survive," Mr.
Broady said of his reduced income.


The Old Devil Himself
THE ANTI-EGOTIST Kingsley Amis, Man of Letters.
By Paul Fussell. 206 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $23.


Gov. Chiles Seizes the Refugee Issue
Jeb Bush sounded like a promoter for Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida -- not like his principal rival -- when a voter asked him the other day what he thought of the incumbent's handling of the Cuban refugee crisis.
"I think Governor Chiles is doing the right thing," said Mr.
Bush, the top vote-getter in this state's Republican primary for governor on Thursday.
"He's gotten off his fanny on this one. He's hustling on this one. To his credit, he's doing the right thing because he knows how politically powerful it is."


Leaders in Their Fields, From Science to Business, Who Died in USAir Crash; Marshall L. Berkman, Ampco Leader, 57
Marshall L. Berkman, the chairman and chief executive of the Ampco-Pittsburgh Corporation, a manufacturing company that specializes in metals and hardware, died on Thursday in the USAir plane crash.
He was 57 and lived in Pittsburgh.
The Berkman family is the largest shareholder of Ampco-Pittsburgh, a publicly traded company with 950 employees.
Mr.
Berkman succeeded his father, Louis, as chairman and chief executive in 1979.


Manager's Profile
Penny Dobkin  Fund: Fidelity Worldwide Fund, $710 million in assets.
Manager since 1990 inception. (Sponsor: Fidelity Investments, Boston.)


Elegant Simple Dishes From the Grill
THE fans of Meson Galicia in Norwalk who have been eagerly anticipating the opening of Ignacio Blanco's new restaurant, Mediterranean Grill, in Wilton, need wait no more.
The new establishment, open unofficially for several months, now has its menu in place, the staff has been trained almost to the Meson Galicia level and the kitchen shows that it is capable of a great deal.
As the name suggests, the food reflects the Mediterranean, and not just its Spanish coast.
Emphasis is on fish, shellfish, grilled and roasted meats and vegetables.
First-rate ingredients are used, beginning with the herbed olive oil redolent of roasted garlic cloves, rosemary and thyme that is served with excellent rolls on arrival.


In Argentina, a New Security Apparatus Resurrects Old Fears
President Carlos Saul Menem has created a security agency to oversee the military, the police and the intelligence-gathering services in emergencies, reviving memories of a time when an all-powerful military terrorized the country.
Since its formation, one day after the terrorist bombing of a Jewish community center here in July, the agency has been shrouded in secrecy, raising concerns here that it could be used to harass or intimidate opponents.


CRITIC'S CHOICES: TELEVISION


Editors' Note
The weekly New York Stock Exchange tables in the Business section today apparently include incorrect final prices for more than two dozen leading stocks because of a stock trader's error in reporting some late transactions on Friday, after the exchange's official close.
The erroneous reports were included on the Nasdaq stock market's computerized price reporting system and apparently led to the transmission of incorrect prices to companies like Tribune Media Services, which provides the stock tables for The New York Times and some other newspapers.


On Sunday; Insider's Love Of Horse Race Called Politics
IN the favored race-track parlance of American politics, in which campaigns are horse races and candidates want to be front-runners, Lauren Hurvitz works the backstretch.
She is a professional political worker who strategizes pace and handicap from the barn-like back rooms of campaigns, hot-walking her candidates, in effect, when they buck and neigh at the relentless daily workouts out at the subway stops and koffeeklatsches.
She is a campaign volunteer become fanatic become pro and, at the age of 28, claims not to be addicted to the perennial runnings, even after Ms.
Hurvitz's last two competitors were nosed out at the wire: David Dinkins placing in the 1993 mayoral stakes and Robert Abrams, who, after an exhausting primary contest that was all whips and mud, faded in the stretch drive of the 1992 senatorial classic.


SEPT. 4-10: Women in the Navy; A Settlement Is Reached In the Tailhook Scandal
Paula A. Coughlin, who blew the whistle on the debauchery at the Tailhook Association convention in Las Vegas three years ago, settled her lawsuit last week with the aviator's group that sponsored the affair.
A former Navy pilot and lieutenant, she was one of more than 80 women whom the Navy found had been sexually molested, assaulted or harassed.
Her testimony and the subsequent Pentagon investigations rocked the highest levels of the Navy and caused the service to rewrite its protocols for relations between the sexes.


Colleen Coffey, John M. Shanks
Colleen Coffey, a daughter of Sonia Coffey of New Paltz, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Jerome Coffey, was married in New York yesterday to John Matthew Shanks, a son of Ann and Bob Shanks of New York.
Dr.
Edmond Bolella, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Mrs.
Shanks, 32, is an actress.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father was the chairman of art and education for the Uniondale, L.I., school district.


Designing a City Stroller
NEW parents listen up.
Have you ever thought about the dangers of pushing a baby in a stroller?
Well, it's not as safe as you might think.
The New York City Department of Transportation found that a large number of traffic fatalities involve small children being strolled across the street.


Monica P. Orbe, Conway Cliff
Monica Patricia Orbe and Conway Cliff, producers at the CNBC cable television network in Fort Lee, N.J., were married yesterday at St.
Elizabeth's Church in New York.
The Rev.
Edward O'Neil, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cliff, 25, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Miguel Orbe of New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a retired building superintendent.


France at War With Herself
PARIS AFTER THE LIBERATION 1944-1949.
By Antony Beevor and Artemis Cooper.
Illustrated. 479 pp.
New York:  Doubleday. $27.50.


Fining The Rule Breakers
CONDOMINIUMS have traditionally fined residents who break the rules as a way to add clout to those rules.
A recalcitrant unit owner could face a fine of, say, $20 a day, for continuing to build an unauthorized deck or park illegally on common ground.
No wonder so many associations and their lawyers were outraged in June when the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court ruled unanimously that a condominium had no right to impose a fine, irrespective of the nature of the misdeed.


Los Angeles Hotels In Two Flavors
WITH the exception of its fabled luxury hotels -- the Bel-Air, the Beverly Wilshire and the legendary pink-and-green Beverly Hills (currently closed for renovations) -- Los Angeles has never been known for its idiosyncratic places to stay.
This has been particularly true in the mid-range price category, where the best-known hotel was the tattered if historically significant Chateau Marmont in Hollywood.
This bleak landscape has been altered of late.
Not only has the Chateau been renovated amid much fanfare, but within the last 18 months a handful of distinctive new hotels has quietly opened on the city's west side.
Los Angeles now offers travelers several intimate, European-style hotels at lower than deluxe prices.
Among the best of these a friend and I discovered on two recent weekend visits are the 140-room Beverly Prescott, just south of Beverly Hills, and the 198-room


Mt. Vernon Teachers Plan to Continue Strike
Teachers in the Mount Vernon City School District who took to picket lines on the first day of school on Friday will defy a court order and continue the strike on Monday, union leaders said today.
Unless a settlement is reached during 11th-hour negotiations set to begin at 8 P.M.
Sunday, Geraldine Hegwood, the president of the Mount Vernon Federation of Teachers, said the teachers would be back on the picket lines on Monday morning.


Retired Executives Aid Nonprofit Sector
To the Editor:
"Out of Retirement Life, and Back Into the Fire" (The Executive Life, Aug. 14) makes no mention of the National Executive Service Corps, a sister organization of the International Executive Corps.


Q. &amp; A.
Repairing A Leak in a Co-op Unit  Q A shareholder's apartment has been damaged from water leakage from another unit.
The shareholder responsible for the damage is unresponsive and does not repair the situation.


SUNDAY, September 11, 1994; Who Killed the Calendar?
It's a little tasteless, but it has meaning," says Kenn Thomas, editor and publisher of the 1994 "Assassination Calendar." True on the tasteless front, but what meaning, exactly? "The idea," he says, "was to make people aware of assassinations and the role they play in current events." And to raise questions like, "Was Abbie assassinated?" Hoffman, that is.
The calendar comes from Thomas's Steam shovel Press, a magazine devoted to making people aware of conspiracies and secret truths of all sorts, including those involving U.F.O.s, the AIDS virus as an escaped weapon of biological warfare, the Shroud of Turin, the eerie similarity of Jesus and Dracula and the role of immortal bloodsuckers through history.


Waiting for Nov. 8: Where Primaries Aren't


Forget PCB's. Radon. Alar
WHAT ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS kill human beings in huge numbers today?
Not ozone depletion or Alar.
What kills them is dung smoke and diarrhea.
Throughout the world, many more people die each year from filthy air and dirty water than from asbestos, dioxin, electromagnetic radiation, nuclear wastes, PCB's, pesticide residues and ultraviolet rays -- the sorts of ecological issues that obsess Western environmentalists.
Problems like dioxin and nuclear wastes are real enough and must be dealt with.
But Western public consciousness and environmental groups continue to focus on such issues while all but ignoring millions of annual deaths from polluted air and water.


Every U.S. Interest Is at Stake in Haiti
To the Editor:
I believe the United States does indeed have compelling interests in restoring the democratically elected government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power in Haiti.
There is a strategic interest.
The situation in Haiti cannot last.
It is ripe for bloody revolt, and who knows what forces could come to power in such a crisis?
It is clearly in the interests of the United States to prevent overtly anti-American factions from replacing the junta.


Minicam's Eye, Midtown's Image
Midtown Manhattan is turning into a de facto Television City.
It's gone way beyond Jumbotron, the Times Square mega-screen.
Steadily proliferating cameras and screens stare from storefronts and plazas.


Fans' Other Options
To the Sports Editor:
In the baseball strike, we should not overlook the Jets and Giants, or even Trenton and Binghamton.
These are our area sports teams that are not on strike.
The Jets will be in the playoffs (it is hoped), the Giants will be competitive and Binghamton has three of the finest pitchers in Class AA.
As a 13-year-old fan, this strike hasn't affected me as much as I thought it would.
JESSE DULMAN  New York


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Audi Cabriolet; Rich, European and Topless
CONVERTIBLES were one of the saddest casualties of the dark days of the American automobile: the era extending from the Arab oil embargo of 1973 until the manufacturers figured out a way to restore some zip and pizazz in the late 1980's.
Certainly, there were exceptions.
Mercedes continued to sail along with its mega-priced roadsters, and Rolls-Royce kept turning out Corniche leather-tops.
But those were cars for arbitragers and magazine covers, not for you and me.


Field Goal By Michigan Flattens Irish
They were lying on the grass once more.
Until the very end, everything had seemed so different at Notre Dame Stadium since the painful end of a season in the chill of last November.
Sunshine was still visible near the end of a warm, late-summer afternoon.
The intense anticipation of the Ron Powlus era was being transformed into the loud, rapid construction of a Fighting Irish legend.
Until suddenly, the stark ending was the same, with Notre Dame players sprawled on the turf, while giddy visitors and an onrushing minority from the stands celebrated an unforgettable victory made possible by an unlikely kicking hero.


More Talks, Same Result: No Progress
The flame of optimism that flickered among some union people 24 hours earlier quickly dissipated on the 30th day of the baseball players strike yesterday as the union chief charged that the owners don't want an agreement unless the players bow to their will.
Representatives of the two sides held three bargaining sessions on two different matters but made no progress on the salary cap issue that divides them and threatens to force cancellation of the last three weeks of the season and the World Series.


Show That Rotates Winds Up Smaller
THIS year's version of the annual New Jersey craft show that rotates each year among the state's five major museums is a shadow of its former self.
Twenty-four craft artists, a far smaller number than usual for these shows, were included in the installation at he Montclair Art Museum, although 160 artists who live or work in New Jersey submitted slides of their work to the two-person jury that made the selections.
The display is set up in the entrance lobby, a space that normally accommodates a few paintings in the four corners.
Yes, there is an extension of the show in the small rotunda, which leads to the basement staircase.
But visitors unfamiliar with the museum layout will have to ask the guards how to find it.


Criminals Rendered in 3 Parts, Poetically
LIKE SEX, CRIME CAN BE BRIEF and messy: more about buildup and aftermath than event and arrival.
So the gun is fired, the police officer dies, and the diamonds are stolen.
So what happened afterward and how did the relevant players get there, in what kind of car, and did they wear clean underwear?
Thus far, the film maker Quentin Tarantino, whose second movie, "Pulp Fiction," won the 1994 Palme d'Or at Cannes, has aimed his writing and directorial focus strictly on crime (P.O.V. the criminal).
In this film, which opens the New York Film Festival on Sept. 23 and will be released commercially on Oct. 7, as well as in "Reservoir Dogs," which he wrote and directed, and in "Natural Born Killers," the Oliver Stone movie based on his story, he has shown himself far less interested in the moment when the illegal, newsworthy thing occurs than in prelude and epilogue, motivation, cleanup, payoff and the postcoital schmooze.


Patricia Clary, Bernard Condon
Patricia Anne Clary, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Clary of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Bernard Francis Condon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Condon of Elmont, L.I.
The Rev.
Roland Jones performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Condon, 29, is a senior real estate consultant at Ernst &amp; Young in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Middlebury College and received masters' degrees in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father is the vice president for taxes at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in New York.


Isles' King Returns to His Home Ice With Loftier Goals


Voter's Guide; THE NEW YORK PRIMARY
The statewide races. Assembly and senate. A look at the money.
Pages 13 and 14


Family Resort
To the Editor: My family and I have very pleasant memories of the Tyler Place, and they were accurately captured in the article on this Vermont family hideaway by Chris Hedges ("Where a Family Vacation Is No Oxymoron," July 17).
Our hope is that Chris Hedges correctly completed the Tyler Place guest survey at the end of the stay so that the family will be invited to return.
After five years of filling out the forms, commenting on the honest food, the outstanding counselors and the family-oriented activities, we gave the elderly owner a dose of her candid New England commentary regarding some areas that could be improved.


Alison W. Smith And Tim Lord
Alison Williams Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter N. Smith of Boston, was married yesterday to Thomas Pillsbury Lord, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles P. Lord of Washington.
The Rev.
Dwight Juliani officiated at the First Congregational Church in Madison, Conn.
The Rev.
Gordon Price, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Lord, 27, is an account executive at J. Walter Thompson, the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Anchor Capital Advisers in Boston.
Her grandfather the late Hayden N. Smith, a New York lawyer, was a deputy assistant chief of staff of the United States armed forces in Europe during World War II.


For Black-Owned Businesses, a Directory of Their Own
Let your fingers do the walking in the Black Pages, and those fingers will find themselves on the pulse of an often unacknowledged world.
"It's the world of black businesses owned by black people," said Celeste Morris.
"Word of mouth was how black people in New York used to find those businesses. Now part of that world is in these pages."


Where Are The Verities?
To the Editor:
I know that life goes on -- modernism, post-modernism, deconstructionism, etc. -- but the values of architectural practice today are practically opposite to those instilled in me as an architectural student at Pratt Institute in 1957.


Virginia A. Scull, Paul M. Ferrarese
Virginia Amerling Scull, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred P. Scull Jr. of Darien, Conn., is to be married today in Rowayton, Conn., to Paul Michael Ferrarese, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Ferrarese of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
John R. Livingston, a United Church of Christ minister, is to perform the ceremony at the United Church of Rowayton.


S. H. McAllister, Douglas T. Kurtis
Dr.
Suzanne Helen McAllister, a psychologist, was married yesterday at the Infant Jesus Chapel of St.
Charles Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I., to Douglas Ted Kurtis, a marathon runner.
The Rev.
Francis Pizzarelli, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
The Rev.
Philippa Turner, an Episcopal priest, took part in it.
Dr.
Kurtis until recently practiced in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in psychology from New York University and a Ph.D. in psychology from Fordham University.


CRITIC'S CHOICES: FILM


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: EAST RIVER PARK: The Ups and Downs (and Ups) of a 57-Acre Dream Park; Park on Respirator Breathes New Life
Opened as a grand esplanade along the new East River Drive in 1939, the East River Park had slowly deteriorated.
Only four pedestrian walks cross the six-lane drive to link the 1 1/4-mile strip of park to Alphabet City and the Lower East Side.
Budget cuts prevented anything more than piecemeal renovations.
But a clarion call for help was heard a few years ago, when inspections showed that the tides were wearing away the seawall that supports the park's esplanade.
"Major reconstruction was needed to keep the park from sliding into the sea," said Robert Redmond, a Parks Department spokesman.


Haven M. Tyler, Lance C. Jensen
Haven Meanor Tyler, the daughter of Patricia Pierce and Cheever Tyler, both of New Haven, was married yesterday to Lance Christian Jensen, the son of Barbara Fawthrop of Milford, Conn., and the late Finn Jensen.
The Rev.
Louise Conant, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Christ Church in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 27, is keeping her name.
She is the director of client services at Design Continuum, a product development consultancy in Boston.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is the president of the Partnership for Connecticut Cities, a foundation in New Haven.
Her mother is the dean of student affairs at the Yale University School of Management.


Janet S. Arnold, Richard J. Hart
Janet Sheppard Arnold, an associate at the San Francisco office of Coudert Brothers, the New York law firm, and Richard John Hart, an associate at Coudert Brothers in San Jose, Calif., were married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass.
The Rev.
Ted Anderson officiated at the Second Congregational Meeting House.
The Rev.
Andrew W. Foster, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hart, 31, graduated from Middlebury College and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Gale P. Arnold of Washington and Judge Richard S. Arnold, chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in Little Rock, Ark.


Leaders in Their Fields, From Science to Business, Who Died in USAir Crash; John Kupchun, Businessman, 52
John Kupchun, the president of the Nashua Industrial Machine Company in Nashua, N.H., died on Thursday in the USAir plane crash.
He was 52 and lived in Merrimack, N.H.
Mr.
Kupchun got a job as a draftsman at Nashua Industrial after graduating from Nashua High School, and he had been working his way up ever since.
He was named president of the company in July.


Susan P. Jeffery, Matthew S. Fine
Susan Penhallow Jeffery, a communications consultant in White Plains, and Matthew Stuart Fine, the sales manager of the multimedia division of Dow Jones &amp; Company in New York, were married yesterday in Salisbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Bevan performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Fine, 28, graduated from Mount Vernon College.
She is a daughter of David E. Jeffery of Charlevoix, Mich., and Sarah P. Jeffery of Shelton, Conn.
The bride's father is the owner of an insurance agency in Charlevoix.


A Hoplophobe Among the Gunnies
Gun lovers call the military-style semiautomatic weapons that will be banned by the crime bill "ugly guns." That's because they lack the wood stocks and clean lines of such pretty guns as the Benelli semiautomatic shotgun with walnut stock that President Clinton used to get a duck last December.
Ugly guns are usually made from polymers.
They bristle with high-tech accessories -- mushroom-shaped pistol grips, ribbed shrouds on the barrel that keep your hand from getting burned.
The surfaces are as dull as office furniture.
"Plain Jane" is how one gun collector describes the look.
Joe Harriton is a member of the National Rifle Association and has a bunch of ugly guns at his firing range in the Poconos.
Several weeks ago, he took me into the back of the range's gun shop to see a few.
There was a Russian-designed AK-47 made in Yugoslavia.
An Israeli Uzi with a folding stock.
An AR-15, Colt's civilian version of the M-16.
Another AR-15, this one in green and olive camouflage.
And an Austrian Steyr AUG, a lightweight matte-green thing, bluntly streamlined, almost like a cartoon gun.
All are among the so-called assault weapons covered by the crime bill, which made it through the Senate on Aug. 25 and is set to become law early this week.
Senator Dianne Feinstein had singled out the AUG, for instance, as the "favorite of drive-by shooters because of its light weight and firepower."


Look Around, Take Notes
Visit gardens to see what's blooming this late in the season.
Take a notebook and jot down your favorites.
The Conservatory Garden at Fifth Avenue and 105th Street has a glorious display of Rudbeckia maxim -- a 10-foot black-eyed Susan with a two-inch dark-brown cone -- and a generous stand of Hibiscus trionum, another tall bloomer with a pale yellow flower and a deep purple eye.


Journal; Van Doren Is Back
Charles Van Doren, the most iconic recluse of the 1950's after J. D. Salinger, lives in quiet retirement in Connecticut.
But his serenity may soon be shattered as it was a cultural eon ago, when he made the cover of Time for winning a fortune on a television quiz show called "21" -- only to lose his extremely good name once "21" and its seemingly 64,000 prime-time imitators were exposed as frauds.
Suddenly the half-forgotten quiz show scandal has attracted the attention of two prominent American story-tellers: Robert Redford, who directed the film "Quiz Show," opening this week, and Richard Greenberg, the playwright whose parallel drama, "Night and Her Stars," is en route to the Manhattan Theater Club in New York.
Both these potential hits find epic import in what some might consider a historical footnote.
Fleeting television celebrities like Mr.
Van Doren, his fellow contestant Herbert Stempel and the slick emcee, Jack Barry, loom as large as characters in "Faust."


Minute of Silence
To the Editor:
As a parent of two boys in South Carolina public schools, I disagree with comments made in your Sept. 4 news article on the minute of silence in South Carolina schools.
I have spoken to many teachers and students who dislike this mandatory religious charade, but their opinions were not represented at all in your article.
Is this balanced reporting?


Schools Pay For Diversity In Languages of Students
It is the first week of classes at the middle school in this middle-class suburb outside Newark, and Devra Weingart, who teaches English as a second language, has never seen so many students from so many countries.
There is Tsvetana, a 12-year-old eighth grader from Ukraine.
And Thinh Vu, a 14-year-old from Vietnam.
There is Jessica, 13, from Guatemala, and Nita, 12, from India.
One by one, they entered a conference room where Ms.
Winegart questioned them to see how much English they knew.


Rosenbaum and Pataki Close on Issues
At first blush the Republican primary for governor on Tuesday seems a contest between two candidates whose visions are canyons apart.
One hopeful, Richard M. Rosenbaum, has deep roots in the liberal Rockefeller wing of the party and says he is crusading to "return the party to the moderates."


Wall Street; A Turnabout by Insiders' on Health Care . . .  Almost
CORPORATE executives and directors of health care companies were among the gloomiest of all industry executives over the last year, actively selling shares of their own companies.
C.D.A./InvestNet, which tracks the trades of corporate insiders, said the heavy selling in the health care group caused it to rank in the bottom 10 among 69 industry groups every month in the year ended June 30.
First place would be held by the industry with the most buying.
But all that began to change in July, when the health care group moved to 48th place.
And at the moment, buying by health care executives is so heavy that it ranks second among the 69 industries.


Corrections
A listing of telephone numbers last Sunday for complaints about community problems and city services misidentified the agency to call about street cleaning.
It is the Department of Sanitation, at (212) 219-8090.
The listing also misstated the number for problems with street lights.
The number is (212) STREETS.


The Jobs Issue And the Primaries
WHEN the singer James Taylor came to Westchester last Monday to help Hamilton Fish Jr. raise funds for his bid to win the 19th Congressional District seat, he chose a song he had composed to commemorate the return of free elections in Brazil in 1985.
"I thought it was appropriate," Mr.
Taylor said, "for such a hopeful time." Presented originally before an audience of 300,000 in a Rio de Janeiro soccer stadium, the song, "Only a Dream in Rio," was also warmly received by the nearly 100 Democrats who filled the courtyard of the Bedford home of Irving Farber, a lawyer, and his wife, Jean.


Highways To Nowhere: Jams Persist
For workers heading into the Hunts Point Market, delays on the once-quick drive have lessened.
Now the trip is just slow.
The cars navigate detour signs or wait in jams that start near the Eastern Boulevard Bridge over the Bronx River.
Later in the day, the work causes truck drivers to return late to the market, sometimes hours late.
"There was so much overtime that had to be paid," said Josephine Infante, executive director of the Hunts Point Local Development Corporation.
"It was a horror scene."


O.K., It's Not November. But It Is Time to Vote.
SO it doesn't seem quite up to the Nov. 8 main event.
Yet, in truth, the round of primaries on Tuesday includes several interesting and important races at every level.
Though the serious run at Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will not come until November, the primary will decide which of two Republicans will make that challenge.
In the Democratic primary against Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the Rev.
Al Sharpton will be seeking to build on his surprising showing in the 1992 Senate primary.
Three fellow Democrats are seeking to wrest the job that the Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, only recently took over.
And in addition to the several competitive Congressional primaries, there are a number of races to watch in the State Legislature.


The Creative Force Behind 'Em All
To the Editor:
Douglas Martin's article "The X-Men Vanquish America"  [ Aug. 21 ]  discussed the X-Men characters and Marvel Comics but neglected to mention the role of my late husband, Jack Kirby, in the creation of the original X-Men and almost every original Marvel character from the 1960's (the Fantastic Four, the Incredible Hulk, the Avengers, Thor, etc.)


Devil His Due Trains Amid Court Battle
Devil His Due was still training yesterday for his next appearance in the $500,000 Woodward Stakes on Saturday, but his legal status was still unresolved after his owners' latest skirmish with the Internal Revenue Service.
The star 5-year-old horse was the subject of a hearing held Thursday in Federal Court in Syracuse, N.Y., where the tax agency argued that his true owner was RALPH LIBUTTI, who has been convicted of income-tax evasion.
The agency had accordingly placed a lien on the horse's earnings, including the $77,000 he won for running second in the Whitney Handicap in Saratoga two weeks ago.
But LiButti's daughter, EDITH, asked the court to lift the lien on the ground that she is the owner of Devil His Due and other horses in the Lion Crest Stable.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
But When It Rains?
THE new mediation sundial at Hofstra University has many people meditating -- on how the sundial works.
The huge timepiece has three large steel structures that look like the triangular skeletons of pyramids.
Students usually tell with Timexes, so this new way makes the intellectual juices flow.


The Spoken-Word Star
MAGGIE ESTEP doesn't have to stray far from her East Village studio to find inspiration.
She constructs humorous spoken pieces out of the pointless situations that occur on her doorstep, from the drug dealers who see her every day but persist in their futile efforts to offer her crack and "smoke" to the male passers-by who yell "Hey, baby" in her direction.
Thanks to MTV, Ms.
Estep's small world has reached a large audience.
Once only a small coffeehouse scene, the spoken-word movement, combining poetry, performance art and stand-up comedy, has now been catapulted to national attention.


Duby McDowell And Kevin Dubay
Patience Peirce McDowell, a political reporter at WFSB-TV in Hartford, and Kevin Gene Dubay, a lawyer in Hartford, were married on Friday in Fenwick, Conn.
The bridegroom's father, Keith E. Dubay of Bristol, Conn., where he is a justice of the peace, officiated at St.
Mary's-by-the-Sea Church.
Ms.
McDowell, who is known as Duby, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Phyllis M. McDowell of New Haven and the late Edward I. McDowell Jr.
The bride's father was a development officer at Quinnipiac College in Hamden, Conn.
Her mother is the founder of Fellowship House, a psychiatric rehabilitation center in New Haven.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $395,000
165 Perry Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; 12-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls, south exposure; maintenance $1,010, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $425,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)


POSTINGS: 3 Buildings, $6.4 Million; 66 Rental Units For Harlem
Manhattan's Harlem neighborhood has another new affordable-housing project: the Lillian Upshur Houses, a $6.4 million, three-building, 66-unit rental development on West 127th Street, between Fifth Avenue and Malcolm X Boulevard.
The project was developed by the Abyssinian Development Corporation, part of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, and is the group's fifth affordable-housing venture in central Harlem.
Tenants began moving in in June.
A dedication for the project, however, was held last month and featured Representative Charles B. Rangel, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church.


Lawyers Contributing Heavily to Campaigns for Attorney General
The primary candidates for New York attorney general raised more than a third of their campaign funds from lawyers and law firms, despite a warning from a bar association that the contributions could create the appearance of favoritism and conflicts of interest.
A computer study of campaign contributions by The New York Times showed that as of 11 days before the primary on Tuesday the lawyers had contributed more than $910,000 of the $2.7 million raised in more than 1,800 separate contributions.


Mutual Funds; Judging the Impact of Television Ads
WHEN you watch cable television news programs, you are probably used to being pitched fast-food hamburgers, cars, beer and other consumer staples.
But mutual funds?
Within the last few years, the fund industry has indeed taken its pitch to television, but its reaction to the medium has so far been mixed.
The big companies are in the game, and a lot of the smaller ones are "testing the waters now," said John A. Jelilian, vice president of Competitrack, a firm in New York that tracks advertising spending by funds, brokerage firms and other financial services companies.


Syracuse's Quarterback Makes Amends
Syracuse 34, Cincinnati 19
Kevin Mason overcame a miserable first half -- one completion, two turnovers -- by leading Syracuse to four second-half touchdowns and a 34-19 victory last night over host Cincinnati.


GIULIANI PROPOSES TOUGHENING LAWS ON X-RATED SHOPS
Saying New York City had to do more to protect its quality of life, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed sweeping new zoning regulations yesterday that would restrict sex-oriented video stores, X-rated theaters and topless bars to a few relatively isolated nonresidential neighborhoods.
The Mayor's proposal, which must now go through a lengthy review process, would prohibit such establishments from opening within 500 feet of residences, schools, houses of worship or one another.
In effect, the restrictions would push them to the city's fringes, even forcing out almost all of those in Times Square.


Restored Tibetan Palace Opens Amid Controversy
AFTER a five-year restoration that has drawn protests from human-rights groups and Tibetan dissidents, the Potala Palace in Lhasa, among the holiest structures in Tibet and the former home of the Dalai Lama, reopened to tourists last month.
The $7 million restoration of the 17th-century hilltop palace is the centerpiece of the Chinese Government's campaign to expand tourism in Tibet, the "Rooftop of the World," which China invaded in 1950 and later annexed.


THE NEVER WIFE
I too, was raised Catholic and graduated first in my high-school class.
Now in my second year at Harvard, I am also considering law school.
Most of all, however, I look forward to married life "like good Catholic girls," to borrow a phrase from your author.
I don't understand why Cadigan regrets "singing 'Kumbaya' " and "playing guitar" at Mass while her generation "went to Woodstock." While my friends attended the Woodstock reunion in Saugerties last month, I was at Young New York '94, a gathering of thousands of Catholic young people on the grounds of St.
Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers.
In October, we will gather again to welcome Pope John Paul II to New York.


Conversations: Laurie B. Midgette; Lured by Fate (and Love of Children) To Be a Teacher in East New York
LAURIE B. MIDGETTE teaches English in a high school on a jagged edge of Brooklyn.
She stands at a blackboard and likens writing to dance, the travails of Romeo and Juliet to an interethnic, urban romance.
In the background lie the streets of East New York.
Thomas Jefferson High School, where Ms.
Midgette has taught for four years, looms large in this poor community.
Its cream-colored walls stand in contrast to the red brick of the housing projects that sit nearby.


SMALLPOX IS DEAD. LONG LIVE SMALLPOX.
Albert Camus, for whom smallpox was a metaphor for moral, as well as physical, disease (and also, paradoxically, for life, with all its "misfortune and instruction"), concluded in his novel "The Plague" "that the virus of the plague never dies or disappears; that it can remain dormant for years in furniture and bedding; that it waits patiently in bedrooms, basements, trunks, hankies and red tape" ("Smallpox Is Dead. Long Live Smallpox." by Charles Siebert, Aug. 21).
Could it also be dormant in what is left of the bodies of its 1975 Bangladesh victims, as well as frozen in the bio safety-level labs in the United States and Russia?


Julia H. Doern, Andrew Zagoren
Julia Helen Doern, a daughter of John O. Doern and the late Alice W. Doern of North Tarrytown, N.Y., is to be married today to Andrew Havis Zagoren, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Zagoren of Edison, N.J.
The Rev.
Maria Washington Eddy is to officiate at Christ Episcopal Church in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride is an associate at Davis, Brody &amp; Associates, an architectural firm in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as a senior vice president and associate creative director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York.


BEST SELLERS: September 11, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
3
28
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
2
7
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
4
4
14
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
5
6
109
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
6
5
12
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
7
7
4
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) An American woman's role as a chaperone in Georgian England brings her a surprising romance.
8
10
2
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) On a return to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters many strange facets of life and a murderer he once knew.
9
8
6
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
10
9
22
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) Murder in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
11
11
3
THE HIDDEN CITY, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $23.) In the "Tamuli" fantasy series, heroes and gods confront forces that shape destiny.
12
13
8
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman tries to cope after an act of violence destroys her perfect family life.
13
3
DIXIE CITY JAM, by James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $22.95.) The search for a sunken Nazi submarine stirs up trouble for a New Orleans detective.
14
14
12
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
15
1
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about the philosophy of its aborigines.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
70
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
4
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of an American family.
3
4
27
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
6
38
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
5
4
OCTOBER 1964, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $24.) The season in which the Cardinals beat the Yankees, reflecting great changes in baseball and society.
6
1
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
7
8
7
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
8
7
12
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
9
3
5
THE TRIBE OF TIGER, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) The nature and culture of cats.
10
10
5
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent, lady's man and freeloader.
11
9
9
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
12
12
13
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
13
13
4
FEAR OF FIFTY, by Erica Jong. (HarperCollins, $24.) A "midlife memoir" by the novelist, poet, essayist and feminist.
14
15
34
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
15
14
6
GAL: A True Life, by Ruthie Bolton. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) A black woman recalls her troubled childhood in Charleston, S.C.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
68
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
1
20
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
20
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of oscillating designs.
4
1
SMART EXERCISE, by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) How to burn fat and increase physical fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 27, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE CIVILIZATION OF EUROPE IN THE RENAISSANCE, by John Hale. (Atheneum, $35.) On the canvas of a whole continent, a distinguished historian portrays the expanding, reforming, self-consciously new Europe that led to where we live now.
DAISY BATES IN THE DESERT, by Julia Blackburn. (Pantheon, $22.) A bold biography whose author risks identifying with the consciousness of her subject, an adventurer, a self-taught anthropologist and a liar who invented her past anew at every turning of her life.
DR.
JOHNSON &amp; MR.
SAVAGE, by Richard Holmes. (Pantheon, $23.) Mr.
Holmes re-creates Johnson's pre-Boswellian existence as a sort of belated adolescent, an impoverished bohemian wandering the streets of London with his friend, the barely tolerable Savage, whose biography became Johnson's first great work in prose.
IN THE TENNESSEE COUNTRY, by Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $21.) In mellow, elegant prose, this fine novel follows the quest of an academic hustler and failed artist to pin down a cousin who escaped from history a generation after the Civil War.
THE LAUREL AND THE IVY: The Story of Charles Stewart Parnell and Irish Nationalism, by Robert Kee. (Hamish Hamilton/Viking, $29.95.) An intelligent, shrewd examination of Ireland's pre-eminent nationalist of the 1880's and of the absurd domestic drama that brought him down.
MR.
VERTIGO, by Paul Auster. (Viking, $21.95.) A badly abused 9-year-old boy is taught to fly by a mysterious Master Yehudi in this fanciful novel of an education for death or for art, controlled by the metaphorical meanings of flight.
MY OWN COUNTRY: A Doctor's Story of a Town and Its People in the Age of AIDS, by Abraham Verghese. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An eloquent personal memoir of a foreign-born doctor's experience in Tennessee, where he arrived just in time to encounter and treat men returning home with the AIDS they caught in the big city.
THE REPUBLIC OF WHORES: A Fragment From the Time of the Cults, by Josef Skvorecky. (Ecco, $21.) Published in Czech in 1971, this keen comic novel concerns a Warsaw Pact tank commander and his men, who hate their allies far more than their prospective American enemies.
SEX AND SUITS, by Anne Hollander. (Knopf, $25.) An art historian endorses fashion's claim to be an art, concentrating on the development of the tailored suit as an aspect of modernism.
THE STORIES OF STEPHEN DIXON, by Stephen Dixon. (Holt, $25.) Selected from 30 years of Mr.
Dixon's work, these stories play unsettling variations on several grand themes: relations between the sexes, the plight of the individual in a hostile society, the instability of truth.
A STRANGER IN THIS WORLD, by Kevin Canty. (Doubleday, $20.) A debut collection of sharp, smart short stories about people caught at the intersection between what they know they should do and what they can't help doing.


Books, or What?
To the Editor:
Sarah Lyall's essay on new publishing media ("Are These Books, or What? CD-ROM and the Literary Industry," Aug. 14) was interesting but too narrow in scope.
She rightly points out that CD-ROM's are cheaper to manufacture than books, but she neglects to mention that they are more expensive to develop -- far more expensive.
Any team-based production (a film, electronic game, reference work or textbook, for instance) is far costlier to develop than the average book is to write.
Book publishers whose primary income comes from games, textbooks and reference books might find new media of long-term interest, but others ought to remind themselves that complexity, subtlety, intellectual rigor and originality have a hard time clearing the economic hurdles of the marketplace -- if new media cost a lot to develop, each title will need a mass audience to make the undertaking viable.
Books, on the other hand, bring good and unusual ideas to people, and they do it cheaply.
ROBERT LAVELLE  Holliston, Mass.


A Marital Nightmare, And All Peru Is Watching
FROM the beginning, the one thing you could count on from Alberto Fujimori was his ability to astound Peru.
Four years ago, when the country was falling apart, he got himself elected President by portraying himself as the honest descendant of samurais who could put things back together.
Two years ago, his image of trustworthiness was so strong that Peruvians trusted him to disband Congress and assume one-man rule.
But he's not the only one in his family who can astound.
Now comes his wife, outraged and eager to bring him down.
With the war against Maoist guerrillas going well, and the economy gaining some steam, what all Peru is talking about these days is Susana Higuchi.


'Reverse Snobbery'
To the Editor:
Instead of knocking the likes of Toscanini, Schnabel and Sibelius and complaining about the conservative nature of orchestral programming, Virgil Thomson could have done something truly anti-snobbish and truly productive: He could have shown The Tribune's readers how to separate hype and celebrity from artistic accomplishment, and how to see the value in the accomplishments of all good composers and musicians, whether celebrated or obscure, living or dead.


Presidio's New Role: A National Park
San Francisco's historic Presidio has been a military post for 218 years under Spanish, Mexican and, since 1846, United States Army control.
On Oct. 1, the installation will convert from military garrison to national park.
The 1,480-acre Presidio has about 800 acres of open space, which is expected to increase to 1,000 by 2010.
About 23 percent of the Presidio will remain occupied and maintained by the Army as headquarters of the Sixth Army.
The income from the continued military presence in the Presidio will be used to reduce National Park Service expenditures.


On Washington; Resurrection
In the Nouveau Deco splendor of the River Club in Georgetown, Marion Barry is talking tough on crime.
The former Mayor of Washington, who is campaigning to win that job back, tells a group of black professionals that he will work to get guns off the streets.
"I met with the F.B.I., those in charge of the F.B.I. here, three or four months ago about their gun program," he says, and then suddenly stops, grinning slyly.
"That was kind of ironic, wasn't it?"


Hudson Rafting
To the Editor: Like Amy Engeler, I too had a harrowing adventure on a Hudson River raft tour that took place about 10 years ago.
At the end of a rather uneventful first day, as our group of eight was making camp on the riverbank, two rafts floated by.
Our guide yelled to them that there was no safe landing place farther on that they could reach before dark, but their leader answered that they were only on a day trip and could make it to town.


Cairo Visitors Hear Plea To End Genital Maiming
The doctor was conservatively dressed: every strand of hair covered by an enormous scarf, and the rest of her buried under yards of skirt and tunic.
But she held aloft a brown-skinned, anatomically correct wooden model of female buttocks and genitals.
Clinically and without a hint of coyness, she demonstrated to an audience of male and female social workers exactly what genital mutilation is, and what irreversible damage it inflicts on little girls all over Egypt.


Jacqueline Preiss, Larry Weitzman
Jacqueline Preiss, a daughter of Marcia and Ralph Preiss of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., is to be married today to Larry Weitzman, a son of Judy Weitzman and Dr.
Sol Weitzman of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Jordan B. Millstein is to perform the ceremony at the Valeur Mansion in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
The bride, 30, is an interior designer at Silver &amp; Ziskind, an architectural firm in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College and the Parsons School of Design.
Her father retired as a senior engineer at the International Business Machines Corporation's development laboratory in Poughkeepsie.
Her mother is a dance booking agent in New York.


INSIDE
Ethics Questions and Apathy In Attorney General's Race
The close Attorney General's race in New York has raised ethical questions about campaign spending by law firms.
At the same time, the race appears to be generating little interest among voters.
Pages 37 and 56.


Fare of the 50's: Italian, and Then Some
AMARCORD * (212) 935-3535; 7 East 59th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
The setting is stylish: wood accents, soft fabric and beautiful flowers, pictures of women's legs adorning the walls.
The cooking pays homage to the rich culinary tradition of Emilia-Romagna, a northern region of Italy.
Begin with a staple: the piadina del giorno, a crunchy griddled bread served with toppings like the lumpy squaquerone cheese.


Historians Cry 'Fault' Over Tennis Court Proposal
"What's a mansion without a tennis court?" said Henry J. Stern, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
It depends on whom you ask.
The Parks Department, Community Board 8 and Councilwoman June M. Eisland will seek final approval from the Art Commission tomorrow to build six courts 250 feet east of the Van Cortlandt Mansion at the southeast corner of the Van Cortlandt Park parade ground.
The commission oversees construction on city property.


Jolynn Childers, H. Y. Dellinger
Jolynn Childers, the daughter of Janice L. Bryant of Asheville, N.C., and John R. Childers of Fruitland Park, Fla., was married yesterday to Hampton Yeats Dellinger, a son of Anne M. and Walter Dellinger of Washington.
The Rev.
Amelia Stinson-Wesley, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Biltmore Estate in Asheville.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 27, completed clerkships this month at the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, she in Baltimore and he in Durham, N.C.
Later this month, the bride is to become a Bristow Fellow in the Solicitor General's Office in the Justice Department in Washington.
She graduated from Columbia University, and received a master's degree in women's studies and a law degree, both from Duke University.
Her father is a retired electronics engineer.
Her mother is the director of constituent services, in Asheville, for Gov.
James B. Hunt Jr. of North Carolina.


Clarifying the Disabilities Law
To the Editor:
"The New Disability Law Guidelines" (At Work, Aug. 7) reports that after a job offer, "employers may require the candidate to take a medical examination" that might justify withdrawal of the offer.
Actually, the Americans with Disabilities Act allows employers to require medical examinations only if they are required of all newly hired people in a job category, not just those with possible disabilities.


Laurie Seidler, Maurice Cinquini
Laurie Seidler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee J. Seidler of Sanibel, Fla., was married yesterday to Maurice Cinquini, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolfo Cinquini of Perth, Australia.
Jill-Ellen Fuller, a marriage celebrant of New South Wales, officiated at Freshwater Restaurant on the Beach in Sydney, Australia.
The bride, 31, is keeping her name.
She is the editor of the Dow Jones Telerate service in Sydney.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a former senior managing director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Lynn Seidler, retired as executive director of the Shubert Foundation in New York.


Julia R. Banks, David E. Rubel
Julia Ruth Banks, an editor at Ariel Books in Cos Cob, Conn., was married yesterday to David Eric Rubel, the president of Agincourt Press, a book production company in New York.
The Rev.
Stephen Kisslinger, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Valeur Mansion in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Mrs.
Rubel, 29, is a daughter of Joann Schmeling, a retired schoolteacher in Escanaba, Mich., and the late Robert F. Banks.
She is a stepdaughter of Robert Schmeling.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Western Michigan University.


Florida Makes a Case To Regain No. 1 Spot
Florida 73, Kentucky 7
Florida, ranked No. 2 by The Associated Press, isn't eager to join a debate over who should be No. 1.


Tomato in Old World
To the Editor:
The caption on your Sept. 4 Week in Review photograph of the tomato-throwing festival in Spain states that the tradition dates back 9 or 10 centuries.
The tomato did not exist in Europe before Columbus brought it from the New World just 5 centuries ago.
MICHAEL RUTTENBERG Berkeley, Calif., Sept. 4, 1994


Employee Charged With Hospital Rape
A nurse's aide at St.
Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx was charged yesterday with posing as a doctor and raping a patient on Tuesday, the police said.


Bookshelf
THE TIN PRINCESS.
By Philip Pullman.
Knopf. $16. (Ages 10 and up) It's 1882 in a central European country called Razkavia, and a trio of characters from the popular Sally Lockhart trilogy -- adventures set in England -- reappear in another caper.
COUNTING JENNIE.
Written and illustrated by Helena Clare Pittman.
Carolrhoda. $19.95. (Ages 4 to 8) That Jennie just counts everything: hats, bus stops, flowers, pajamas.
There is a list at the end of the book of the sometimes surprising things, embedded in the illustrations, that Jennie sees on her way to school.


Quebec May Restore Separatists to Power
Quebecers seem poised to elect a government on Monday that is committed to breaking away from Canada.
Almost all polls indicate that Jacques Parizeau, 64, leader of the separatist Parti Quebecois and a former provincial Finance Minister, will defeat Premier Daniel Johnson, 49, of the Liberal Party, a former business executive and the most federalist Premier in several generations.


Man Charged in Shootings Was Apparently Not Aiming at Cars
A truck driver, who apparently took target practice from a furniture warehouse loading dock in Carle Place, L.I., was charged with reckless endangerment yesterday in the shootings Thursday morning in which three cars on the Meadowbrook Parkway were fired upon and two of them were struck, the police said.
Investigators said that they did not believe the truck driver intended to hit the cars, or that he was the sniper sought in five shootings earlier this summer, one of which killed a man.


The Owner and the Neighbors: Opposite Views of the Pornography Issue
In front of the EcsXXXtasy adult video store in Queens Village yesterday, a 13-year-old boy walked up to the door and then suddenly turned around, embarrassed, when he realized what was inside.
With a bewildered look on his face, the boy, who would not give his name, walked away, but not before catching the attention of Mara Burns, an area resident who has been leading a campaign to close the store for nearly three months.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Consumer prices, August, percent change
0.3
0.3
Wednesday
Retail sales, August, percent change
-0.1
0.7
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
330
330
Business inventories, July, percent change
0.4
0.6
Friday
Industrial production, August, pct. change
0.2
0.4
Capacity utilization, August, percent
83.9
84.0
This Week's Numbers
Tuesday
Atlanta Fed business outlook survey
Wednesday
Federal Reserve to release beige book
Thursday
Bundesbank Council meeting
*4*Philadelphia Fed business outlook survey


Nicole K. Efros, Ethan Kaufman
Nicole Karen Efros and Ethan Ezekiel Kaufman, lawyers in New York, are to be married today at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Balfour Brickner is to perform the ceremony.
The bride, 31, is an associate at Todtman, Young, Tunick, Nachamie, Hendler &amp; Spizz.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Magdalena and Norbert Efros of Haworth, N.J.
Her father, now retired, was an owner of Lite Industries, safety clothing manufacturers in Madison, N.J.
Her mother is a systems engineer at Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J.


SHANNON FAULKNER
HERE IS A PHOTOGRAPH OF Shannon Faulkner in her parents' house that catches her at sweet 16, her long, dark hair swept off her face, her cheeks a perfect blush, her mouth a pouting smile.
It is a bland image devoid of character, a mall portrait of Everygirl setting out for the prom, half shy, half devilish, the picture of a young woman drifting toward a mythic adulthood without drudgery or struggle.
She looks quite different now.
Her hair -- still long despite the Citadel's much-publicized intent to shave it -- has streaks of lighter shades.
Her eyes are more guarded, her expression more fixed.
During an 18-month battle against the Charleston, S.C., military college, she has gained weight and character and a kind of heaviness of the soul.
Although she was admitted as a day student in January, she will not give up her fight to become the first woman to take part in the round-the-clock regimen of the corps of cadets.
Long days in the courtroom have sharpened her.
A life of extraordinary isolation on campus -- where her presence is a challenge to the Citadel's commitment to forging hard-tempered masculinity -- has lent her a wariness she never had before.


SUNDAY, September 11, 1994; Pop! Go the Coal Fumes
Everyone is used to drinking soda in recycled cans and bottles.
But who knew that the fizz in soda pop was often recycled too?
The Bellingham Carbon Dioxide Recovery Facility, in Bellingham, Mass., strips CO2 from the fumes belched from a local coal-based power plant.
The facility channels the toxic flue gases into a filtering system that gleans 99.99 percent pure carbon dioxide, which is then liquefied and sold to the food-service industry.


Thinking Small In a Big-Time Heist
What struck New York City's police from the start was not what two audacious robbers stole but what they left behind.
And that was an element in figuring out whom to charge with storming into Tiffany's flagship store last Sunday and escaping with 464 pieces of jewelry valued at $1.9 million, and whom to accuse of helping them.
Yesterday, just six days after the bold but bungled robbery, the police arrested six men.
They included the store's assistant security manager, a security guard and three confederates, said Police Officer Merri Pearsall, a department spokeswoman.


Sports of The Times; Graf's Back Aches, And Tennis Feels Pain
THERE goes the franchise.
The trouble with women's tennis is that the best battles often take place off the court, but yesterday there were two gripping matches in the finals of the United States Open.
The arcane world of women's tennis could have done without the duel between Steffi Graf and her aching back, but the other match was delightful.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the human trampoline from Catalonia in Spain, chased down enough balls to win her first major-major (Wimbledon or the Open) championship, 1-6, 7-6 (7-3), 6-4.


JAZZ
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
WESS ANDERSON He is best known for his alto saxophone work with Wynton Marsalis; his pungent debut album, "Warmdaddy in the Garden of Swing" (Atlantic), will feature his almost preternaturally catchy writing.
He'll throw a party for the album by spending five nights at the Iridium, his first important show in New York leading his own group.
Sept. 20-24.


The Man Who Drank Life in Great Gulps
BALZAC A Life.
By Graham Robb.
Illustrated. 521 pp.
New York:  W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $35.


Clubs Go to the Rescue Of Gardens in Need
VISITORS to Gillette Castle State Park in East Haddam invariably ooh and ah over the bright flower beds in the formal gardens surrounding the medieval-style stone building on a bluff high above the Connecticut River, former home of the actor William Gillette.
If they give a thought as to who is responsible for the gardens' care, they probably assume that the state has provided it, or that the actor, famed for his portrayal of Sherlock Holmes, bequeathed the necessary funds.
Neither is the case.
The beds are planted each spring by members by the East Haddam Garden Club, just one example of the burgeoning cooperation between the Federated Garden Clubs of Connecticut and the Parks Division of the Department of Environmental Protection in Hartford.
A Preserve Our Parks Committee was established three years ago, with Agatha Carroll of North Haven as chairwoman, to serve as liaison between the department and a statewide network of volunteers to provide gardening expertise and muscle at a time of budget constraints.
Parks with formal landscapes were specifically targeted.


THE NEVER WIFE
As a Catholic who has been skeptical of the church's granting of marriage annulments, I was puzzled by Cadigan's essay.
She believes the process to be cruel and cynical, yet the rejection of her former husband's petition for the annulment seems to show that the church does indeed weigh the evidence and does not nullify marriages as automatically as she had thought.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 11, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
8
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
2
11
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
4
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
5
2
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
6
13
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
30
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
8
3
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
9
22
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
10
12
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
11
3
THE WYNDHAM LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A demanding earl and a serene duchess in Regency England.
12
2
THUNDER POINT, by Jack Higgins. (Berkley, $5.99.) The discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War II scandals.
13*
7
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother and daughter win $60 million.
14
7
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which he stumbled.
15
8
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Vintage, $12.) The adventures of a 16-year-old Texas vaquero in the Mexico of 1950.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
35
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
566
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
2
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime cases reported by a veteran policewoman.
4*
19
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
5
82
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
35
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
7
18
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of mental illness.
8*
17
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
9
8
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past and present.
10
16
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
11*
45
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
12*
2
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
13
66
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
14*
152
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
15*
18
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
16*
155
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
3
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
2
182
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
15
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
4
44
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 27, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


London Parks
To the Editor: Thanks for that delightful tour of the shaded City of London parks and churchyards ("Green Havens in London's Heart," July 10).
The article enabled me to "revisit" many of the places my father took me as a child, including the ruins of St.
Mary Aldermanbury.
Nazi incendiary bombs wrecked this and many other Wren masterpieces, and all that stood after the war were the blackened walls.
In the 1960's, the stones of St.
Mary Aldermanbury were taken down and shipped across the Atlantic to be put back together at Westminster College in Fulton, Mo., where Winston Churchill had made his "Iron Curtain" speech.
The faithfully restored church was rehallowed 25 years ago this May.
Your front-page photograph shows the sandstone bases of the columns, which could not be moved from the original site.
But the 12 columns they supported are in Fulton.


ART
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
September
"FACE-OFF: THE PORTRAIT IN RECENT ART" Someone had to do it: an exhibition of works in all media examining the new, nontraditional uses to which 22 American and European artists, including Alex Katz, Janine Antoni and Alice Neel, have put contemporary portraiture, often to undo cultural stereotypes.
Through Oct. 30, Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia. (215-898-7108)


Primary Day: the Basics
Primary electgions will be held on Tuesday in New York for several statewide offices and legislative and Congressional seats.
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
New York City voters with questions about polling places may call (212) VOTE-NYC.


Topics of The Times; Thinking Thin About Pork
The National Pork Producers' Council is indignant that its product's good name means "fat" in the lexicon of politics.
"Pork barrel" spending is money earmarked by members of Congress and state legislatures for local projects designed to find favor with voters.
"If the government could trim as much fat from its budget as we've been able to cut from pork over the last 20 years, we'd all be better off," says Robin Kline, public relations director at the council's Des Moines headquarters.
Producers raise leaner hogs now.
A typical pork chop today, she says, has much less fat than it had two decades ago, even less than a skinless chicken leg.


ARCHITECTURE
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
As usual, programs change, and some events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once appear at the bottom of page 61.
EXHIBITIONS


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Exercise Equipment Supplier To Expand for Retail Sales
One of the city's largest suppliers of exercise equipment, the Gym Source, has been working out of a tiny midtown showroom, only 1,200 square feet at 45 East 51st Street, for the last six years.


Agassi the Upset King to Duel With Stich
Masked this time around as a comeback kid with an overgrown 5 o'clock shadow, the unpredictable but suddenly unflappable Andre Agassi, that swarthy upset artist from Las Vegas, Nev., reached his second career United States Open final just before sundown yesterday by ousting ninth-seeded Todd Martin, 6-3, 4-6, 6-2, 6-3, on the chilly, windswept Stadium Court.
"I feel like it's my arena," he said after a semifinal tour de force in which his self-control -- he made only 16 unforced errors and yielded just two break points -- proved more of a factor than the invasive breeze and Martin's invasive serve.


Sanchez Smiles As Graf Winces
If only life were as simple as a 22-minute first set.
If only Steffi Graf's two opponents -- Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Graf's ailing back -- had stayed down when she had them down.
Then Graf would still be the undisputed champion of women's tennis, its last remaining icon, instead of another troubled superstar with a future as questionable as the sport's.
An emotional 1-6, 7-6 (7-3), 6-4 comeback victory by Sanchez Vicario for the United States Open championship was the popular outcome on the Stadium Court yesterday, a just reward for the 22-year-old Spaniard's extraordinary resolve, moxie and adaptability.


The New Agassi Style Now Has Substance
With the sunshine blazing off his three earrings and his opponent in abject surrender to his three-set manifesto, Andre Agassi, unseeded but far from unsung, brought his remedial United States Open run to a crashing crescendo yesterday by trouncing Michael Stich of Germany, 6-1, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5.
"I can't believe it's all over," said the 24-year-old Las Vegan of what he called a two-week "moment of belief" where he put his ranking and reputation on the line and put his game back together with a combination of talent, discipline, aggression and street smarts supplied by his newest coach, Brad Gilbert.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  SOUTH AFRICA'S BINDING FORCE
Watching Nelson Mandela in action for a day leaves little question that his unique patriarchal authority is the main force binding the diverse country together.
A1


I.B.M. and Compaq Diverge On Machines Called Servers
The International Business Machines Corporation and the Compaq Computer Corporation are to announce today new computers that they both call servers, but they reach that designation by radically different routes.
I.B.M.'s six machines offer an alternative to the traditional mainframe, while Compaq's four computers are evidence of the microcomputer's growing role.


Tamino's Quest, in a Language Closer to Home
When the New York City Opera brought out its dreamily handsome Lotfi Mansouri production of "The Magic Flute" in 1987, it chose to present the work in the original German.
For a 1992 revival, the company switched to Andrew Porter's English translation, and English was heard again when the production resurfaced on Friday night.
The choice between German and English in "The Magic Flute" is a complicated one, and the availability of supertitles at the City Opera oddly complicates things further.
The opera is a singspiel, and there is a fair amount of spiel between songs.
It makes no sense to have singers jabbering at one another in German with English translations overhead.
A more pressing problem for a company stocked with younger American singers is that spoken German requires a far greater degree of fluency than German sung.


A Reopening of Wounds in Haft Family Struggle
Lurid accusations of infidelity, physical abuse, threatened violence and dishonesty rent the Haft family's retailing and real estate empire last year.
And in the last few weeks, the family's battles have become nastier.
In the first round last year, Herbert H. Haft, the patriarch, turned against the son, Robert M. Haft, 41, who was his closest partner and heir apparent.
Now in the latest set of blows and parries, Herbert's one remaining ally within the family, his younger son, Ronald S. Haft, 35, has set out to break the father's grip on the family-controlled Dart Group Corporation, which owns Crown Books, Trak Auto, Shoppers Food Warehouse and other stores.


Supervising


Market Place; A new rule will let a bit of light shine on municipal bond prices.
THE municipal bond business, which has heretofore treated actual prices of bonds as a secret to be withheld from the public, has decided to begin disclosing prices of actively traded bonds starting in January.
The disclosure plan, to be announced today in New York by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, falls well short of the disclosure taken for granted in the stock market.
But it could revolutionize the municipal bond business by providing investors with better information, while leading to lower profit margins for dealers.


Crash Investigators Examine Condition of Right Engine
Federal investigators have found new evidence that the right engine of the USAir jet that crashed on Thursday might have malfunctioned during flight, officials of the National Transportation Safety Board said tonight.
The evidence, while not conclusive, increased their suspicion that the engine's thrust reverser, a braking mechanism, might have partially deployed.
They also said that engine's thrust reverser had been repaired a little more than two months ago.


Unseeded, Unshaven and Unbeatable


Powlus Who? Michigan Has a Quarterback of Its Own
On another storybook Saturday afternoon in South Bend, Ind., Ron Powlus was good, but Todd Collins was just a little bit better.
Powlus, the sophomore quarterback who is already being mentioned in the same breath as past Irish legends, performed what appeared to be another last-minute miracle for Notre Dame when he hit Derrick Mayes in the back of the end zone for a 7-yard touchdown with 52 seconds left and a 24-23 lead over Michigan.


Police Recover More Than Half of Tiffany Loot
With six suspects in custody in the $1.9 million Tiffany jewelry robbery, the police displayed a treasure trove of diamond necklaces, gold watches and gem-encrusted rings and bracelets yesterday and said more than half the loot had been recovered.
Of 464 items stolen in the Sept. 4 midnight holdup at Tiffany &amp; Company, at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street, 248 pieces were recovered, said Sgt.
Edward Caro, a police spokesman.


Kevorkian's Sister, 68, Dies
Margaret Janus, who helped her brother, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, in assisted suicides, died today at Sinai Hospital here.
She was 68 and lived in Troy, Mich.
The cause was a heart attack, said her physician, Dr. Stanley Levy.


Essay; Clinton's Voodoo Intervention
Bill Clinton is giving intervention a bad name.
Used to be, in the good old days, a command decision was made by an awesomely burdened President to knock out a dictator.
Our lean-and-mean armed forces were given secret orders or the C.I.A.'s dirty-tricks department was "tasked" and had its necessary finding backdated.
Patriotic editors refrained from publishing troop movements; leaks were scornfully denied.


Police Battle Troubled Officers' Mistrust of Counseling
They are supposed to stand tall and stoic against the vagaries and perils of their work.
Yet police officers find themselves vulnerable to the painful psychodramas that engulf other people.
Ten members of New York's police force have killed themselves this year, equaling the number in 1987, the worst year until now.
The suicides, including two last Tuesday, have brought renewed attention to a long-smoldering problem on the police force: the depth of suspicion that troubled officers have for the department's array of counseling services.
Most officers shun them for fear of jeopardizing their careers or out of a stubborn attitude that they should deal with their own ordeals.
And many sergeants are loath to report tormented officers because they do not want to be looked upon as the heavy.
Of the 10 policemen who took their lives this year, only one was being treated by a department psychologist.


Baseball Is Heading For Final Inning of '94
Bud Selig, four days into his third year as baseball's acting commissioner, is only a series of telephone calls away from formally canceling the rest of the season and the 89-year run of the World Series.
Selig said yesterday that he had not decided when he would make an announcement, but there was no doubt left that he would announce by Wednesday that the 1994 season is history, bad history though it may be.


Hours for Voting in the Primary
Primary elections will be held tomorrow in New York and Connecticut for several statewide offices and legislative and Congressional seats.
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City and in Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Orange, Ulster and Erie counties, and from noon to 9 P.M. elsewhere in New York State.


Pats Get The Points But Not A Victory
For the second straight Sunday, Drew Bledsoe had a marvelous day.
He finished 26 for 42 for 380 yards to 7 different receivers, with 3 touchdowns and 2 interceptions.
For the second straight Sunday, the Patriots scored 35 points.
And yet, they are 0-2.


Ammirati Names Department Heads
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas has named heads of departments as the agency continues to combine operations of its two predecessors, Ammirati &amp; Puris and the New York office of Lintas Worldwide.
As with the merged agency's top positions, the department heads come from Ammirati.
The appointments were announced last week.
Philip Palazzo, 38, who had been executive vice president, general manager and chief financial officer at Ammirati, takes the same positions at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas.
Carlos Hernandez, who was executive vice president and chief financial officer at Lintas New York, will move to a finance post at Lintas Worldwide.


Bill Would Curb Suits On S.&amp; L.'s
An obscure provision of the Clinton Administration's interstate banking bill, quietly inserted during a House-Senate conference, would effectively prevent Federal regulators from pursuing most negligence cases against the officers, directors, lawyers and accountants of failed savings and loan institutions.
Federal regulators estimate that it would cost the Government up to $1.6 billion in lost cases against individuals who contributed to the collapse of the savings and loan industry, which so far has cost the taxpayers $200 billion.


Nedved Might Just Fit In With Rangers
If and when Mark Messier settles his contract dispute and rejoins the Rangers, it is likely that he would reclaim his status as first-line center on the Stanley Cup champions.
Until then, the chair is empty, unless someone decides to keep it warm.
Perhaps that person will be Petr Nedved, who joined the team this summer in the trade with St.
Louis that helped settle the Mike Keenan affair.
Nedved impressed many onlookers today with one goal and one assist as the team opened its camp with a pair of scrimmages at the Civic Center.


Bosnia: Ease Both Embargoes
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia is now willing to let international observers monitor the trade embargo he has imposed on the Bosnian Serbs.
In return, the U.S., Britain, France, Germany and Russia will ask the U.N.
Security Council to begin easing sanctions on the Yugoslav Federation, now consisting only of Serbia and Montenegro.
That makes sense -- if the monitors can verify that the embargo is really being enforced.
The U.N. imposed sanctions against Yugoslavia to get Belgrade to cut off the Bosnian Serbs.
If that is what Belgrade is now doing, it deserves relief.
The first steps planned, reopening Yugoslavia's airports to international flights and allowing its citizens to participate in international sporting and cultural events, are harmless enough in themselves.


For Giuliani, Primary Dance Is the Sidestep
Picture these two late-summer snapshots from the New York campaign scrapbook:
On the left, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Democratic Party's poet laureate, stands shoulder to shoulder in his native Queens with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the city's first Republican Mayor in a generation, who effusively lauds the Governor's leadership and vision at the ground breaking for a major real-estate development there.


Blimp Bound for U.S. Open Touches Down Against House
A 200-foot-long blimp bound for the United States Open tennis championships lost pressure and touched down against a house on a quiet dead-end street in Nassau County this morning.
No one was injured, but the airship took down several power lines as it landed and deflated.
The blimp, carrying two pilots and a photographer to the event in Flushing Meadows, Queens, had taken off from Republic Airport in Farmingdale at 10:30 A.M., but soon started to lose pressure, said Capt.
Peter Buckley, chief aviator for Airship International, the Florida company that operates the craft.


CHRONICLE
In her day, Nancy Lady Keith, who died in 1990 at the age of 73, was considered the epitome of style, taste and beauty.
On Sept. 20, Sotheby's will auction a collection of decorative objects and artifacts owned by Lady Keith, the socialite who was known as Slim.
Lady Keith was married to, and divorced from, Howard Hawks, the director and producer, Leland Hayward, the producer, and Lord Kenneth Keith, a British merchant banker, and lived in seven residences in California, New York, Connecticut and England.


Soon, a Serious Governor's Race
So far, this has not been an edifying gubernatorial race.
New York is a proud but uneasy state with big problems like crime, education, a crushing Medicaid burden, a swollen public payroll and a stubborn recession.
But the issues that have so far dominated public attention include Republican front-runner George Pataki's real estate ventures, Gov.
Mario Cuomo's speaking fees and the question of who is paying for the nursing home-care of Mr.
Cuomo's mother and Mr.
Pataki's father.
Each side has also filed a lawsuit accusing the other of breaking the legal limits on campaign contributions.


In Minnesota, a Campaign Focuses on Religion
This polite but stern Minnesota town could have been drawn from the pages of a Sinclair Lewis novel, the kind of straight-arrow place where children learn early that the Ten Commandments were not meant as mere suggestions.
For conservative Christians, who are backing Allen Quist for the Republican nomination for governor in the primary election on Tuesday, any chance for victory rests on strong support in towns like Albert Lea, 80 miles south of the liberalism and feminist politics of Minneapolis and St.
Paul.
Mr.
Quist, a farmer and former state representative, who was also once a religion teacher, is probably best known in the state for having said that men have a "genetic predisposition" to head households.


Active Stocks Advisory
The weekly Active Stocks table that normally appears in Monday sections of Business Day is not included today because it apparently contains incorrect final prices for several leading stocks.


A Day in the Life of Mandela: Charm, Control, a Bit of Acid
Nelson Mandela, South Africa's indispensable man, settled into the seat of his presidential jet.
He propped his chronically swollen feet on two pillows, accepted a bowl of cereal and a plate of fruit, and commenced a daylong demonstration of his art of the presidency.
It was 6 A.M. on his 122d day as liberator-turned-chief-executive, and he had agreed to let two reporters watch him do his job.
Never a man oblivious of his audience, Mr.
Mandela promptly embarked on a campaign of seductive engagement: deliberate charm, disarming confidences, a command of details mustered in defense of crisp convictions.


Where Jetliner Crashed, A Grim, Difficult Search
Scores of bright red-orange flags, the color of autumn leaves, spread across the shaded forest floor, each one indicating where human remains from USAir Flight 427 had come to rest.
Down a hill, a sheet of white metal could be seen through the saplings and foliage.
Tom Haueter, chief on-scene investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board, said it was a piece of the Boeing 737's left wing.
A recovery worker in a white protective jumpsuit moved through the bushes, searching for remains of the 132 passengers and crew members.


William T. Langan; Energy Official, 57
William T. Langan, who worked to develop clean-burning coal for the Department of Energy, died on Thursday in the USAir crash.
He was 57 and lived in Morgantown, W.Va.
Mr.
Langan was the director of the department's Clean Coal Technology Division at the Morgantown Energy Technology Center.
His wife, the former Charlotte Lorraine Warczynski, 55, was with him on the flight.


Overtime Can't Faze These Unconscious Jets
It soared toward the goal posts ever so gently, and then took off -- perhaps blown forward by the gasps of so many Jets fans who for too many years have been afraid to exhale.
But in this September of good feelings, Nick Lowery's 39-yard field-goal attempt in overtime did precisely what Nick Lowery field-goal attempts have done so often: win a game.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Green Monsters Of 'the Meadowlands'
OUTSIDE the Jets' locker room, Pete Carroll was holding a football.
Surely it was his "game ball" for the 25-22 overtime victory over the Denver Broncos, but it wasn't.
"The star of the day," the Jets' coach was saying now, "was the people in the stands. They went nuts. They went crazy about our football team and the way we played and they hung with us when it looked a little bit bleak. They brought us out of that fourth quarter."


Campaign Finance Reform Gets a Chance
To the Editor:
Thank you for enlisting in the battle to pass campaign finance and lobbying reform measures when Congress returns for the balance of its legislative session (editorial, Sept. 4).


Rison Comes Through On Victory Guarantee
Falcons 31, Rams 13
Andre Rison backed his boast, and then some.


Tapping Eastern Europe for 'Prince Igor'
Somebody seated behind me was humming a bit of "Stranger in Paradise" at the New York City Opera on Saturday night, which was appropriate, for the company was presenting a new production of Borodin's "Prince Igor," the neglected opera that gave the Broadway show "Kismet" its great melodies and famous love song.
The accompaniment even seemed a bit charming.
One didn't want to get too solemn about this work, which has more than its share of absurdities.
It leaves its love story hanging in midair, and neglects to show us the fate of its villain after the first act.
The opera was unfinished when the composer died unexpectedly in 1887 and was then cut, altered and completed by Glazunov and Rimsky-Korsakov.
It still has no definitive edition because the original manuscripts have yet to be studied by contemporary scholars.
Add to these problems a production that looked low-budget and a cast with little-known singers from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, some of whom were more faithful to the idea of vibrato than the idea of pitch, and a healthy dose of accompanying humming could seem a welcome diversion.


Brazil Cuts Its Tariffs on Many Goods
Tariffs protecting the Brazilian economy, Latin America's largest, are to be slashed by almost one-third on Monday.
Moving to bolster the nation's fight against inflation, Finance Minister Ciro Gomes announced on Saturday that Brazil's median tariff, covering 13,000 types of goods, would drop to 14 percent from 20 percent.
Only cars, computers and factory machinery would be excluded.


Medicaid
Medicaid costs in the region continue to soar, putting an increasing strain on state budgets and local governments in New York State.
Federal expenditures for Medicaid, which provides medical services for the poor through a combination of federal and state funding, have tripled since 1988, and yearly state outlays have doubled.
Congress is likely to limit the growth of Medicaid and Medicare as part of a health care bill.
In New York state, where local governments help carry the burden of Medicaid costs, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and county leaders have lobbied heavily -- so far unsuccessfully -- for the state to take over these expenditures.
New York City's yearly expenditures on Medicaid increased 49 percent from 1989 to 1993, Westchester's jumped 41 percent, and Nassau County's rose 85 percent.


Clinton Honors First Members Of National Service Program
President Clinton flew to a nearby military post today to honor the first entrants in his Americorps national service program, saying they embodied "the oldest and best of American traditions" by working in public jobs in exchange for student aid.
The President's trip by helicopter to a church service at the Aberdeen Proving Grounds weapons-testing site in Maryland was a prelude to a far more expansive kickoff of the Americorps program on Monday.
At that ceremony, the President is expected to swear in about 2,500 public-service volunteers and to initiate another 15,000 volunteers around the nation by a satellite link.


The Losers' Last Word Is Stern Call to Action
The last song to be played in the Foro Italico at the world swimming championships turned out to be "The Star-Spangled Banner."
With all due respect to the victorious American men's 400-meter medley relay team, it was a most inappropriate finish to a week in which two quite different sounds set the tone: The sound of the Chinese national anthem and the sound of voices from many countries crying foul.


From Pataki, an Early Bid In Debate Gamesmanship
The Republican gubernatorial primary is still a day away, but State Senator George E. Pataki is confident enough of victory that he sought to get a jump on the general election yesterday by challenging Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to five one-on-one debates.
The debate over debates is a fixture of any campaign season -- down to who gets credit for seeking them, and who seems to be ducking -- and Mr.
Cuomo's spokeswoman, Arda Nazerian, promptly countered by saying, "Finally, George Pataki is responding to the Governor's call to make this a campaign based on the issues."


Recalling a Pelham Parkway Past; A Nostalgic Gathering Celebrates a 1950's Neighborhood
Mickey Mantle, Duke Snyder and Willie Mays were their heroes, President Dwight David Eisenhower was in the White House, and it seemed like one big continuous block party to the kids who grew up in the Pelham Parkway section of the Bronx in the 1950's.
"We didn't know it then, but the old neighborhood was a unique place," said Harry Schwartz, one of several thousand former residents of Pelham Parkway who attended a reunion here today in Eisenhower Park on Long Island.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Aquagenix Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., an initial public offering of 1.2 million units, each unit representing one share and one warrant.
Whale Securities.


In Texas District, a Democratic Candidate for Congress Runs Against Guns
Here in south-central Texas, where stuffed deer heads gaze blankly upon convenience-store customers and bumper stickers say things like "They'll take my gun from my cold, dead hands," it is not easy to speak up against assault weapons.
But Rolando Rios, a San Antonio civil rights lawyer and a Democratic candidate for Congress, is doing just that.
Mr.
Rios, who was 6 years old when his father was randomly killed by a man with a gun, has embraced the $30 billion crime bill and its ban on several kinds of assault weapons.
And the highlight of his campaign is the vote by his Republican opponent in the 23d District, Representative Henry Bonilla, against the bill, which Congress narrowly passed just before it adjourned for vacation.


Press Notes
THE American newspaper industry, humbled by slipping advertising revenue in recent years, is showing strong signs of returning health.
Revenue from advertising in newspapers across the country for the first half of this year showed the strongest gains since 1987, according to industry data, and the advertising is projected to remain stable.
As a result, the earnings of most big newspaper companies are improving.


Patents; A Heating Element In an Airplane Coating Could Prevent Ice From Forming on the Wings
FOR many travelers, few experiences are more unnerving than sitting in an airplane in winter, watching airport crews spray de-icing agents on frigid plane wings.
Even a thin film of ice on the wings can interfere with a plane's ability to take off or fly.
And de-icing agents are only temporary.
A jet that had been de-iced at National Airport in Washington in January 1983 subsequently idled on a runway for nearly an hour.
Snow and ice accumulated on its wings and engines.
Seconds after takeoff it crashed into a bridge spanning the Potomac River, killing 78 people.


Flawed Characters In the Public Eye, Past and Present
Paul Attanasio was born in 1959, the same year the quiz show scandal on television stunned and outraged the nation.
But Mr.
Attanasio, who wrote the script for the film "Quiz Show," speaks of the scandal as if it happened hours ago.
"Films only work if they're about us today," said Mr.
Attanasio, a Harvard-trained lawyer and former film critic for The Washington Post.
"And I thought where we all are today is the product of this national loss of innocence, which began with the quiz show scandals and continued on to Vietnam, Watergate, Oliver North, even O. J. Simpson."


INSIDE
Cuban Cutoff Begins
Under its agreement with the United States, Cuba began cracking down on people trying to leave the country on small boats and rafts, but the exodus did not stop completely.
Page A3.
Engine Problems Suspected
Investigators said evidence indicated that an engine might have malfunctioned on the USAir jet that crashed, killing 132 people.
Page A10. 'Fences' and 'Frasier' Win
The CBS drama "Picket Fences" and the NBC comedy "Frasier" topped the Emmy Awards as best series of the 1993-94 season.
Page C11.
A2 Arts


A Grungy Showman: 'Uh, Wow!' and Cool
The ponytail dangling from the back of the cap is hotter than ever now, so expect a nationwide rise in scruffy, shirtless males with earrings and black socks hitting with topspin.
Andre Agassi won the United States Open last night, making a convincing argument for the peaceful coexistence of substance and style.
Grunge is good. Unseeded is better.


RESULTS PLUSThe Sly One Wins It  Jacques Villeneuve outfoxed Paul Tracy and Al Unser Jr. yesterday to win the Texaco-Havoline 200 Indy-car race in Elkhart Lake, Wis., as Unser clinched his second PPG Cup championship. Villeneuve, the son of the late Formula One star Gilles Villeneuve, took the lead with a daring pass that shot him from third to first on a restart only 15 laps from the end of the 200-mile event on the 4-mile, 14-turn road circuit. Unser, the runaway leader of the Indy-car series for virtually the entire season, had his string of consecutive victories end at three but added the series title to the one he earned in 1990. (AP)
AUTO RACING


No Headline
"In previous times it used to be a declaration of war; yesterday we have heard a declaration of peace." -- SHIMON PERES, the Foreign Minister of Israel, commenting on a statement from Syria.  [ A5:2. ]


Ryan's Cardinals Are Tough, but Brown and Giants Escape With Victory
He took all the hits again and again.
As the Arizona Cardinals sent everyone except their cheerleaders after Giant quarterback Dave Brown, he stood tough.
He took the hits to the head.
To the chest.
To the ribs.
When he took his shirt off after the game, there were literally chunks missing from his skin.
It was that rough an evening tonight.
And time and time again, he got back up.
He may have been nervous, even scared, but he certainly wasn't intimidated.
All the talk about Cardinal Coach Buddy Ryan and his blitz crew was well founded.


When A.C. Was a Glint in Engineer's Eye
To the Editor:
We at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign share your feelings of gratefulness for the air-conditioner and appreciate your crediting us for having contributed to early research (editorial, Sept. 5).


The World Through Discolored Glasses
The Fall, which performed on Saturday night at Tramps, is a stubbornly good band.
Seventeen years after it formed, this English group continues to play by its own rules.
It releases as many as three albums a year and produces each with a gritty, low-fidelity sound.
Its cantankerous singer, Mark E. Smith, writes infectiously cynical songs, sings in eccentric rhythms and cadences in which nearly every line ends in "uh," and is well known for punching out members of his own road crew.
On Saturday, the Fall was joined by Mr.
Smith's ex-wife, Brix, who left the band in 1989 but rejoined it last month.
Her sharp, simple bass and guitar lines funneled the band's diverse energies into hard-hitting post-punk.
Dave Bush, the keyboardist, lightened the heavy sound with propulsive rhythms borrowed from techno dance music.


One Broker's Slide Into Bribery
When Norberto Escobar and his wife, Ivette, hung out their shingle as immigration brokers in October 1990, they knew little about United States immigration laws.
For a time, Mrs.
Escobar had worked in another broker's office; Mr.
Escobar had recently lost his job selling cars.
Their company, Best Services, was a modest venture, run from their home at first.
The Escobars said they had taught themselves the rudiments of the law from a handbook published by the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
And so they set to work guiding fellow Salvadorans through the labyrinth of immigration service forms.


Raymond C. Firestone, 86, Dies; Was Chairman of Tire Company
Raymond C. Firestone, a former chairman and chief executive of his family's tire company and a philanthropist, died on Friday in the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland.
He was 86 and had houses in Bath Township outside Akron, Ohio, and in Southern Pines, N.C.
The cause was heart failure, said Bob Troyer, a spokesman for the Firestone family.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
For the first time in three years, fall is not bringing strong growth in the economy.
It is a decisive sign, many economists, Government officials and business executives say, that the strongest days of the recovery from the recession may be in the past.
That recognition has renewed the debate over how much economic growth is possible without bringing on a damaging level of inflation.  [ Page A1. ]


Adobe Revamps Software
Adobe Systems plans to introduce on Monday a revamped version of Acrobat, a program it hopes will eventually wield the same influence over electronic publishing that its technology now holds in the computer printing market.
Adobe, which has just completed a merger with the Aldus Corporation to create a combined company with annual revenue of more than half a billion dollars, is the publishing industry's dominant software company.
It first came to prominence in the mid-1980's based on the widespread adoption of its Postscript technology, which permits computer control of laser printers to produce documents that combine high-resolution text, graphics and photos.


Jessica Tandy, a Patrician Star Of Theater and Film, Dies at 85
Jessica Tandy, who enhanced the American theater and enriched the American screen as few actresses have, died yesterday at her home in Easton, Conn.
She was 85.
The cause was ovarian cancer, said her husband, the actor Hume Cronyn.


Library of Congress Offers To Feed the Data Highway
The Library of Congress plans to announce next month an ambitious effort to convert into digital form the most important materials in its collection and in the collections of all public and research libraries in the country.
The project would create a vast "virtual library" of digitized images of books, drawings, manuscripts and photographs that would look just like the originals and could be sent over computer networks to computer screens and high-definition television sets, accessible to millions of students and researchers.
The goal is eventually to offer movies and music to the public throughout the country.


CHRONICLE
FRANCESCA ZAMBELLO , an operatic stage director who has worked on productions with companies in this country and Europe, is accustomed to being booed (and cheered) by audiences and lambasted by critics for her unorthodox interpretations.
But she is determined to change the way women are portrayed in opera, no matter how much furor she incites.
Tonight and next Monday she will give a two-part talk, "Female Characters in Opera: Are They Just Madonnas and Whores?" for the Metropolitan Opera Guild at St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue.
"We need to re-examine the operatic literature and how women are presented," she said the other day.
"Opera is run by men conductors and directors, and it is one of the most conservative of art forms.


DIALOGUE: Congress Is Back. Now, to Lay the Blame.; We'll Obstruct What Needs Obstructing
The last few months haven't been the best for Congress.
The hours have been long, the debates have been contentious.
And as we left for the Labor Day weekend, the American people seemed to respect the Congress and its members less and less.
Now some people are suggesting that if members of Congress could just exercise a little more "bipartisanship," America would be better served and the public would hold us in higher regard.
I disagree.
When principles coincide, bipartisanship should prevail.
But sacrificing principles will neither be good for America nor good for our Government.


The High Cost of Sex Harassment
A San Francisco jury has hit the world's largest law firm, Baker &amp; McKenzie, with the largest-ever sexual harassment award.
Rena Weeks, a secretary who objected to the bawdy remarks and crude gropings of a high-powered partner, stands to collect $50,000 for emotional distress -- and $7.1 million in punitive damages.
If that judgment conveys its intended meaning, law firms and other enterprises across the country will bolt from their complacency and rectify the mistreatment of women in the workplace.
Ordinarily one might not bet on that, but this could be a case of money talking, very loudly.


Fire Under Empty Train Forces Evacuation of Penn Station


Israeli Officials Enthusiastic About the Latest Word From Syria
With enthusiasm overtaking more familiar caution, senior Israeli officials said today that they thought Syria meant business about wanting peace with them as long as it got back the Golan Heights.
The Israelis were reacting to a speech on Saturday by Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, in which he told his Parliament that he was ready to reach a peace agreement and make it work.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Added Brian Henesey, running back, to the practice squad.


Kirshenbaum Gets New Phone Account
Time Warner Telecommunications, a division of Time Warner in New York that is exploring the company's entry into the next generation of wireless telephone services, has named Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York to handle strategic planning and development.
The project involves the division's efforts to introduce personal communications services that would offer consumers telephones that are smaller, lighter and less expensive than cellular phones.


Merging Body and Spirit To Produce a Single Essence
Chandralekha, a choreographer from Madras, India, has been described as a counterculturalist who draws on elements of classical Indian dance like Bharata Natyam and on Western modern dance.
A bizarre-sounding idea, but Chandralekha's "Yantra," performed by the Chandralekha Group on Thursday night at St.
Mark's Danspace, made the concerns of specific form seem prosaic.
More than anything, "Yantra" is the distillation of a cultural sensibility, a piece in which form and expression merge inseparably for a mostly hypnotic 90 minutes.
"Yantra" is built around the Sri Chakra, a shape in which many triangles fold into one in an abstraction, as program notes put it, of "the inner life of the body, its vital energy zones, its sexual and spiritual potentialities." The dance was also inspired by the ninth-century hymn "Soundarya Lahari," a homage to the triangle and to women.
A glowing triangle hangs over the dance space.


Big Labor's Strategic Raid in Mexico
For American labor leaders, it's Nafta 2: The Rematch.
Having failed to convince Congress last fall that the North American Free Trade Agreement would shift American jobs to lower-paid Mexican workers, unions are trying for a comeback by organizing Mexican plants, especially those run by American companies near the border.


ECONOMIC GROWTH SLOWS FROM PEAK, RENEWING DEBATE
For the first time in three years, fall is not bringing a powerful burst of growth for the American economy.
It is a decisive sign, many economists, Government officials and business executives say, that the strongest days of the recovery from the 1991 recession may be in the past.
"No one is expecting -- not the Federal Reserve, nor the Administration nor the forecasters -- for the economy to return to the peak growth rate that was reached in recent months," said Alan S. Blinder, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve and, until June, a member of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers.


Sparks Keeps Cool With Pair of Interceptions
He was named for his Uncle Phillippi, who got his name from the New Testament Book of Philippians.
Many from his uncle's congregation at the Calvary Community Church in Phoenix were in attendance, pinning up two banners in an upper corner of the stadium with his last name highlighted in bold letters: "SPARKS."
While the Almighty could not be reached for immediate comment, it is safe to deduce one lasting truth from the Giants' 20-17 victory over the Arizona Cardinals tonight: Phillippi Sparks's homecoming was incredibly divine.


I.R.A. Cease-Fire Shifts the Focus to Britain
To the Editor:
For years the Irish Republican Army has been identified as the problem in Ireland, and the popular theory was that if only the I.R.A. could be defeated or persuaded to end its guerrilla warfare, peace would follow.


Teachers Settle
A three-day-old strike by Mount Vernon teachers ended early this morning when the Board of Education agreed to a contract, much like one it had previously rejected, that raises teacher salaries 8.5 percent over four years.
Teachers will return to work today.
Article, page B7.


Everyone Knew, but No One Acted
When Matt Carmody joined the New York Police Department in 1982, his marriage was crumbling, and he was already a drinker.
But he had not revealed much about his demons when he applied.
He continued to seek the consolation of a bottle -- on and off duty.
"It wasn't hard," he said.
"You'd pick up a six-pack at a bodega and toss it in the back of the squad car. Some days I'd show up drunk and I'd take the passenger seat and my partner would drive until I woke up. I did crazy things. Once I took an unmarked car down to the Jersey shore with a couple of bottles of champagne and a blonde."


Pope Urges Croats to Renew 'Unbreakable' Slavic Ties
In a speech that came close to suggesting the rebuilding of Yugoslavia, Pope John Paul II urged Croats today to use the "unbreakable ties" of culture and language that link the south Slavic peoples as a bridge to peace and reconciliation in the Balkans.
Speaking on the banks of the Sava River during an outdoor Mass at the Zagreb race track, the Pope pointed to the river as an image of unity among the peoples of the former Yugoslavia.
The Sava, he noted, flows through Croatia, along the northern border of Bosnia and Herzegovina and on to Serbia and Belgrade, where it meets the Danube.


Inquiries Confounded by Many Diverse Accounts of Officers' Subway Station Shootout
Shots rang out from three different directions, all fired from different types of weapons, all echoing crazily in the subway station deep under Lexington Avenue.
There were 200 people on the East Side platform, and so there was screaming and scrambling everywhere shortly after 7 P.M.
Aug. 22.
There were, as well, nine police officers at the scene -- four in plain clothes, four in uniform, one off duty.
Two of the officers ended up wounded, one critically.
The investigation, begun that night, involved two different departments -- the New York City Police Department and the Transit Police Department.


For Lowery, Through the Wind and the Uprights
When you've been kicking in the National Football League for 15 years and you're the most accurate field-goal kicker in history (80 percent) and you've made 99.2 percent of your conversions, you must be doing something right.
Nick Lowery, a 38-year-old Dartmouth graduate, is doing many things right.
The most obvious today was his 39-yard field goal into the wind that gave the Jets a 25-22 victory over the Denver Broncos in overtime at Giants Stadium.


Auf Wiedersehen to Berlin
They had come to Berlin as occupying powers and stayed on as protectors.
On Wednesday, officials from the U.S., France and Britain celebrated the departure of the last handful of troops who had been a part of Berlin's landscape for nearly 50 years.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher was quick to remind Berliners that "even as our troops leave Berlin, 100,000 American servicemen and women will remain in Europe." But now that the last Red Army regiment has headed home, the American military presence is no longer the reassuring symbol it once was.


The Hidden Population Issue: Money
When all the sound and fury of the conference on population has faded to whispers, one inescapable reality will remain: money.
No matter who wins or who loses in the political jousts over abortion and homosexuality, migrants and monogamy, the real test of whether the United Nations Conference on Population and Development has made a difference will lie not just in the readiness of rich donors to give far greater aid, but also in the willingness of poor recipients to spend more of their own money to solve their problems.


Top U.S. Officials Appear to Disagree On Haitian Leaders
Senior Administration officials appeared today to disagree on Washington's plans for the future of Haiti's military leaders.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher seemed to leave open the possibility that the three leaders could lead normal lives in Haiti if they relinquished power voluntarily.
Asked on the NBC News program "Meet the Press" whether the leaders could remain in Haiti and even organize politically, Mr.
Christopher said that the restored Government would have to decide.


I.R.A. Cease-Fire Shifts the Focus to Britain; An Irish Federalism
To the Editor:
The Irish and British governments must now pointedly assure the unionist and nationalist communities that any political reform will be structured to improve the civil rights and economic prospects of all the people in Northern Ireland.


World Economies


When A.C. Was a Glint in Engineer's Eye; The Forgotten Worker
To the Editor:
It seemed maddeningly appropriate, on the Labor Day closing a summer that saw the insurance industry buy a national consensus against universal health care, that the lead editorial of The Times -- America's newspaper of record -- celebrated the joys of air-conditioning.


Big D's Unofficial Prosperity Index
Dallas builders are once again tearing down homes worth hundreds of thousands to raise homes worth millions, and the area's economy is zooming ahead of the nation's.
But the Cattle Baron's Ball might be the telltale sign that the Big D is back.
Page D5.


Vengeance Run Wild, Operatically
Of all public television's problems, and there are many, one must be especially galling: the tendency of viewers and critics to take excellence for granted.
The stunning photography in "Nature," the keen intelligence of "American Playhouse," the best of British television on series like "Masterpiece Theater" and "Mystery," the political courage of domestic series like "P.O.V." and "Rights and Wrongs": all taken for granted after a season or two.
This evening's case in point is "The Metropolitan Opera Presents" and its superb rendition of Richard Strauss's "Elektra," taped during live performances in January.
This presentation (a stereo simulcast is being broadcast on WQXR-FM) opens the 19th season of Metropolitan Opera telecasts on PBS, supported prominently by Texaco.


Sampras to Play In the Davis Cup
Tom Gullikson, the United States team captain, announced yesterday that No. 1-ranked Pete Sampras has reconsidered his decision not to compete in the semifinal round of the Davis Cup in Sweden on Sept. 23-25 and will again headline the team.


4 in Attorney General Race Trade Attacks in TV Debate
Two days before voters decide on a race with no clear leader and few defining issues, the four candidates in the Democratic race for state attorney general assailed each other yesterday for being too rich, too political or misleading voters by talking too much about crime.
In a televised debate -- reflecting fierce competition for a sizable pool of undecided voters -- the candidate who stayed farthest from the fray, Karen S. Burstein, a former Brooklyn Family Court judge, asked time and again what the exchanges had to do with the Attorney General's office.


No Trouble at Mall
To the Editor:
The authorities at Connecticut's Trumbull Shopping Park want to stop downtown Bridgeport teen-agers from congregating at the mall by limiting weekend bus service.
This gives a bad impression of the average teen-ager who frequents the mall.


U.S. to Sell Bills This Week
The schedule of Treasury financings this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Treasury will auction a 52-week Treasury bill.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.55 percent, traders said, while the rate for the six-month issue was 4.93 percent.
The rate for the one-year bill was 5.35 percent.


It Took Montana and His Entourage to Pull It Off
Everyone involved promised that there would be so much more to the San Francisco-Kansas City matchup here this afternoon than Steve Young versus Joe Montana.
Indeed, there was.
There was Jerry Rice -- on the heels of a three-touchdown game and a league-record 127 career touchdowns -- being held scoreless and to fewer than 80 receiving yards.


Abraham Gelbart, Mathematician, 82
Dr.
Abraham Gelbart, whose achievements in mathematics gained him an international reputation even though he never received a high school diploma, died on Wednesday.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was complications from cardiovascular surgery, said his son William.


To Our Readers
Starting today, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on Monday through Saturday increases to 60 cents in the New York metropolitan area.
The change does not affect the Sunday price, the weekday price outside the metropolitan area, or the cost of copies from The Times's direct home delivery service.


BBDO Wins Contest For Pizza Hut Work
BBDO New York has survived a challenge to its status as the lead agency for an important client, Pizza Hut, by besting the company's other agency, Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners of San Francisco, in a creative "shoot-out" on a big new assignment.
BBDO New York won the creative competition with Goodby, Silverstein last week for work that Pizza Hut calls a brand positioning campaign.
That advertising is intended to bolster Pizza Hut in the face of an intensifying price war with Little Caesars and Domino's Pizza.


Zheleznodorozhny Journal; Workers' Paradise Is Lost, but Its Spas Live On
On a tiny table not far from the whirlpool baths lies a glass pitcher of sepia-colored liquid labeled Concoction No. 3.
Above it, a chart indicates that Concoction No. 3 helps fight "neurotic obsession."
Every afternoon, patients have a glass of their prescribed herbal potion.
Then, depending on their ailment, they undergo massage, electrotherapy, hydrotherapy, electronic joint massage, eucalyptus inhalation, sauna, hot paraffin wraps and acupuncture and listen to relaxation tapes.


Amy Clampitt, 74, Late Bloomer Who Rose to Heights of Poetry
Amy Clampitt, known for her dense, ornate and allusive poetry, died on Saturday at her home in Lenox, Mass.
She was 74 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was ovarian cancer, said Anne Close, her editor at Alfred A. Knopf.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Prices . . .
Aug.
Wednesday  Retail Sales . . .
Aug.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Business Inventories . . .
July  Friday  Industrial Production . . .
Aug.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Aug.


PBS Seeks to Widen Its Prime-Time Net With New Quiz Show
Public television, home to award-winning documentaries and imported British drama, is about to offer some unlikely fare: a weekly prime-time quiz show.
"Think Twice," with all the glitz and polish of a Hollywood game show, is being produced and taped in the studios here of WGBH, creator of "Nova" and "Evening at Pops." The half-hour program, replete with a smooth, wise-cracking host, an off-camera announcer, prizes, lavish sets, a studio audience and applause signs, will begin on Oct. 10 and run on Mondays at 8:30 P.M. for 22 weeks.


SENATE OPTIMISTS OFFER SOME HOPES FOR A HEALTH BILL
As they return from a two-week recess that began with universal health insurance legislation dead and incremental measures in critical condition, determined Senate optimists are still working to pass a measure that would insure about half the 39 million Americans who currently lack coverage.
The senators themselves will not be meeting until later in the week, but their staffs spent most of the time their bosses were away looking over the details of the plan offered by the self-styled mainstream coalition, a bipartisan group of about 20 senators, and making line-by-line comparisons with Democratic bills.


In Immigration Labyrinth, Corruption Comes Easily
Up and down the East Coast, the word quickly spread through immigrant communities.
Come to the Northern Virginia offices of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Bring cash.
Buy the right to live or work in the United States.
Smooth-talking middlemen took care of the details, bribing immigration service employees with gold jewelry, free vacations and cash-filled envelopes passed hand to hand in the aisles of a nearby department store.
Ghanaians, Lebanese and Salvadorans, among others, flocked to what quickly became a multicultural bazaar.
Most came from the Washington area, but others drove hundreds of miles and scribbled phony local addresses.


A Second Chance for a Love That Barely Was
Last year at this time, Tony Giordano was directing "Mixed Emotions," a would-be comedy in which a 65-year-old Jewish widower relentlessly pursued a 61-year-old Catholic widow.
This year, Mr.
Giordano is directing "First Night," a would-be comedy in which a 30-ish nun relentlessly pursues the manager of a video store, a man she hasn't seen since they were in eighth grade together.
Perhaps it is time for Mr.
Giordano to consider another kind of play -- something to do with ax murderers, say.
These romantic trifles are not doing him, or anyone else, the slightest bit of good.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Owners Strike Out In Betrayal of History
THIS is failure.
This is sheer, flagrant, blatant failure.
When the baseball owners pull the plug on the season in the next day or two, they will be confirming one of the great public miscalculations ever committed in this part of the world.
They will be forever redefining a sport, a business, a way of life, a national pastime, as it used to be called but can never be again.


Accounts
*
Fisher-Price, East Aurora, N.Y., to Gardner, Geary, Coll &amp; Young, San Francisco, to handle the account of its Power Wheels division.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.
The agency was required to repitch the account after Power Wheels was sold by the Kransco Group Cos., San Francisco. to Fisher-Price and its parent, Mattel Inc.


Siberia's Treasure
To the Editor:
What can we do about the impending devastation of Siberia, a pristine environment the size of almost all the tropical rain forests combined and home to a lake holding 20 percent of the planet's fresh water?


A Blaze in Penn Station Disrupts Train Schedules
A fire under the diesel locomotive of an empty Amtrak passenger train yesterday morning forced the evacuation of Penn Station, disrupted rail and subway service for several hours and sent plumes of smoke billowing through the station and onto Seventh Avenue.
Fire officials complained of being delayed for nearly an hour and a half in putting out the fire because they could not get confirmation from Amtrak officials that electric power to the area had been shut off so they could douse the blaze.
The fire, which was first noticed at 9:42 A.M., went to four alarms but was declared under control at 12:40 P.M., about an hour after firefighters were convinced that power had been shut off and they were in no danger of electrocution.


When A.C. Was a Glint in Engineer's Eye; Abets Congress
To the Editor:
I dispute your holiday ode to air-conditioning (editorial, Sept. 5).
You realize air-conditioning is what keeps Congress in session all summer.
The result is posturing, pandering to special interests and passing bad legislation that is dangerous to the health of every American.
ED VETTER Dallas, Sept. 6, 1994


CHRONICLE
Representative HENRY B. GONZALEZ , who led investigations into the faltering savings and loan industry and United States aid to Iraq, received the Profile in Courage Award yesterday at the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston.
"He and I came from different worlds, but we traveled a common path, we shared the same goals," said Mr.
Gonzalez, a Democrat of Texas who entered Congress the same year Kennedy became President.


Big D's Unofficial Prosperity Index
Builders here are once again tearing down homes worth hundreds of thousands of dollars to raise homes worth millions, and the area's economy is zooming ahead of the nation's.
But the best read on Dallas giddiness might well be the Cattle Baron's Ball Index of Philanthropic Overachievement.
The ball, which was held on Saturday night, appears to have broken the record $800,000 raised by the 1985 Cattle Baron's Ball, all for the American Cancer Society.
If that result reflects a stronger local economy it also speaks to the attractions of a setting that exemplifies the turnaround: the Circle T ranch, handed over by a bankrupt Nelson Bunker Hunt to his creditors and bought last year for $20 million by Ross Perot Jr.


Putting Sex In Its Place
For decades, sex-oriented entertainment in New York City was largely confined to the sleazier stretches of Times Square.
Now such businesses can be found everywhere from the Adult Love Boutique on Queens Boulevard to the All Star Harmony Club on West 22d Street in Chelsea.
The industry has grown in response to the widespread home use of video recorders and the increasing popularity of topless bars among an affluent male clientele.
And as it has spread throughout New York City, particularly into Queens and middle-class neighborhoods in Manhattan, it has produced a widespread backlash among outraged residents of several communities.


F.D.A. Debate on Speedy Access to AIDS Drugs Is Reopening
At the urging of advocates of people with AIDS, the Food and Drug Administration relaxed its approval process for new AIDS drugs three years ago, allowing them to go on the market faster.
Many researchers said they thought it unwise to waive the requirement that drugs be proved clinically effective before being licensed.
But the F.D.A. decision quickly resulted in more drugs on the market, as the advocates had hoped.


Vernon Boggs, 55, Music Expert, Dies
Vernon Boggs, a sociologist and expert on Afro-Caribbean music and American rhythm-and-blues, died on Sept. 3 at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 55 and lived in New Jersey.
The cause was acute pneumonia, said a friend, Bill Kornblum.


Mexico's Trading Allies Play Financial Bodyguard
Even though Mexico's most important trading partners expressed confidence in the country's ability to survive peacefully any result of last month's presidential election, they quietly put together a $6 billion plan to back the peso just in case there was trouble.
United States Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen has disclosed, and Mexican finance officials have confirmed, that in the weeks leading up to the Aug. 21 election a plan was secretly put together for several European central banks and Japan to extend a $6 billion line of credit to Mexico.
The money was available to help Mexico in case there was a run on the peso after a governing-party loss or, as Mr.
Bentsen said, "in case violence broke out."


Republican Hopefuls Fishing for Votes
John Rowland carried Fairfield County in nearly winning a three-way race for governor in 1990, and today he returned to the county in hopes of reclaiming it in Tuesday's primary for the Republican nomination against his challenger, Secretary of State Pauline R. Kezer.
"This is our time," Mr.
Rowland, a former Congressman from Waterbury, told Greenwich Republicans as they ate lobster and steak at the 63d annual Cos Cob Republican Club clambake.
"After 24 years, this is our time for victory. Let's not spoil the opportunity."


Teachers in Mount Vernon Reach Contract Agreement
A three-day-old strike by Mount Vernon teachers ended early this morning when the Board of Education agreed to a contract, much like one it had previously rejected, that raises teacher salaries 8.5 percent over four years.
Teachers will return to work today.
The teachers claimed victory in standing their ground on the salary issue, but the district gained, as well, winning concessions on medical coverage that will save an estimated $600,000 a year.


Emerging Political Dynasty Is Facing Test at Polls
Dynasty. Darryl C. Towns seems to bristle at the very mention of the word.
He is annoyed that his young political career -- two years in the State Assembly representing the 54th District in Brooklyn -- is viewed not as a sincere effort at public service but as an extension of the influence of his better-known father, Representative Edolphus Towns.


Dividend Meetings


Crime Bill Takes First Giant Step Toward Stopping the Violence
To the Editor:
Sometimes even the best pundits succumb to the temptation to attack a good thing, instead of studying it.
Russell Baker's Sept. 6 column on the crime bill, "No, Not a Hit Child," is an example of this.


James Aubrey Jr., 75, TV and Film Executive
James T. Aubrey Jr., a hard-driving television and film executive who headed CBS and then Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, died on Sept. 3 at U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 75 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was a heart attack, the Associated Press reported.
It said paramedics found him unconscious, at a location it did not identify, after he had summoned them by telephone.


Clinton Has Authority He Needs To Invade Haiti, Top Aides Say
Joining a two-century-old debate over who has the power to make war, the Administration asserted today that it has no obligation to seek Congressional approval for an invasion of Haiti.
Two senior officials, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Madeleine K. Albright, the United States representative to the United Nations, responded to growing calls to put the issue to a vote in Congress by saying that no vote was required.


A Familiar Refrain: Price and Then Field
It was just another Sunday for Nick Price.
Another victory march.
Another national championship.
Another trophy held aloft and another authoritative and convincing step toward becoming the most dominating golfer since Tom Watson assumed that throne from Jack Nicklaus in the late 70's.
In what is becoming a numbingly familiar refrain, Price, 37, re-stated his superiority over the world of golf.
He won the Bell Canadian Open today for his seventh victory of the year, his fifth on the PGA Tour.
The only difference between this and all the other victories is that he really didn't have his game completely under control, and that might be the most impressive thing about this, his 16th victory in his last 54 starts.


So Much for a Blowout: Cowboys Hold Off the Oilers
It wasn't supposed to be this difficult.
The Dallas Cowboys weren't supposed to struggle with some greenhorn quarterback and a defense that had been stampeded a week ago by the Indianapolis Colts.
But here they were, the two-time defending Super Bowl champions, being blitzed silly today by the Oilers and having their passing and rushing attacks stymied.
And whoever heard of this Bucky Richardson, the Oilers' quarterback?
Certainly not many of the 64,402 fans at Texas Stadium who had come to see a rout.


In a switch, New Woman focuses on men and their perceptions of women to market itself.
FOR decades, images of men have been used to sell products to women.
In the 1920's, a print advertisement for Chesterfield cigarettes featured a languid lass urging her male companion to "Blow some my way." In the 1990's, a television commercial presents female office workers rushing every morning to watch a hunky construction worker gulp down a Diet Coke.
Now a women's magazine, New Woman, will use men -- and their perceptions of the women in their lives -- to sell itself to the media decision-makers at agencies.
A campaign that begins this week, which carries the theme "New Woman. You'll like her when you meet her," is centered on men's musings about women, rendered in stream-of-consciousness style.


California Vietnamese Off to Hanoi
It took him eight tries and cost him nearly two years in prison, but a decade ago Philip Nguyen succeeded in fleeing Vietnam with his wife and children, though with little else.
This month, to the outrage of some fellow refugees here in the community known as Little Saigon, he will return as a member of a delegation from the Vietnamese Chamber of Commerce in Westminster to establish business links with the Communist leaders in Hanoi.


Correction
A listing yesterday in The City profiling candidates in the primary elections on Tuesday omitted information supplied by a Democrat running in the Eighth Congressional District.
The candidate, Deborah A. Green, 42, is a partner in Ross &amp; Green, a lobbying firm, and lives in Greenwich Village.
She is a graduate of Barnard College and the Graduate School of Business at Fordham University.


Hearst Finds Unexpected Success in a Magazine for Dreamers
The covers of Victoria magazine feature old-fashioned sewing baskets, antique gold watches, full-blown roses and wing chairs covered with tapestry.
Articles have titles like "Portrait of a Time Too Beautiful to Forget," "Savor Indian Summer in Tasha Tudor's Garden" and "Shopping for Romance."
Not exactly every postmodern woman's porcelain cup of tea.


Havana Begins to Cut Flow of Migrant Rafts
Cuba began moving today to clamp down on the flight of refugees, ordering people to dismantle homemade rafts and boats under construction and prohibiting them from taking vessels to the coast.
Small, crowded rafts continued to leave from points east and west of Havana, after an agreement between Cuba and the United States on Friday to try to stop the exodus by sharply increasing the number of visas issued for Cubans wishing to move to the United States.


Raw Blues and Patrician Pop Crooning
Boz Scaggs has sustained a 25-year recording career by merging two temperamentally opposite strains of American pop in allusive hybrids that resist easy categorization.
One moment, Mr.
Scaggs sounds like a raw Texan blues singer, then with a slight softening of tone he metamorphoses into a patrician San Franciscan pop crooner.
The change from one thing into another isn't so much a matter of self-conscious role-playing as it is of allowing different facets of a many-layered musical personality to edge to the fore.
The singer, who performed at Town Hall in Manhattan with a five-member band and two backup vocalists on Saturday and Sunday, started out as a Texan blues-rock singer.
He reached his peak of popularity in 1976 with a sophisticated pop-soul album, "Silk Degrees," which had something of a disco ambiance.
His best-loved songs include romantic ballads like "Harbor Lights" and "We're All Alone" in which his reedy, quirky pop baritone projects considerable tension and vulnerability.
Although the music on his newest album, "Some Change" (Virgin), is tougher and more guitar-oriented than it is on his earlier records, the songs also have a brooding, introspective undertone.


Bridge
Almost all the world's best players will be gathering in Albuquerque, N.M., later this week to contest the world championships.
A few of them, however, have already been giving thought to the 1995 world championships in Beijing.
To compete in the Bermuda Bowl there, Canada will have to win a playoff with Mexico and Bermuda.
The Canadians will be favored in that, because five world-class players recently qualified to represent their country: Fred Gitelman, Eric Kokish, George Mittelman, Mark Molson and Joe Silver.
In the qualifying contest in Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, in June, Silver, as West, helped his team with a brilliant opening lead on the diagramed deal.


Media Giants Jockey for Position As Fight for Networks Heats Up
While Time Warner and General Electric continued to hold what several executives described as mostly exploratory negotiations involving Time Warner's interest in NBC, other media companies scrambled last week to get positions of their own.
One senior executive called it "the biggest game of musical chairs ever to hit this business."
The only problem with being in the game, added the executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, is that "nobody is really sure how many chairs there are and how many companies really want to sit in them."


Abroad at Home; 'Not in A Single Man'
Haiti poses many difficult questions for President Clinton.
None is more prickly -- or more important to the integrity of his Presidency -- than whether to ask Congress for authority to launch an invasion.
Mr.
Clinton told a press conference last month that he did not have to ask.
"Like my predecessors of both parties," he said, "I have not agreed that I was constitutionally mandated" to have Congressional approval.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI'S GUBERNATORIAL FENCE-SITTING
Rudolph W. Giuliani, New York City's first Republican Mayor in a generation, is testing the patience of his party by withholding his endorsement in tomorrow's gubernatorial primary between State Senator George E. Pataki and Richard M. Rosenbaum while cozying up to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and generally parceling out his popularity and praise to influence the race for governor on his own terms.


An Officer's Painful Trip to the Edge and His Long Journey Back
Officer Paul Ciurcina's drift to the brink of suicide began when two colleagues were killed on a Brooklyn street.
Struggling to save one of them in the back of a patrol car by mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, he swallowed the man's blood.
And in that strange communion, they were linked.
"I can taste it still today," said Mr.
Ciurcina, 52, a decorated police officer who was dismissed from the department on a psychological disability 11 years ago and is still in therapy.
"I tasted blood. He's a part of me."


Kevorkian's Sister, 68, Dies
Margaret Janus, who helped her brother, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, in assisted suicides, died today at Sinai Hospital here.
She was 68 and lived in Troy, Mich.
The cause was a heart attack, said her physician, Dr. Stanley Levy.


Soviet Struggle to Build the Bomb
Several former Soviet atomic physicists and spies tell in the three-hour documentary that begins tonight on the Discovery Channel how they went about collecting secrets from the West and building their country's first atomic bomb.
Their accounts are supplemented by recently unearthed material from Russia's archives about the operations of Department S, the intelligence agency that oversaw the whole works.
Although revelations in "The Red Bomb" are in shorter supply than uranium was for the Soviets, the account of how Stalin at first ignored reports of German nuclear research, then ordered a crash program under his secret-police chief, Lavrenti P. Beria, throws light on the way a police state gets things done.
Unfortunately, the producers resort to hokey techniques -- cameras tracking gloomy hallways and such -- to add a portentous note, and the dramatizations of Soviet scientists at work smack of B movies.


In Baseball, the Good Old Days Started Early
Baseball  An Illustrated History  By Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns  486 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $60.
Once upon a time in the American Republic, they played a beautiful game called major league baseball.
Remember?


Zinc and Alzheimer's
To the Editor:
In "Experiments Link Alzheimer's Condition and Zinc" (Science Times, Sept. 6), you quote Dr.
Rudolph Tanzi as saying that even if zinc is related to Alzheimer's disease, there is no need to worry because the amounts you get in food or in vitamin supplements are not enough to harm you.
This neglects to consider the possible effect on amyloid protein formation from the zinc in hair shampoos.


Solectron Corp.(SLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26


The Primary: Highlights of Major Races in New York State. . .
GOVERNOR THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES MARIO M. CUOMO, 64.
Governor since 1983.
A lawyer, he was appointed Secretary of State by Gov.
Hugh Carey in 1975.
He lost to Edward I. Koch in the 1977 New York City mayoral race but was elected lieutenant governor with Mr.
Carey in 1978.
He has raised over $6 million for the campaign.
LENORA B. FULANI, 44.
A developmental psychologist in New York City and chairwoman of the New Alliance Party.
Over the past 12 years she has run for New York City mayor, lieutenant governor, governor and President, never garnering more than 1 percent of the vote.
She has raised more than $93,000.
THE ISSUES: At the heart of Ms.
Fulani's campaign is the premise that she is an alternative to Mr.
Cuomo.
Beyond that, she has called for easier ballot access for statewide candidates, term limits for state officials, and initiative and referendum.
Mr.
Cuomo, who has largely ignored the primary challenge, supports improving ballot access, but opposes term limits and initiative and referendum, saying all those issues should be debated at a constitutional convention.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.(SHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 13


Youth in Custody Battle Is Detained in Paris After Running Away
The battle over Shai Fhima Rheuven shifted to Paris yesterday, after it was disclosed that the teen-ager had run off to France three weeks ago and was detained last Thursday while trying to return to the United States using someone else's passport.
Shai, 15, has been the center of a fierce custody struggle since 1992, when he vanished while studying for his bar mitzvah with an Orthodox rabbi in Brooklyn.
His family contended that he had been kidnapped.
When Shai surfaced nearly two years later, he said that because of his religious beliefs, he no longer wanted to live with his mother, Hana Fhima of Ramsey, N.J., or her former husband, the youth's father, Michael Reuven, an Israeli.
Shai said they were not Orthodox and did not share his religious beliefs.


Noncampaign Yields A Windfall Coffer
To the Editor:
I was astonished to learn that Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican Senator from New York, still has in his possession the many hundreds of thousands of dollars he raised for a gubernatorial campaign that was never waged.


Q&amp;A
Good Clean Dirt
Q.
How dirty is dirt?
Do I have to wash fresh vegetables if I know I didn't put pesticides or manure on my garden?


'New' Light in the Forest Is Named Sylvanshine
IT was during a predawn summer drive through a forested region of Canada that Dr.
Alistair B. Fraser first observed the curious sight of trees glistening in the moonlight as though covered by snow.
Dr.
Fraser later described the scene: "You're driving along on a warm August night. Everything is black on either side. You are not expecting anything unusual. You come around a corner and all of a sudden you think you're in a winter wonderland. It is not a subtle phenomenon."


Richard Salomon Memorial
A memorial service for Richard B. Salomon, a philanthropist and former chairman and chief executive of Lanvin-Charles of the Ritz, will be held at 11 A.M. tomorrow at The New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
The service will be in the Celeste Bartos Forum.
Mr. Salomon, who died in July, was chairman of the library's board from 1977 to 1981.


JAZZ
A Saxophonist Conveys The Idiom of a Time  Birdland
Virginia Mayhew, a saxophonist and band leader who performed on Thursday night, has a precise ear for idiom.
Her compositions, bluesy and influenced by hard-bop, can almost be dated to a year.
And when she plays saxophone, especially the alto, it's clear that she has spent time studying the exact rhythms, harmonies and melodic ideas that constitute an idiom.


Uncharted, and Bitter, Territory Awaits the Owners and Players
Imposition.
It is a word that is starting to take on as much importance as the words salary cap as it becomes increasingly obvious that the 1994 major league season's life supports are about to be disconnected.


Friends Depict Loner With Unraveling Life
When Frank Eugene Corder, a 38-year-old truck driver, crashed a small airplane on the White House grounds today, he ended a life that had been spiraling downward for more than a year.
Mr.
Corder's relatives said he was hospitalized for treatment of alcoholism last November, and court records show that he was convicted of a drug offense early this year.
His marriage, to his third wife, broke up three weeks ago, and since last Friday, Mr.
Corder had been living in Keyser's Motel, a modest residential motel in Aberdeen.


CHRONICLE
What more could a fellow ask for?
Here's what's happening to MEL TORME today, his 69th birthday.
Oxford Press is publishing his book "My Singing Teachers." Concord Jazz is issuing a CD, "Mel Torme's Tribute to Bing Crosby, Paramount's Greatest Singer." Palomar will begin distributing a videotape, "Mel Torme Live at the Ambassador." In addition, he opens a one-month engagement at Michael's Pub on East 55th Street tonight.


Bargain Zoning in the Big City; New York Seeks an Economic Lift, Suburban Style, by Wooing Discount Stores
Stretched across the open doorway at the store entrance on a recent morning was a red-and-gold ribbon with a fancy bow tied in the middle.
Outside, almost 300 people waited impatiently in line, clutching fliers promising gifts.
Inside, dozens of employees clapped and cheered as the opening of the largest free-standing home appliance and electronics store in New York City drew near.
"The name of the game is jobs," said Claire Shulman, the Queens Borough President, just before she cut the ribbon at the new 75,000-square-foot Tops Appliance City superstore on Northern Boulevard in Long Island City that will employ 350 people.
"Thank you for this expression of faith in the future of Queens."


Toolmaker's Thumb Not Unique to Humans
SINCE the first stone tools appeared in Africa about two and a half million years ago, corresponding with the emergence of the earliest direct human ancestors, anthropologists have long assumed that the ability to make tools was somehow linked to brain size.
The earliest members of the genus Homo, with a relatively large brains, had the ability, so it was thought, but not their smaller-brained primate relatives.
This standard assumption is now being challenged by an anatomical study that has produced a rule of thumb that is more than a figure of speech.


Clinton Working to Strengthen Ties to Clergy
Richard M. Nixon had a close friendship with Billy Graham.
Jimmy Carter taught Sunday school while living in the White House.
And Bill Clinton, despite being the target of conservative preachers, delights in punctuating his speeches with scriptural passages and broad religious references and in holding informal sessions with religious leaders.
The President has not shied from religious settings, whether that involves attending Rosh ha-Shanah services last week on Martha's Vineyard or addressing the National Baptist Convention USA on Friday in New Orleans.


Quebec Separatists Win Provincial Election, Ending the Liberal Party's 9-Year Reign
This province of seven million, Canada's largest in land area and second-largest in population, today elected a government dedicated to making Quebec a new North American republic.
After a spirited 50-day election campaign, voters gave a majority of the 125 seats in the Quebec National Assembly to a reinvigorated separatist party, the Parti Quebecois, whose leader, Jacques Parizeau, becomes the province's 28th premier.


Patterns
Westwood Gets Her Due
The concierge caught his breath as he watched Vivienne Westwood gently pick her way across the lobby of the Carlyle Hotel yesterday in eight-inch heels.
The look on his face was similar to that of the fashion insiders who have watched Ms.
Westwood throughout her career, one brave step after another.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Stocks Ebb as Traders Await Data on Spending
Stock traders trimmed prices on stocks yesterday, girding for the second blow of a one-two punch, as the Government issues its report on consumer inflation today.
In advance of the Consumer Price Index for August, stock prices drifted lower on most leading stock indexes yesterday.
Bond and gold prices also edged lower, while the dollar held steady.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.68
3.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.61
4.55
2.98
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.99
4.93
3.03
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.44
7.42
5.27
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.71
7.70
5.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.58
8.56
6.86
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.47
6.46
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Race for Governor
CANDIDATE George E. Pataki  PRODUCER Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Sacramento, Calif., and Alexandria, Va.


Goma Journal; Now Heavens Drown The Rwandans in Woes
Muddy streams and stagnant pools dot the refugee camps here as daily rainstorms soak the thousands of thatched huts stretching for miles across this stark volcanic land.
At times the rain is so heavy even the shoulder-to-shoulder huts disappear.
No one can escape.
Some huddle under the leaves of banana trees.
An old man, back against the wind, sits stooped on a stump bravely holding a dilapidated umbrella as the storm whips at him.


Randall Fostvedt, Music Producer, 41
Randall Fostvedt, a concert and record producer and artists representative, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 41 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Vincent Wagner, a friend.


Deficit Reduction, Chapter and Verse
The other day I was surfing through the channels when I heard a spokesman for the Christian Coalition explaining his organization's platform.
I was surprised to hear that one of the planks was balancing the budget.
I am not an expert on Christian doctrine -- or on Jewish doctrine either, for that matter -- but I have paid a lot of attention to arguments about balancing the budget.
With one exception, I don't think I have ever heard it suggested that balancing the budget was a particularly Christian precept.


Air &amp; Water Technologies Corp.(AWT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


INSIDE
Separatists Ahead in Quebec
Separatists were projected to have won a Quebec legislative election, where polls have indicated dissatisfaction with the economy.
Page A8.
Accord on Population Issues
After a week of debate, a panel of the United Nations population meeting agreed on reproductive rights and population control issues.
Page A10.
Swapping Elsie the Cow
Surprising Wall Street, Borden Inc. agreed to be taken over by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the leveraged buyout firm.
Page D1.


Moore Gets Star Role Playing With a Cast
At first glance, Rob Moore's first two games last season look a lot like his first two this season: 15 receptions for 264 yards in 1993 compared with 14 and 230 the past two weeks.
A closer look, however, points up some important differences.


Spiegel
Class A shares of Spiegel Inc., the catalogue company, fell sharply in Nasdaq trading yesterday after an analyst with Robertson, Stephens &amp; Company cut her assessment of the company to "market performer" from "buy." Spiegel, based in Downers Grove, Ill., has recently been trading closer to its 52-week low of $13.875, set on July 28.


To Nourish More Than the Body
The Hungry Soul  Eating and the Perfecting of Our Nature  By Leon R. Kass  Illustrated. 248 pages.
The Free Press. $24.95.
In "The Hungry Soul," Leon R. Kass has attempted to light a ring of sacred fire around the dinner table.
The flame sputters in the wind of Dr.
Kass's prose and fizzles under the weight of his polemic.
But any reader whose world view has been altered, however slightly, by a scent, a taste, or a meal, will wish he had a bellows as he plows through this dense and often erudite book.
What food lover could resist trying to stoke the premise that by reclaiming the deeper meaning of eating, society could be cured of its "spiritual anorexia"?


New York City Primary Choices
This list summarizes our recommendations for some contested New York City races in today's Democratic primary in which the outcome is tantamount to election.
The polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Both Republicans and Democrats also have statewide races on today's ballot.
In those contests we reserve our endorsements until the November general elections.
Bronx HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  15th District (Marble Hill): Charles Rangel; 17th District (North Riverdale, Fieldston, Riverdale, Norwood, Woodlawn, Williamsbridge and Baychester, Wakefield, Co-op City, part of Belmont): Eliot Engel.
Brooklyn HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  Eighth District (Parts of Borough Park, Bensonhurst, Coney Island, Brighton Beach, Seagate and Gravesend): Jerrold Nadler.
ASSEMBLY  37th District (Parts of East New York, Bushwick and Ridgewood): Catherine Nolan; 47th District (Bensonhurst and Gravesend): Frank Barbaro; 51st District (Park Slope area): Felix Ortiz; 54th District (Cypress Hills, parts of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Williamsburg, Bushwick, City Line and East New York): Darryl Towns; 55th District (Ocean Hill-Brownsville, Crown Heights and Bedford-Stuyvesant): William Boyland.
CIVIL COURT  First Municipal District (Downtown Brooklyn to Navy Yard): Sarah Krauss; Second Municipal District (Ocean Hill and Bedford-Stuyvesant area): Bert Bunyan; Fourth Municipal District (Flatbush area, Canarsie and Jamaica Bay): Dolores Waltrous-Joseph.
Manhattan HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  Eighth District (Battery Park, South Street area, Greenwich Village, West Village, Chelsea, Clinton and part of the Upper West Side): Jerrold Nadler; 15th District (Washington Heights and Harlem): Charles Rangel.
STATE SENATE  27th District (Greenwich Village, West Village, SoHo, Battery Park City, most of midtown, parts of the Lower East Side, East Village, Chelsea, Clinton and the Upper West Side): Catherine Abate.
ASSEMBLY  68th District (East Harlem, parts of the Upper East Side and Manhattan Valley): Nelson Antonio Denis.
Queens ASSEMBLY  33d District (Bellerose, Cambria Heights, Cunningham Heights, Hollis, Queens Village, St. Albans): Barbara Clark; 37th District (Long Island City, Ridgewood, Sunnyside and Woodside): Catherine Nolan.
Westchester HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  17th District (parts of Yonkers, Mount Vernon, Pelham and New Rochelle): Eliot Engel.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 7.70 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The issue is noncallable.


Latest Threat to Yellowstone: Admirers Are Loving It to Death
A HIKER to the top of Mount Washburn in the heart of Yellowstone National Park may find it hard to believe that the wild land stretching out before him could ever be in serious jeopardy, so eternal does the spectacle seem.
From 10,243 feet, where marmots scurry about above the timberline, distant slopes garbed in evergreen forests alternate with the gold-beige velvet of grassy inclines and alpine meadows.
Deep gorges, cascading cataracts and broad rivers cut through a sweeping vista punctuated by blue lakes and bright green mountain marshes.
Close up, Yellowstone's incomparable geysers spout and its hot pools bubble, and the land abounds with the elk, bear, moose, deer, antelope, bison and bighorn sheep that have earned it the nickname "America's Serengeti."


Key Promotion Is Expected For Capital Cities Executive
Capital Cities/ABC is likely to elevate Robert A. Iger to president and chief operating officer of the company, possibly as soon as next week, senior network executives said yesterday.
Mr.
Iger, who is currently the company's executive vice president as well as president of the ABC network group, has been expected to succeed Thomas S. Murphy as the chairman and chief executive of Capital Cities, once Mr.
Murphy retires.
Mr.
Murphy has told associates that he expects to remain in his position for another year to 18 months.


Steep Hurdles for Rescue
TAKING an ecosystem-wide approach to the management of Yellowstone, as many conservation biologists argue is the only effective approach, might require some over-arching political authority, given the near-impossibility of forging an alliance among the ecosystem's welter of political and administrative jurisdictions.
But opponents appear to have killed off, at least for now, any attempt to impose such an arrangement.
As recently as four years ago, greater Yellowstone was being touted as a first-class laboratory for ecosystem management.
But in the Bush Administration, highly organized defenders of extractive industries and private property succeeding in killing a "vision document" for the ecosystem's future that had been drafted by Federal agencies.
Opponents attacked the document as part of an environmentalist plot to "lock up" land against development and exploitation, and their conservative allies in Washington prevailed.


India's Democracy Needs U.S. Support
To the Editor:
I was disappointed by "India's Dirty Little War" (editorial, Sept. 6), about human rights abuses in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir.
United States policy has historically favored Pakistan, and only recently has there been some movement toward redressing the balanced with India.
Without whitewashing human rights abuses in Kashmir, it is important to recognize that India is not merely dealing with pro-Pakistan militant groups in the territory, but with Pakistan-sponsored terrorism.


President Leads Swearing-In Of New Corps of Volunteers
Raising his right hand and beaming like a proud scoutmaster, President Clinton swore in a group of the first 15,000 members of Americorps, the domestic Peace Corps that he promised in his campaign and that was authorized by Congress a year ago.
The members, most of whom will receive educational grants in exchange for their service, will begin work around the country in programs ranging from immunization efforts for children and the elderly to recycling, tutoring, crime prevention and urban revitalization.


Grant in Legal Limbo After Contract Ruling
A year after he upheld a contract with a controversial opt-out clause that allowed Chris Dudley and the Portland Trail Blazers to make a multimillion-dollar mockery of the National Basketball Association salary cap, a Federal judge served notice yesterday that as a cap-breaker the one-year opt-out could prove to be a one-year aberration.
Rejecting arguments that his opinion in the Dudley case last year had foreclosed further N.B.A. challenges to similar contracts, Judge Dickinson Debevoise of District Court in Newark refused yesterday to grant automatic approval of a contract between Horace Grant and the Orlando Magic.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries(DWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Invasion of Haiti Would Be Limited, Clinton Aides Say
Struggling to win Congressional and public support for an invasion of Haiti, the Clinton Administration offered assurances today that American soldiers would do little more than restore Haiti's exiled President to power.
Officials also issued a grim new litany of human rights abuses by the ruling junta.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A consolidation will change the coffee without caffeine into a brand without its own identity.
SANKA, one of the most venerable names in consumer marketing, is losing its status as an independent brand in a consolidation underscoring the triage among weaker, slower-selling grocery products.
Sanka, introduced to Americans in 1923, was for decades the nation's only mass-marketed decaffeinated coffee.
Now, without fanfare, it will become a variety of Maxwell House coffee, which, like Sanka, is produced by the General Foods U.S.A. subsidiary of Kraft General Foods Inc.


Judge Rules That Muslim Inmate Was Unfairly Punished
A former inmate who served 17 years for rape has been awarded $157,000 by a Federal judge who ruled that New York State correction officials shuttled him from prison to prison, segregated him, ransacked his cell and even denied him medical treatment in retaliation for his zealousness as a leader of Muslim inmates.
Judge Leonard B. Sand, in a ruling issued last week in United States District Court in Manhattan, said the plaintiff, Ya' Qub Shamsid-Deen, who was imprisoned under the name Jory Lowrance, had been subjected to years of unwarranted disciplinary actions by officials who regarded him as a troublemaker and contended that his frequent transfers and confinements were based on valid prison security requirements.


Borden Agrees to a Takeover
Taking Wall Street by surprise, Borden Inc. agreed yesterday to be taken over by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company in an unusual transaction that would sharply reduce that leveraged buyout firm's equity in RJR Nabisco Holdings.
The deal would make the financially troubled Borden a privately held, independent company, although analysts were uncertain whether it would insure that Elsie the Cow, Borden's beloved icon, would not eventually be put permanently out to pasture.


Anticipation and Worry as School Begins
Theirs were simple exchanges, words of wisdom passed from sister to brother, friend to friend, as they prepared to begin another school year in New York City.
Ebonie Jackson, 15, sat on her family's front porch in the Bedford-Stuyvesant area of Brooklyn and told her baby brother, Daniel Brooks 2d, 11, to wear clean jeans and not baggy pants, not to take drugs, to walk away from fights, to listen in class and strive for success.
No matter that he was only going to be in the fifth grade.
He had to learn early, she said, so he would not look up one day and discover that it was too late.


Mark IV Industries(IV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cooper Offered Plea Agreement
As part of a proposed plea agreement, MICHAEL COOPER would plead guilty to assault and battery on his wife and receive a deferred sentence while continuing counseling for six months, the prosecutor in his case, MICHELLE FRECHETTE, said yesterday.
Cooper, the Laker assistant coach, was arrested after a domestic dispute with his wife July 27 at the couple's Corrales, N.M., home and is free on $400 bond.
He has entered inpatient counseling. (AP)


U.S. Official Supports South Africa Site
Playing host to the 2004 Olympics would give South Africa a chance to spur development and raise its profile, the head of the United States Olympic Committee said yesterday in Cape Town.
LEROY WALKER ended a brief visit by telling members of Parliament that he supported South Africa's bid to hold the Games a decade from now in Cape Town.
"I am willing to work hard to ensure that your bid is successful," Walker said.
If Cape Town was chosen, the 2004 Games would be the first held in Africa.


Charges Are Brought Against 2 Members Of the Beers Family
Katie Beers's mother and 18-year-old brother were arrested today and arraigned separately in First District County Court in Central Islip on unrelated charges.
Marilyn Beers, whose daughter Katie, 11, was held captive by a family friend in an underground bunker for 16 days in January 1993, was charged with illegally collecting unemployment benefits totaling $3,750 between April 6, 1992, and Oct. 4, 1992, while she was employed by a taxi company in Mastic, law-enforcement officials said.


FHP International Corp.(FHPC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with the obituary of a former chairman and chief executive of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company in the 1960's and 1970's misstated his given name in some copies.
He was Raymond C. Firestone, not Richard.


Key Panel at Cairo Talks Agrees on Population Plan
After a week of contentious debate, the main drafting committee of the United Nations Conference on Population and Development reached agreement today on a program that defines a new concept of reproductive rights and lays out a 20-year strategy to keep the world's population growth in check.
The new "Program of Action," which reflects days of bitter negotiations on wording, appears to be generally acceptable to the four main blocs at the conference: Muslim countries, the developing world, the wealthy Western nations and the Vatican and its allies.


Cunningham Turns Around Crowd as Well as the Bears
Oh, if Randall Cunningham and the Philadelphia Eagles could play all their games on Monday night.
With the nation watching.
With something to prove.
Backed against the wall after a season-opening, listless road loss to the Giants and booed at the start here, Cunningham and the Eagles responded with one of their best offensive performances since he joined the team 10 seasons ago.
Philadelphia scored the game's first 30 points and then cruised to a 30-22 victory before 64,890 fans at Veterans Stadium, though Chicago made things uncomfortable at the end.


Pilot's Exploit Rattles White House Officials
Rattled security officials acknowledged today that they could not account for how a small Cessna airplane breached the closely guarded White House compound early this morning.
Nor could they guarantee that they could prevent a similar occurrence in the future.
Frank Eugene Corder's early morning ride highlighted a vulnerability that has worried some experts for years.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL Mets' Farmhand Pulsipher Gets No-Hitter
Bill Pulsipher threw the first no-hitter in a Class AA Eastern League playoff game in 57 years, leading the visiting Binghamton Mets to a 2-0 victory over Harrisburg last night in Game 2 of the championship series.
Pulsipher had eight strikeouts and walked four as the Mets evened the best-of-five series at 1-1.


Low Ratings for Men's Final
Andre Agassi's victory in the men's final of the United States Open on Sunday did not galvanize viewers as CBS had hoped.
In preliminary overnight national ratings for the 4 P.M.-6:15 P.M. period, the Open received a 5.5 rating, down 5 percent from 5.8 a year ago, when Pete Sampras defeated Cedric Pioline.
Pro football was the primary culprit.
On NBC, the 4 P.M. game earned a 16.2 rating, up 7 percent from 15.2 a year ago.
In the New York market, NBC's Jets-Denver Broncos game rated a 13.3.


Germans to Regain Bayer Aspirin
In a $1 billion deal with SmithKline Beecham, Bayer A. G., the giant German drug and chemical company, yesterday regained the American rights to its best-known invention, Bayer aspirin, which were confiscated as enemy property in World War I.
Bayer agreed to buy the North American portion of the Sterling Winthrop nonprescription drug business from SmithKline, which just two weeks ago announced that it was buying Sterling's over-the-counter drug lines from the Eastman Kodak Company for $2.9 billion.
SmithKline, based in London, is keeping the international portion of the business.


Primaries Today
Four Democratic candidates for attorney genera, above, face off today in the most unpredictable New York primary.
Voters will pick Democratic and Republican candidates for Governor in New York and Connecticut, and Congressional races are also on the ballot.
Article, page B1; summary of major races, page B4.


Sports of The Times; Who Are These Jets, Anyway?
ARE these the same old Jets, in their green-and-white suits and haberdashery, or the new old Jets?
Before proceeding, let us for a moment go back in time:
Merrily rolling through the league, the Jets in 1986 started off with 10 victories in their first 11 games.
There was euphoria galore.
This was a team for the ages, surely.
A reporter called up the team's owner, Leon Hess, a quiet man, and asked for his reaction to all this bliss.
"My heart's been broken so often by this team that I'd like to reserve any comments," he said.
"I'll talk at the end of the season, if we can keep winning."


Foe's Pullout Gives Jeb Bush G.O.P. Victory
Jeb Bush, a son of former President George Bush, won Florida's Republican nomination for governor by default today when his only remaining challenger dropped out of the race.
The withdrawal of Mr.
Bush's opponent in a runoff election, Secretary of State Jim Smith, allows the general election fight between Mr.
Bush, a Miami real-estate developer, and Gov.
Lawton Chiles, the Democratic incumbent, to begin.


Gene Study Suggests Why Cancer Is a Disease of the Elderly
CANCER is overwhelmingly a disease of the elderly, and molecular biologists think they know why.
As people age, the scientists theorize, they accumulate genetic errors in their cells that may eventually send them careering down the path to cancer.
But proof of this hypothesis has been hard to come by.
Now one group of investigators, led by Dr.
Gino Cortopassi, a molecular biologist at the University of Southern California, has found evidence consistent with the aging hypothesis for one common cancer of the blood cells: non-Hodgkins lymphoma.
Cells with mutations that can lead to this cancer are 13 times more common in old people than in young people, Dr.
Cortopassi and his colleagues have found.


Travelers Cancel Flights In 737's and on USAir
Travel agents around the country reported yesterday that a large number of travelers have canceled flights on USAir, while others are trying to steer clear of flying on the Boeing-737, the ubiquitous twin-engine plane involved in last week's USAir crash that killed all 132 passengers.
"A lot of people canceled their flights on USAir, even when it meant booking another airline at a higher fare," said Judy Dwiggins of Advantage Travel and Tours in Charlotte, N. C. "One client even decided to drive back to Charlotte from California rather than fly."


Race for Governor
Candidate: Gov. Mario M. Cuomo Producer: The Garth Group


Giuliani Denounces Board of Education
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani began New York City's school year yesterday with a visit to a Manhattan junior high school and quickly used the occasion to assail the Board of Education.
With students facing larger classes and fewer course choices, Mr.
Giuliani blamed school administrators for the problems, continuing a dispute over finances that raged for months between City Hall and the Board of Education last spring.


Cotton-Top Tamarins: Cooperative, Pacifist And Close to Extinct
COTTON-TOP tamarins are the punks among monkeys: small in stature, big in hair and noisy.
At six inches high and weighing barely a pound, they are one of the world's tiniest primates.
A shock of white fur rises from the midline of the skull in a kind of Einsteinian Mohawk, dipping down toward ears so prominent they beg to be adorned by a row of hoop earrings.
And the monkeys make gorgeous punk music, squealing, whistling, chirping, letting loose with slicing screams.
But lest their singing be dismissed as so much senseless muddle, researchers say the tamarins' vocal repertory of 38 distinct sounds is unusually sophisticated, even by primate standards.
It is structured like a language, conforming to grammatical rules and able to express curiosity, fear, dismay, playfulness, warnings of predators approaching, a desire to be groomed, joy over food discovered and calls to the young among them to join the feast.


Ruth Friedlich, Television Ad Writer, 97
Ruth K. Friedlich, a writer whose articles were published in several magazines, including Reader's Digest and Better Homes and Gardens, and who helped write some of the earliest television commercials, died on Wednesday at the Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs. Friedlich, who was 97, lived in Manhattan.


Candidates in Today's Primaries
NEW YORK GOVERNOR Mario M. Cuomo (D)*
Lenora B. Fulani (D) George E. Pataki (R) Richard M. Rosenbaum (R) Robert G. Relph Sr. (C) U.S.
SENATE Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D)*
Al Sharpton (D) Bernadette Castro (C) Henry F. Hewes (C)


Spitting Images: Trying the New Inkjet Printers
RED Delicious apples and green Granny Smiths shine with crisp promise.
Ruby and black grapes glow translucently.
Scarlet-dimpled, green-stemmed strawberries pertly challenge a golden-fleshed melon and blushing nectarines.
Yes, this is the Personal Computers column.
Too many reproductions of a mouthwatering test photo have momentarily addled the brain of a person awash in a horn of plenty of a different kind.
The harvest season has also brought a cornucopia of color inkjet printers at surprisingly low prices.


Toro (TTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


H. J. Maidenberg, 66, Reporter
H.
J.
Maidenberg, a former correspondent for The New York Times in South America and a specialist in commodities and money markets for the newspaper's business and financial news section, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 66 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, said his brother, David Maidenberg.


Different Cultures Have Different Values
To the Editor:
I read David M. Raddock's Sept. 2 letter on China with amusement.
Yes, we are still eating dogs in China.
What's wrong with that?


James Clavell's Japan
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 8 obituary for James Clavell describes the author of "Shogun" and other epic novels about East Asia as a gifted storyteller able to draw the reader into a faraway time and place.
In "Shogun," he provided Western readers with a window on the distinctly Japanese way of life of the feudal era, particularly the Japanese understanding of reality through spirituality.


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 6


Mall Developer to Complete Project in Rockland County
Five months after it stopped construction and left a scarred landscape where a $250 million mall had been promised, a developer has returned to Rockland County with a pledge to finish the project.
In April, the Pyramid Companies stopped work on the Palisades Center mall, saying that protracted negotiations with the New York State Thruway Authority over the price of a parcel of land had fatally thrown off its construction and financing schedule.


Griffey to Manage Another Son
KEN GRIFFEY once played with his son, KEN Jr., on the Seattle Mariners.
Now, he will get a chance to manage another son, CRAIG, in the Arizona Instructional League.
The father was selected yesterday to manage the Seattle Mariners' entry in the league which is scheduled to begin play Sept. 19.
Craig Griffey is a highly rated prospect in the Mariners' organization. (AP)


On a Pony, A Fantasy Come True
FIVE years ago, Deborah Couples stood on a lawn in Palm Beach, Fla., watching fabulously rich men on horseback galloping back and forth, swinging mallets at a little plastic ball.
Smitten, Ms.
Couples made herself a promise: that she, too, would someday saddle up and swing a mallet at a little plastic ball.


Interstate Bakeries Corp.(IBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 20


'92 Shooting Victim Dies of Pneumonia
Stuart Abramowitz, a subway conductor who was hailed as a hero when he was shot more than two years ago while trying in vain to protect a woman from a gunman, has died.
Mr.
Abramowitz, 43, died of pneumonia at Brookhaven Hospital on Thursday, said his son, Jeffrey.
Mr.
Abramowitz, who lived in Holbrook, L.I., with his wife, Francine, and their son, had been in frail health since the shooting, paralyzed from the neck down.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc.(JBM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Lions' Carter Out for at Least 6-8 Weeks
A broken collarbone will probably sideline Detroit Lions wide receiver ANTHONY CARTER for at least six to eight weeks.
Carter broke his collarbone and scapula during Sunday's 10-3 loss at Minnesota.
Carter, in his 10th National Football League season, sustained the injury on his only reception -- an 18-yard gain in the second quarter.
It was his first game at the Metrodome after playing the previous nine seasons with the Vikings. (AP)


A 'Virtual' Trade Show: You Don't Have to Go
It was a sign of the times that one of the first product demonstrations at the Networld + Interop computer trade show that began here today was for a "virtual trade show," with virtual display booths, virtual salespeople and virtual customers, all coming together as pulses of electrons traveling over the Internet, the global computer network.
The Virtual Places software demonstrated by Ubique Ltd., a privately held software start-up in Rehovot, Israel, is expected to allow Internet users who cannot physically come to the next Networld + Interop show to "meet" at the show's counterpart on the area of the Internet known as the World Wide Web.


Gibson Files Lawsuit Over Derivatives
Gibson Greetings Inc. sued the Bankers Trust Company yesterday, accusing it of "deception, cheating and fraud" in connection with a series of financial transactions known as derivatives.
In April, Gibson said it was taking a charge of $19.7 million because of several derivative transactions.


After a One-Day Strike, It's Back to the Classroom
Mary Lofaso was introducing herself to her fourth-period mathematics class at Mount Vernon High School this morning when her mind suddenly went blank.
"I forgot what I was going to say," Mrs.
Lofaso said, apologizing to two dozen students sitting stiffly at gray metal desks.
"I've been up since 2 this morning."


Why Small Business Disliked Health Care Plan
To the Editor:
Hooray for the collapse of health care social engineering!
While the observation of a sickness in our delivery system was accurate, the diagnosis was faulty and the prescription truly horrific.
The problem with our system today is not too little insurance and government, but rather too much.
Eighty percent of the $1 trillion spent on health care is affected by government subsidies.
There is simply no rational reason for large-scale government involvement in this sector of our economy, nor for insurance to be involved in day-to-day patient care.


Executive Changes
APPLIED MICROBIOLOGY INC., New York, appointed Fredric Price president and chief executive.
BARNEYS NEW YORK promoted Simon Doonan, its senior vice president in charge of advertising and display, to senior vice president of creative services, adding publicity and store design to his responsibilities.
Publicity was previously handled by Mallory Andrews, who has resigned to pursue other interests, the company said yesterday.


Ryan Struggles With an 0-2 Start
Lines to the local call-in show were still laced with venom today.
Buddy Bawl.
Cruddy Ball.
Fuddy-Duddy Ball.
Bob from Tucson took the more direct approach: "This guy is a joke."
Making fast friends, isn't he?


Brady (W.H.) Co.(BRCOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Golan Settlers Appeal To Israeli Public Opinion
Normally, Yehuda Harel worries about the farmlands and industries of his kibbutz, Merom Golan, but these days he has gone into salvage work.
What he is trying to salvage is his future on the Golan Heights -- and while he is at it, he says, the security of his country.


Mobil Oil's Review Narrowed to 2 Shops
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its Mobil 1 motor oil account to two finalists, with billings estimated at $15 million.
The account had been at DDB Needham Worldwide in New York, which will continue to handle accounts like Mobil fuels.
Judy Lynn Prince, a Mobil spokeswoman in Fairfax, Va., confirmed a report this week in Adweek that the review had been narrowed to Grace &amp; Rothschild and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, both in New York, after the elimination of four other undisclosed agencies.
Adweek listed Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston and Hal Riney &amp; Partners in Chicago as among those eliminated.
A decision is expected at the end of October, she said.


Agassi's Ascendance Righted All the Wrongs
It seems like only yesterday, but in truth it was just two weeks ago that things weren't looking so good for the United States Open in the eye, image or curb-appeal departments.
The defending champion Pete Sampras had a bad case of Achilles' heel, and the defending champion Steffi Graf was having delusions of octogenarianism due to the ache in her lower back.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about West Africa misstated the number of countries in the region that use the CFA franc as their currency.
It is 13, not 11.


Three May Be A Charm For Ranger
At age 26, having landed with his third National Hockey League team in six professional seasons, Glen Featherstone may finally be in the right place for the right role at the right time.
The Rangers acquired him in a trade with the Boston Bruins for a minor league forward, Daniel Lacroix, because Featherstone is a large person -- 6 feet 4 inches and 215 pounds -- capable of doing certain, specific things.


CHRONICLE
Summer vacation season is barely over, and already organizations are rushing to shower worthy individuals with honors.
The Fulbright Association announced yesterday that it wwould award the second annual J. William Fulbright Prize for International Understanding to former President JIMMY CARTER.
He will receive the $50,000 prize on Oct. 1, his 70th birthday, at the association's annual conference in Washington.


Mechanics' View Gains
The Environmental Protection Agency has indicated in a preliminary decision that it will probably require automobile dealers to furnish independent repair shops with information necessary to make electronic repairs to cars' pollution-control systems.
The stance strikes a blow to auto makers, who prefer that the computer programs remain only in the hands of their dealers.
The independent repair industry was worried that dealers could erode their 80 percent share of the repair business if mechanics were unable to obtain the software needed to reprogram a car's computer nerve center and correct emission problems.


Players Will Get Back Pay
The National Labor Relations Board announced yesterday that National Football League players will receive $30 million in back pay arising out of the 1987 players strike.
The Players Association filed a complaint with the N.L.R.B. in 1987 when striking players who had agreed to return to their teams at the end of the walkout on Oct. 15 were not allowed to play in games on Oct. 18 and 19.
N.F.L. owners set a deadline for players to report, and when they did not meet the deadline, the owners instead staged games with replacement players.


Observer; Here's to The James Boys
Thanks to the baseball strike, Henry James has at last gained purchase on that part of my consciousness -- I might almost call it my psyche -- which has long enabled me to endure summer's idler hours without suffering a sense of what I might once have thought of as emptiness.
Exposure to the Jamesian sensibility now makes me wince at the realization that I was ever so indifferent to the nuances of daily life as to think myself capable of experiencing a condition so blatant as emptiness, even under a condition as trying as an absence of baseball.
Prior to the vexing situation which resulted in baseball's removal from what a more blunt observer might call my psychic forefront, I had been conscious that a curious sense of vacuity had begun to shape my daily conduct, if not indeed my character.


Conscience Clear, Says Mitterrand
President Francois Mitterrand declared today that his conscience was "perfectly clear" about revelations that he worked for the pro-Nazi Vichy Government early in World War II before he joined the French Resistance and rose to become a leading Socialist.
Along with Mr.
Mitterrand's failing health, the subject of his past consumed much of a 90-minute television interview tonight.
The details of his past, which were published in a book last week, have garnered so much interest in France largely because of the highly emotional issue of the degree of French resistance to Nazi ideology in the early years of the war.


The Magic of Dreams
Ann Carlson's "Mirage" magically transformed the vast arched spaces of the Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage into an art gallery in which the exhibits lived, breathed and moved.
For slightly more than an hour on Sunday afternoon, spectators were free to wander through the rooms.
There was much to see and hear in this multimedia presentation, which Ms.
Carlson, a choreographer, created in collaboration with several artists -- Todd Gilens, Pat Oleszko and Mary Ellen Strom -- and which was based, in part, upon the dream imagery of the large cast of children and adults.


METRO DIGEST
TOURIST ON SIGHTSEEING CRUISE IS SHOT
A sightseeing boat cruising along the Harlem River between Manhattan and the Bronx came under gunfire and a German tourist was shot through the shoulder on the open upper deck.
Alarmed passengers heard two or three more shots after the boat reached the Bronx shore seeking help.
The tourist was knocked to the deck of the Circle Line boat just after it passed under the Washington Bridge at 181st Street.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  FOOD STAMP FRAUD RING IS SMASHED
They were called markets, though they served few customers.
And some of them actually stocked food, though it was often stale.
But the main business of the operations was food stamps, according to Federal authorities in Manhattan, who said that they had smashed a ring of 30 Chinese grocers who trafficked illegally in the relief coupons and laundered more than $40 million in fraudulent receipts.
B3.


National Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bates Has Jaw Broken by Teammate
New Orleans Saints running back MARIO BATES, the team's No. 2 draft pick this year, will miss up to six weeks after having his jaw broken by teammate LORENZO NEAL, the club said.
Bates and Neal went out after the Saints' 38-24 loss to the Washington Redskins on Sunday night, ending up at Club 57, a lounge owned by former Saints linebacker RICKEY JACKSON.
"Neither one of them are quite sure as to exactly what happened," Coach Jim Mora said.
"Things got out of hand and we've got a player with a broken jaw."


Kerrigan Certain Harding Planned Attack
She never asked, but figure skater NANCY KERRIGAN says she has no doubt that TONYA HARDING was behind the clubbing attack that nearly cost Kerrigan her trip to the Olympics.
"I would like to know how she could do it, but I don't think there's an answer," Kerrigan told The Boston Sunday Globe.
"How could anyone do violence to someone? I think she needs help in her head."
Four people, including Harding's ex-husband, JEFF GILLOOLY, were sentenced to prison for their part in the Jan. 6 attack in which Kerrigan was struck above the knee as she sat by a practice rink.
Harding was spared a prison sentence after pleading guilty to conspiracy to hinder prosecution.
She said she didn't know about the attack beforehand.


Market Place; Buyout Firm Is Betting Wall Street Is Wrong
Borden Inc. may be the most despised big company around.
Its stock has fallen sharply amid talk that no one would buy its badly managed collection of businesses, ranging from the milk that made it famous to Cracker Jacks and Prince pasta.
So why would someone buy it?
But yesterday, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company did, serving notice that it thinks the conventional wisdom is very wrong.


Candidates Rally Voters For Primary
Even as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senator George E. Pataki approached today's primaries as inconvenient speed bumps on the road to the general election, four Democratic candidates for attorney general and dozens of Congressional contenders campaigned furiously yesterday on a shimmering day for retail politics.
In recent days, the advertising war between Mr.
Cuomo and Mr.
Pataki, both of whom face primaries today, has escalated from a skirmish into a firefight.
Mr.
Cuomo, for the first time in a television commercial, linked Mr.
Pataki, a Republican from Putnam County, to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Mr.
Pataki, meanwhile, is broadcasting a mudslinging ad that criticizes Mr.
Cuomo for mudslinging.


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


In a Shift, The British Lift Rates
Hoping to choke off inflation before it imperils the nation's steady if unspectacular economic recovery, Britain raised its benchmark interest rate today by half a point, to 5.75 percent, its first rate increase since 1989.
Following similar rate increases in Italy and Sweden last month, the move in Britain's base rate for short-term lending offered further evidence that Europe was now joining the United States in one of the trickiest dances in economic policy-making, tamping down incipient inflationary pressures without stamping out the underlying growth.


Payless Cashways (PCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


By Design; Success for the Dress
For years, designers tried to get women back into dresses, but women resisted until they found something they liked: the A-line slip.
So now that they have rediscovered dresses, women are likely to move into more covered-up styles for fall.
Calvin Klein has several knee-length bias-cut black styles, including a wool jersey empire ($550), a sleeveless empire with a pleated skirt ($750), and a long-sleeved wool gauze ($800).
Barneys New York has them.


GM Hughes Plans More Layoffs in California
In a further cutback of the military industry that strikes another blow to Southern California, GM Hughes Electronics said today that it would close a plant in Fullerton, Calif., and lay off 4,400 more employees -- or 10 percent of its work force of 51,000 -- over the next year and a half.
The reduction, which had been expected, continues a consolidation at the company that began in 1992.


Another Year, Another Bind for a Devil
Peter Sidorkiewicz finds himself in another precarious situation with the Devils.
At this time last year, it was a right shoulder injury that prevented the 30-year-old goaltender from having a chance to make the team.
This time around, Martin Brodeur and Chris Terreri are two virtually insurmountable obstacles for Sidorkiewicz, but the Devils are determined to give him another chance.
Either that, or they are in the process of showcasing the experienced goaltender for a possible trade.


Jury Selection in Tailhook Negligence Suit Begins in Nevada
Jury selection began here today in a civil trial involving one of the most sordid and divisive episodes in the history of the United States Navy.
The plaintiff is Paula A. Coughlin, a former Navy lieutenant and the original whistle-blower at the 1991 convention of the Tailhook Association, an independent group of retired and active naval aviators.
Ms.
Coughlin was among several dozen women who Navy investigators determined were sexually abused at the Las Vegas Hilton, where the convention was held.


Uncluttering the Screen When Using Windows
PERSONAL computers simplified our lives. Sure they did.
The first ones certainly made business tasks easier, although we had to learn the ins and outs of CP/M and early DOS to accomplish anything.
Then we learned the peculiar commands of the programs that actually accomplished those business tasks.
Wordstar or Lotus 1-2-3 running under primitive operating systems had steep learning curves.


Executive to Join Times
Harold F. Woldt Jr., a senior executive at Newsday, will be joining The New York Times later this month as deputy circulation director, The New York Times Company announced yesterday.
He will report to Charles E. Shelton, vice president for circulation, and will be responsible for circulation sales and operations -- including home delivery and customer service -- throughout the United States.
Mr.
Woldt, 47, is the senior vice president for circulation and distribution at Newsday.
In his nine years at the Long Island-based paper, Mr.
Woldt developed the circulation strategy for New York Newsday, an edition that is primarily sold in Brooklyn and Queens.


Hampton Out, but for How Long?
It was 6:45 A.M. at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, and Rodney Hampton was wide awake, despite not being able to sleep at all during the night because of intense pain near his lower back.
Hooked up to an intravenous feeder in a small room on the eighth floor, Hampton, one of the best running backs in the National Football League, could not sit up in bed without a tremendous amount of effort.
Hampton was in so much pain because he had been hit in the left kidney in the third quarter of the Giants' 20-17 victory over the Arizona Cardinals Sunday night.
The Giants said today that Hampton had suffered a bruise of the kidney and lower back and would remain in the hospital for another day or two.


Congress Must Vote on Haiti
To invade Haiti without prior Congressional approval would short-circuit the United States Constitution.
It would also leave the President with sole political responsibility if the operation turns sour.
Yet that is just what the Clinton Administration now suggests it might do.
Neither of the situations usually cited as justifying independent action by the Commander in Chief -- military crisis or unexpected threat to national security -- exists in this case.
To the contrary, Congressional deliberation is both practical and desirable, and there is plenty of time for it.


Of TV, Awards and, Above All, Sales
Lovers of trash television, rejoice.
The awards shows are back for a brand new season.
Prime-time addicts can once again gather to gloat over how the shows were too long or too vulgar or too commercial.
Pick your favorite complaint.
It's all part of the delicious whining game whose players, deep down, realize that the shows offer an uncannily accurate reflection of American culture and commerce.
Two major awards productions were mounted in the last week: the 11th Annual MTV Video Music Awards, carried live on Thursday from Radio City Music Hall, and the 46th Annual Prime-Time Emmy Awards, broadcast live on Sunday on ABC from the Pasadena Civic Auditorium in California.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CUBAN EXODUS HALTED  The departure of Cubans in small boats and rafts came to a virtual halt under the agreement between Cuba and the United States, as Cubans lined up seeking the new American immigrant visas.
A1


A Treatise on Football And Its Practitioners
N.F.L.
Films has produced pro football's glorious propaganda for 30 years with extraordinary, bombastic, witty and grandiose skill.
The work by Steve Sabol, usually seen on local stations during the football season and on ESPN, has canonized the National Football League's testosterone-injected work ethic, the upending tackles, crunching hits, Hail Mary passes, impossible receptions, battles in the trenches, muddy linemen and wacky bloopers.
These are men, Mr.
Sabol's oeuvre tells us, earthy, bloody giants, worthy of our love.
Though it is a lot of macho fun, "75 Seasons: The Story of the National Football League" is far more a celebration than anything approaching a complete history of the league.
It is a highlight film, giving us the N.F.L.'s oldest living former player, the Canton Bulldogs' 95-year-old Arda Bowser, recalling how he played four games in four days, both offense and defense, to earn enough money to buy his girlfriend an engagement ring.


WITH HIGH WINDS, CUBANS' EXODUS APPEARS TO END
The six-week-old flood of refugees that left more than 30,000 Cubans in American internment camps and an untold number dead at sea came to a virtual halt today.
Heavy winds across the northern coast conspired with the Cuban Coast Guard and the police to hurry the last dozens of people leaving in makeshift rafts and to dissuade others who had been preparing to go.


Hard-Nosed Volunteerism
President Clinton kicked off his promising national service program yesterday when he swore in, via satellite, thousands of volunteers across the country.
AmeriCorps will place 20,000 volunteers this year in community-based programs focusing on education, health, the environment and public safety.
Over time, the program could dwarf the Peace Corps at its peak.
The volunteers will work for up to two years earning minimum wages while receiving health insurance and about $5,000 a year in vouchers that can be used to pay for college or vocational training.


CHRONICLE
DAVID ROCKEFELLER has been named the recipient of the World Monuments Fund's Hadrian Award and will be honored at a luncheon at the Pierre Hotel on Oct. 14.
The award is given annually to an individual for lifelong efforts to preserve art and architecture.
Mr.
Rockfeller, a former chairman of the Chase Manhattan Bank, was a leader in the creation of corporate art collections in America through the formation of the Chase Manhattan Art Program.
He is also a former chairman of the Museum of Modern Art.


Gunfire Strikes German Sightseer On Circle Line Boat in New York
A sightseeing boat cruising along the Harlem River between Manhattan and the Bronx came under gunfire yesterday, and a German tourist was shot through the shoulder on the open upper deck.
Alarmed passengers heard two or three more shots after the boat reached the Bronx shore in search of help.
The tourist, identified as Ralf Bolowski, a 31-year-old postal supervisor from Hamburg, was knocked to the deck as the Circle Line boat moved north in the Harlem River just after the cruise passed under the Washington Bridge at 181st Street, off the Inwood shore of Manhattan.


Corrections
A listing of credits yesterday with a television review of "The Red Bomb" misidentified the cable channel that carried the program.
As the review correctly noted, it was the Discovery Channel, not the Disney Channel.


Corrections
An article, headline and picture caption yesterday about a reunion of 1950's residents of a Bronx neighborhood included several erroneous references to the area in some copies.
The neighborhood is Pelham Parkway, not Pelham Park.
The article also misidentified a street where one resident lived; it is Bronx Park East, not Bronx Parkway East.


Operas on Willful Women and Pliable Men
Like many another American arts institution, the San Francisco Opera fell on hard financial times recently and had to adopt stringent austerities.
But with one exception, these showed little onstage during the glittery first weekend of the company's 72d season, which was filled with big-name singers in new productions.
Perhaps taking a cue from a 1993 book by George Martin, "Verdi at the Golden Gate," the company opened on Friday evening with Verdi's "Macbeth." On Saturday evening it repeated the theme of the strong-willed, malicious woman who wreaks havoc through a weaker male proxy with the premiere of Conrad Susa's "Dangerous Liaisons."


Cuban Killed In Accident During Protest
A Cuban detainee died today in an accident at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, during a peaceful protest outside the refugee camps there, a military spokesman said.
The man was one of 2,000 Cuban refugees who had breached the concertina wire perimeter of their camp Sunday during a protest demonstration and congregated on the beach and in the hills of the sprawling naval station.


Alfred Loomis Jr., Olympic Sailor, 81
Alfred Lee Loomis Jr., a businessman and avid sailor, died last Wednesday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan, where he had been admitted for tests.
The cause of death was not known, said his daughter, Candace DiLello.
He was 81.
Mr.
Loomis had homes in Bluffton, S.C., and Oyster Bay, L.I.
During his mid-30's he won a gold medal in the 1948 Olympic Games in Britain while sailing a 6-Meter yacht.
In 1977, he was manager of the Independence-Courageous syndicate, the yachting team that successfully defended the America's Cup that year.


Dole Campaigns for Man He Called 'Loose Cannon'
As he campaigned all over Virginia today alongside Oliver L. North, Senator Bob Dole looked like a bridegroom stuck in a marriage of convenience: he went through all the motions, but his heart did not seem in it.
Mr.
Dole, the Senate Republican leader, cooperated when a volunteer affixed an "Ollie!" sticker to his lapel.
He clasped hands with Mr.
North as they raised their arms in a traditional victory pose.
And he implored voters to support Mr.
North, the Republican nominee here for the Senate, a man he once called "a loose cannon" who had "overstepped his bounds" in the Iran-contra affair.


POP
Passion and Promiscuity And Suspending Disbelief  Madison Square Garden
At the Budweiser Superfest on Friday night, R. Kelly, a singer whose most recent album of dance music about the bedroom, "12 Play" (Jive), has sold over two million copies, promised the women in the audience that he would stay with them all night.
Instead, he left the stage after playing for only an hour.
So let that be a lesson about sweet talk.
It's just talk.


It's September, But Just Don't Tell the Jets
If they have been Jets for a while, then they appreciate being 2-0.
For 2-0 is as much a state of mind as it is a perfect record.
"No question we're getting more breaks," eighth-year tackle Jeff Criswell said today.
"For a long time I thought God's football team was the Buffalo Bills."


Vernon Houk, Crucial Figure In Dioxin Issue, Is Dead at 64
Dr.
Vernon N. Houk, one of the Government's top environmental health specialists, who raised a scientific and political furor by declaring three years ago that it had been a mistake to evacuate Times Beach., Mo., in 1982 after fears were raised about the chemical dioxin, died on Sunday in Atlanta.
He was 64 and lived in Atlanta.
The cause was tracheal cancer, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, where Dr.
Houk had worked since 1968.


. . . And in Connecticut
GOVERNOR THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES WILLIAM E. CURRY JR., 42.
State Comptroller since 1990, lawyer, served as a state senator from 1979 to 1983, ran unsuccessfully for the U.S.
House of Representatives in 1982, former political director of Freeze Voter, the political arm of the Nuclear freeze movement.
JOHN B. LARSON, 46.
President pro tem of the State Senate since 1987, spent four years as a high school teacher, became president of an insurance agency in 1987, served on East Hartford school board and town council before being elected to the state Senate in 1983., THE ISSUES: The campaign has revolved largely around who would be a better manager.
Mr.
Larson, the party-endorsed candidate, cites his 11 years in the state Senate as proof of his leadership.
Mr.
Curry has blamed the Democratic establishment for the state's fiscal problems and says he would shake things up.
Both share strong anti-crime positions and similar economic development strategies.
The biggest difference is on tax cuts: Mr.
Larson promises a $287 million reduction in the income tax; Mr.
Curry has proposed a $1 billion cut in property taxes.


Mexican Government Panel Instills The Unfamiliar Idea of Competition
In a slender 20-story tower at the center of this city, a team of young bureaucrats is attempting to create what until recently was as unlikely to be found in Mexico as chili peppers that don't burn -- a competitive economy.
The 140 economists, investigators and staff form the backbone of the Federal Competition Commission, which in its first year of operation has managed to anger, obstruct and scold some of Mexico's biggest companies.
The commission has fined brokerage houses for bid-rigging in connection with the sale of Treasury notes.
It has made the oil monopoly Pemex loosen its grip on the number of gas stations it supplies.
It has even put an end to price-fixing by corner laundries.


DNA Tests Find Meat of Endangered Whales for Sale in Japan
WORKING with a portable DNA sampling device and setting up a makeshift laboratory in a Japanese hotel room, scientists have discovered that many fish markets and grocery stores in Japan sell meat from endangered species of whales, a violation of international law.
Among the samples of illicit whale meat found was a bubble-wrapped slice of humpback whale, the great aquatic acrobat, singer of mournful transoceanic melodies and a mascot of the save-the-whales movement.


JAZZ
A Logical Saxophonist Now Comes Out Roaring  Small's
The tenor saxophonist Sam Newsome is best known for his work in the trumpeter Terence Blanchard's band, where he played logical, articulate solos.
Mr.
Newsome's playing always seemed shy but smart, his lines almost blushing from the attention they brought on themselves.
On Thursday, things had changed.
Mr.
Newsome, fronting his own band, came out aggressively, with furious and driving solos that were remarkably free of cliches.


Chess
After losing his last three encounters against Vladimir Kramnik, Gary Kasparov, the Professional Chess Association's world champion, got sweet revenge in the P.C.A.
International Tournament in Novgorod, Russia.
His defeat of his 19-year-old protege was the most imaginative game in the elite, double-round competition, which ended in late August.
It also gave Kasparov, a Russian, a point toward the total of 7-3, which was good for a first place tie with Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine.
Kasparov led throughout, but when he drew his last three games, Ivanchuk overhauled him.
FINAL STANDINGS  Player . . .
W. . . .
L. . . .
D. . . .
Pts.
Kasparov . . . 4 . . . 0 . . . 6 . . . 7 Ivanchuk . . . 4 . . . 0 . . . 6 . . . 7 Kramnik . . . 3 . . . 3 . . . 4 . . . 5 Short . . . 0 . . . 2 . . . 8 . . . 4 Shirov . . . 1 . . . 3 . . . 6 . . . 4 Bareyev . . . 1 . . . 5 . . . 4 . . . 3
This time Kasparov did not look as though he might have any ambivalent feelings toward the young grandmaster whose career he had done so much to further.
He showered the hapless Kramnik, also of Russia, with a veritable cascade of fireworks.
The Pelikan Variation of the Sicilian Defense presents a dramatic confrontation in its chief lines: after 10 Bf6 Bf6 11 c3, Black has the bishop-pair as against White's occupation of the weak d5 square with his knight.
Once Kasparov had revealed his plans for a mating attack with 13 h4!?, Kramnik challenged the d5 knight with 13 . . .
Ne7.
He was, of course, aware that 14 Nf6 gf damages the black king position, but after 15 Qd2 Bb7 16 Bd3 d5, he counted on using his central pawn phalanx as a counterweapon.
On 17 ed Qd5 18 O-O-O!? e4 19 Be2, Kramnik could have prevented a white mating attack with 19 . . .
Qd2 20 Rd2, but with three pawns stopping four black ones on the kingside, while the healthy white queenside pawn majority would eventually yield a powerful passed pawn, the endgame prospects would strongly favor Kasparov.
By accepting the pawn sacrifice with 19 . . .
Qa2, Kramnik banished endgame worries.
After 20 Qh6 Qe6 21 Nd4, Kramnik might have tried to keep his queen centralized with 21 . . .
Qe5, but then 22 f4! ef 23 gf Ng6 24 Rdg1!
Kh8 25 Kb1 Rg8 (25 . . . Qf4? loses a piece to 26 Rg6!) 26 Bd3 Nf8 27 Rg8 Kg8 28 Bh7!
Nh7 29 Rg1 Ng5 30 hg f5 31 g6! is overwhelming for White.
On 21 . . .
Qb6, Kasparov kept mobilizing with 22 Rh3 Kh8 23 Bg4!, which threatened 24 Bf5 Nf5 25 Nf5 Rg8 26 Rd6 followed by 27 Qf6, winning outright.
After 23 . . .
Rg8, Kasparov produced the fantastic 24 Ne6!, planning to crush 24 . . . fe by 25 Qf6 Rg7 26 Rd7 Re8 27 Rg3 Bc8 28 Re7 Re7 29 Qf8 Rg8 30 Qg8!
Kg8 31 Be6 Kf8 32 Rg8 mate.
Moreover, taking the other sacrificed piece with 24 . . .
Rg4 is smashed by 25 Ng5!
Rg5 (25 . . . fg drops the queen to 26 Qb6) 26 hg Kg8 27 gf.
And defense by 24 . . .
Qf2 fails against 25 Rf3!
Rg6 26 Qg6 Qb2 27 Kb2 Ng6 28 Rf6 fe 29 Be6, which gives White a winning ending.
Kramnik struggled nobly on with 24 . . .
Rg6 25 Qf4 Re8 26 Rd6, but it would not have saved him to try 26 . . .
Qa5 27 h5 Qa1 28 Kc2 Qa4 29 Kb1 Rg4 30 Qg4 Rg8 31 Rd8! fe 32 Rg8 Ng8 33 Rg3.
In this same hypothetical line, 30 . . . fe 31 Qe6 e3 32 Qf6 Kg8 33 Rg3 Ng6 34 Rg6 hg 35 Qg6 Kf8 36 Qh6 Kf7 37 Qh7 would lead into 37 . . .
Kf8 38 Rf6 mate.
Kramnik tried 26 . . .
Nd5, but Kasparov fired another salvo with 27 h5!
Kramnik could not play 27 . . .
Rg4 because 28 Qg4 Rg8 29 Qg8 Kg8 30 Rg3 Kh8 31 Rd8!
Qd8 32 Nd8 forces 32 . . . h6 to stop 33 Nf7 mate, after which 33 Nb7 puts Kasparov a rook ahead.
So he went ahead with 27 . . .
Nf4 28 hg!
Qd6 (28 . . . Nd3 is broken by 29 Rhd3! ed 30 gf) 29 Rh7 Kg8 30 gf Kh7 31 fe/Q Ne6, but after 32 Bf5!
Kg7 33 Qg6 Kf8 34 Qf6 Ke8 35 Be6, Kramnik was a decisive pawn down and his king was in a wretched position.
He could not even reduce the pawns by 35 . . . e3 because 36 fe Bg2 37 Bf7 Kd7 38 Be8 Kc7 39 Qg7 Kd8 40 Bb5 Bf3 41 Ba4 just loses more material.
Not that it affected the outcome of the game, but Kramnik blundered in time pressure with 35 . . .
Qf8? and at once, seeing that 36 Bd7 wins his queen, he gave up without waiting for the move to be put on the board.


. . . And in Connecticut
GOVERNOR THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES WILLIAM E. CURRY JR., 42.
State Comptroller since 1990, lawyer, served as a state senator from 1979 to 1983, ran unsuccessfully for the U.S.
House of Representatives in 1982, former political director of Freeze Voter, the political arm of the Nuclear freeze movement.
JOHN B. LARSON, 46.
President pro tem of the State Senate since 1987, spent four years as a high school teacher, became president of an insurance agency in 1987, served on East Hartford school board and town council before being elected to the state Senate in 1983., THE ISSUES: The campaign has revolved largely around who would be a better manager.
Mr.
Larson, the party-endorsed candidate, cites his 11 years in the state Senate as proof of his leadership.
Mr.
Curry has blamed the Democratic establishment for the state's fiscal problems and says he would shake things up.
Both share strong anti-crime positions and similar economic development strategies.
The biggest difference is on tax cuts: Mr.
Larson promises a $287 million reduction in the income tax; Mr.
Curry has proposed a $1 billion cut in property taxes.


New York Yacht Club Returns to Its Harbor
It has been 90 years since the New York Yacht Club forsook the whirligig winds and flotsam and jetsam of New York Harbor for the open-air breezes and clean-water sailing of points north.
But next weekend, for the first time since 1904, club members plan to compete on their home waters.
More than 50 yachts are expected to race in divisional fleets Saturday and Sunday in New York's Upper Bay, between Battery Park City and the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
About 40 of the sailboats, which range from 26 feet to 80 feet, will be docked at South Street Seaport.


Lawmaker Denies Sex Acts
Representative Mel Reynolds, Democrat of Illinois, today pleaded not guilty to charges of sexual assault, sexual abuse, child pornographby and obstruction of justice.
Mr.
Reynolds, a first-term Congressman, appeared before Judge Fred Seria Jr. of Cook County Circuit Court.
When asked for his plea, he said, "Not guilty to all charges."


Rohr Inc.(RHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


23 Are Arrested In Kickbacks For Supplies
The head of an office supply company in Manhattan and 22 purchasing agents at many of New York City's leading law firms, publishers, public relation agencies and Wall Street investment concerns were arrested yesterday and accused of taking part in a kickback scheme that the authorities said defrauded buyers of supplies of $1.8 million from 1989 to 1993.
The director of the scheme was Larry Simon, the owner of Paper Hotline, an office supply company formerly at 242 West 30th Street, Robert M. Morgenthau, the District Attorney of Manhattan said.


Mexican Government Panel Instills The Unfamiliar Idea of Competition
In a slender 20-story tower at the center of this city, a team of young bureaucrats is attempting to create what until recently was as unlikely to be found in Mexico as chili peppers that don't burn -- a competitive economy.
The 140 economists, investigators and staff form the backbone of the Federal Competition Commission, which in its first year of operation has managed to anger, obstruct and scold some of Mexico's biggest companies.
The commission has fined brokerage houses for bid-rigging in connection with the sale of Treasury notes.
It has made the oil monopoly Pemex loosen its grip on the number of gas stations it supplies.
It has even put an end to price-fixing by corner laundries.


Legislative Candidate Turns to Gang for Help
To the police and prosecutors, the Latin Kings are a rigidly hierarchical youth gang believed to be responsible for at least eight murders in New York City over the last two years.
To Nelson Antonio Denis, a Democratic candidate for the State Assembly from East Harlem who is on the primary ballot today, the Kings are tireless workers on his campaign and misunderstood youths trying to overcome immense disadvantages.


Oxford Health Job To Merkley Newman
Oxford Health Plans Inc. said yesterday that it had moved the commercial portion of its account to Merkley Newman Harty in New York from Deutsch Inc. in New York.
Billings are estimated at $5 million.


Deciphering Rules In a Competition For Arts Grants
With $10 million in city and state money up for grabs, arts organizations throughout the city's five boroughs have been racing to turn in grant applications due today.
Under the challenge-grant initiative, a plan announced with great fanfare in July, the city's Department of Cultural Affairs and the New York State Council on the Arts are each to award $5 million in grants to organizations able to match the grant money dollar for dollar with grants from other sources.
As details of the plan have become clearer in the last month, however, some arts administrators and officials at philanthropic foundations say it is unlikely that it will generate $10 million in new money from the private sector.
Further, they say because the grants must be used to expand an institution's programs to draw an increased audience, they could actually harm many smaller arts institutions that need to stabilize their operations before undertaking an expansion.


Bangladesh, Still Poor, Cuts Birth Rate Sharply
When a 38-year-old villager named Anwara picks up her bag of family planning materials and heads down the alleyways of Pirojali, a village of fruit orchards and rice paddies just north of this capital, she is greeted with smiles and waves from many village women.
Not long ago, many of the women would have shunned Anwara.
Enveloped by a profoundly conservative, male-dominated culture that centers on their Muslim faith, the women of Pirojali, like 75 percent of Bangladesh's 117 million people, are mostly illiterate.
But owing largely to the efforts of family planning workers like Anwara, nearly 60 percent of Pirojali's women of child-bearing age use contraceptives.


MTV Rules
In Chinese, "satellite dish" translates literally as "heavenly thread." A year ago, the Chinese Government tried to snip about 500,000 of those threads, to forestall "spiritual pollution" due to MTV, "Bay Watch" and "The Simpsons." The decree banned virtually all private satellite dishes, ordering owners to take them down or face heavy fines.
Foreigners could continue to receive the broadcasts in their homes and offices.
We are happy to note that spiritual pollution continues apace, and with it defiance of the totalitarian state.
The Times's Philip Shenon reports that an independent audit being circulated by Star TV, the pan-Asian satellite service, suggests that the number of Chinese homes receiving satellite broadcasts has actually increased since the crackdown, from 49 percent to 55 percent in Guangzhou, one of China's free-market boom towns, and from 9 percent to 13 percent in more orthodox Beijing.
With their life savings invested in the dishes, Chinese are not about to dismantle or destroy them.
In Beijing they have hidden them instead.
In freewheeling cities like Guangzhou, they are right out in the open.


On My Mind; And We Call It Victory
The results to date of Clintonian policy in the Caribbean:
1.
In Cuba, the United States has achieved a new status: Fidel Castro's partner in violation of international codes on human rights.


For Holy Bull, There Will Be No Excuses
From New York to California, star horses were being groomed, trained and aimed yesterday for the biggest day of racing so far this year.
It will arrive on Saturday, when six Grade I stakes will be run at Belmont Park and seven or eight of the best horses in the business try to catch Holy Bull as he races for the final time in 1994.
The great, gray 3-year-colt has already won seven stakes this year, leading almost every step of the way, and he will shoot for No. 8 in the $500,000 Woodward.
He will also try to pre-empt the title Horse of the Year before taking a two-month vacation while other contenders pursue the title in his absence in the Breeders' Cup.


No Headline
"It just proves you can make all the plans in the world and there's nothing you can do to plan against a lunatic who doesn't think rationally." -- PATRICK PORTER, an Oregon tourist, outside the White House.  [ A20:7. ]


New Whitewater Inquiry Chief Begins Reorganization of Office
The new Whitewater independent counsel announced today that he was reorganizing the office and had hired four new lawyers to handle the growing case.
The reorganization reflects the fact that the new counsel, Kenneth W. Starr, has limited trial experience, unlike Robert B. Fiske Jr., the man he replaced more than a month ago.


Giants Call Cardinals Cheap-Shot Artists
The game was long over.
Giants players were celebrating their victory over the Arizona Cardinals on Sunday night, but some took time out from the celebration to express their anger about what they believed were a number of cheap shots and unprofessional gestures by Cardinal players during the game.
The Giants say Arizona defensive players were doing things like purposely poking New York's offensive players in the eye while they were on the ground, pinned underneath a pile of bodies after a tackle was made, and punching them under the chin while they were trying to make a block.


A Question of Desire About Malakhov
Basically, the way Lorne Henning sees it, it's time for Vladimir Malakhov to either put up or shut up.
"Vlady has certainly shown that he is capable of being in the upper class of defensemen in this league," the new Islander coach said today of his talented third-year Russian defenseman.
"But we've got to get consistency from him. You can't have a superstar game one night and not be consistent the next night. If he doesn't do it, he'll be sitting on the bench. If that doesn't work, he won't be here."


G.M. Promotion Gives Lift to Operations Abroad
In a move to add organizational status and prestige to its overseas operations, the General Motors Corporation promoted Louis R. Hughes to the new post of president of G.M.
International and named two other European automotive executives to senior posts in its international management.
Mr.
Hughes, 45, will remain in Zurich as head of General Motors Europe and as an executive vice president of G.M.
Mr.
Hughes, who is regarded as one of the auto maker's brightest executives, is being elevated to the same status as Rick Wagoner, who was recently named president of North American operations and J. T. Battenberg 3d, who is president of the worldwide parts operations.


Origin of Turtles in Mediterranean Traced to U.S.
BY analyzing the genetic fingerprints of giant loggerhead sea turtles, a team of international researchers has determined that 57 percent of the juvenile loggerheads living in the rich waters of the Mediterranean hatched on United States beaches.
The researchers, led by Dr.
Brian W. Bowen of the University of Florida in Gainesville and Dr.
Luc Laurent of Lyon University in France, identified genetic markers that are unique to turtles that lay eggs along the Florida coast.
Then they looked for the markers in turtles killed in Spanish swordfish fisheries.


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Designing to a Latin Beat
Growing up in Houston, Cesar Galindo was torn between two views of fashion.
He would go fabric shopping with his mother, who made all her own sundresses.
And he would go shopping with his father for the types of clothes worn in his parents' native Mexico, like the guayabera dress shirts for weddings.
"My father was wearing little Mexican boots made of fur down to the ankle, and I was very influenced by his style and his taste," Mr.
Galindo said.
"And my mother made every dress she ever wore. I have a little of both in my work."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts will acquire Borden in a $2 billion deal.
Kohlberg, Kravis's stake in RJR Nabisco Holdings would be sharply reduced in the unusual transaction.  [ Page D1. ]


Time Warner and Newhouse Form a Joint Cable Operation
Time Warner Inc. moved to strengthen its position as the nation's second-largest operator of cable television systems yesterday, announcing a venture in which it would manage Newhouse Broadcasting's cable systems, which serve 1.4 million subscribers.
Separately, Time Warner said it would pay $375 million in stock to Summit Communications to acquire a cable system in Winston-Salem, N.C., and two in suburban Atlanta, with a total of 160,000 subscribers.


Don't Close the Records to Adopted Adults
To the Editor:
The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws does a grave disservice to adult adoptees with its proposed model adoption law.
The clause that forces records to remain closed for 99 years is unconscionable.


Crash Investigators Broaden Their Inquiry
Federal investigators today broadened their inquiry into the crash that killed 132 people on a USAir jet last week, to include the possibility that the plane's right engine might have come partly detached from the wing in flight.
Carl Vogt, a member of the National Transportation Safety Board, said that the investigators had been unable to find the engine's rear mounting and that although the engine had remained attached to the wing, it might have been awry, possibly causing the plane to roll steeply to the left and plummet to the ground.


Teachers Strike at Catholic Schools in New Jersey


Fairchild Corp.(FA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inclusion of TV Crew in a Raid Is Ruled Illegal
A Secret Service agent violated constitutional protections against unlawful searches when he invited a CBS television camera crew on a raid of a Brooklyn apartment, and he can be sued for damages, a Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled yesterday.
"A private home is not a sound stage for law-enforcement theatricals," the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit said in a rebuke to the Secret Service for allowing a television crew to accompany agents on a 1992 raid on the apartment of a man suspected of credit card fraud.


Marshall Industries(MI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Ungaro's Latest: His Own Boutique
In many ways, fashion has become the proverbial broth produced by too many chefs.
By the time the investors who own the designer's house, the editors and the retailers have their say, what is left is often a bland consomme.
Emanuel Ungaro's work, however, is a rich cassoulet.
His is the only couture house in Paris owned totally by the designer.
Visitors who come to his atelier when he is swathing models are just that: visitors, not collaborators.
And while his clothes are in many New York stores, including Saks Fifth Avenue, Bloomingdale's and Henri Bendel, last Wednesday he officially opened his own boutique -- owned by him -- at 792 Madison Avenue, at 67th Street.


Candidates in Today's Primaries
NEW YORK GOVERNOR Mario M. Cuomo (D)*
Lenora B. Fulani (D) George E. Pataki (R) Richard M. Rosenbaum (R) Robert G. Relph Sr. (C) U.S.
SENATE Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D)*
Al Sharpton (D) Bernadette Castro (C) Henry F. Hewes (C)


30 Arrested In Scheme To Defraud
They were called "markets," though they served few customers.
And some of them actually stocked food, though it was often stale.
But the main business of the operations was food stamps, according to Federal authorities in Manhattan, who said yesterday that they had smashed a ring of 30 Chinese grocers who trafficked illegally in the relief coupons and laundered more than $40 million in fraudulent receipts.


COMPANY NEWS
BRE PROPERTIES INC., San Francisco, which owns and operates apartment, shopping center and other income-producing properties, agreed to buy a portfolio of seven apartment complexes in Tucson, Ariz., from closely held Schomac Group in a transaction valued at $51.8 million.


Seiko Plans Wristwatch With Worldwide Paging
In what sounds like something out of the Dick Tracy comic strip, the Seiko Corporation said today that it planned to develop a worldwide paging service that would deliver messages and other information to wristwatch receivers.
But unlike the two-way wristwatch radios used by the cartoon detective, the Seiko watches cannot receive voice messages, only text messages limited to 16 digits or letters.


Why Small Business Disliked Health Care Plan; Why Others Want It
To the Editor:
I am the chief executive officer of a nonprofit corporation that employs approximately 50 people.
It is a small business on whose behalf opponents of health care reform claim they are fighting.
However, they do not represent me.
I support health care reform, universal coverage and the single-payer plan.


Reitmans (Canada) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Officials Link Deaths to Drugs
Three members of a family of Colombian immigrants, whose bodies were found on Sunday in a house in Fort Lee, N.J., may have been slain in a drug-related incident, the authorities said today.
The bodies of Carlos Quintana, 48, his wife, Luscieni Correa Quintana, 46, and Mrs.
Quintana's son from a previous marriage, John Gonzalez, 25, were found in the basement of a single-family house that they had been renting at 2408 Rossett Street in Fort Lee.


A Low-Water Mark for U.S. Team
"Rome has spoken; the case is closed," said Saint Augustine back when this city had the clout to match its monuments.
What Rome had to say about the United States swim team in the past seven days was not necessarily Verdi to the American ear.
The question with little more than 22 months remaining until the Summer Olympics in Atlanta is whether last week's unspectacular results were an anomaly, the new reality or the decline before the fall.


The Primary: Highlights of Major Races in New York State. . .
GOVERNOR THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES MARIO M. CUOMO, 64.
Governor since 1983.
A lawyer, he was appointed Secretary of State by Gov.
Hugh Carey in 1975.
He lost to Edward I. Koch in the 1977 New York City mayoral race but was elected lieutenant governor with Mr.
Carey in 1978.
He has raised over $6 million for the campaign.
LENORA B. FULANI, 44.
A developmental psychologist in New York City and chairwoman of the New Alliance Party.
Over the past 12 years she has run for New York City mayor, lieutenant governor, governor and President, never garnering more than 1 percent of the vote.
She has raised more than $93,000.
THE ISSUES: At the heart of Ms.
Fulani's campaign is the premise that she is an alternative to Mr.
Cuomo.
Beyond that, she has called for easier ballot access for statewide candidates, term limits for state officials, and initiative and referendum.
Mr.
Cuomo, who has largely ignored the primary challenge, supports improving ballot access, but opposes term limits and initiative and referendum, saying all those issues should be debated at a constitutional convention.


Porous Deportation System Gives Criminals Little to Fear
Jorge Luis Garza Gorena, a beefy man with tattoos like scrollwork, was first deported to Mexico 20 years ago.
But within a week Mr.
Garza, a thief, burglar and heroin addict, had walked back across the border, smiling at an immigration inspector as he falsely declared himself a United States citizen.
Over the next 15 years, immigration officers deported Mr.
Garza five more times.
And five more times he easily returned, flashing his California driver's license at inspectors who had no access to his records.
Then, in 1989, after a bureaucratic slip-up, the Immigration and Naturalization Service lost track of Mr.
Garza altogether, sticking his bulging case file into a drawer stuffed with lost causes.


Porous Deportation System Gives Criminals Little to Fear
Jorge Luis Garza Gorena, a beefy man with tattoos like scrollwork, was first deported to Mexico 20 years ago.
But within a week Mr.
Garza, a thief, burglar and heroin addict, had walked back across the border, smiling at an immigration inspector as he falsely declared himself a United States citizen.
Over the next 15 years, immigration officers deported Mr.
Garza five more times.
And five more times he easily returned, flashing his California driver's license at inspectors who had no access to his records.
Then, in 1989, after a bureaucratic slip-up, the Immigration and Naturalization Service lost track of Mr.
Garza altogether, sticking his bulging case file into a drawer stuffed with lost causes.


Dolphins Lose Cornerback
The afterglow of the Miami Dolphins' victory Sunday over Green Bay didn't last long.
Coach Don Shula today discovered that a starting cornerback, Frankie Smith, had a badly swollen right knee.
A magnetic resonance imaging test confirmed the bad news: torn cartilage, eliminating Smith from this Sunday's game against the Jets at Joe Robbie Stadium.
That leaves Miami (2-0) with a problem.
Smith had replaced Troy Vincent, who was unable to go against Green Bay because of tendinitis in his right knee.


DANCE
Choreographer's Solos Change With Performer  Dia Center for the Arts, SoHo
Kristin Jackson, who has choreographed several exquisite solos in recent seasons, offered a premiere at her program on Friday night.
But what made the evening of special interest were revivals of two older works, "Field" and "Still Waters," both to recorded piano music by Brahms.


Death Knell For Season Is Ready To Sound
One month after they shut down their game, major league club owners and players stood as far apart as ever yesterday, leaving the remainder of the season and the World Series teetering on the brink of oblivion.
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, said he had spoken with most of the clubs about a decision to cancel the rest of the season but declined to say when an announcement might be forthcoming.
He was expected, however, to make the announcement today or tomorrow.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Atlantic Coast Conference
Virginia started the season with a loss -- a defeat to Boston University -- but even with the departure of Claudio Reyna, look for the Cavaliers to offer a strong challenge in quest of their fourth consecutive national title.


A Rare Switch From Paperwork to Pursuit
Anthony D. Lazalde awoke at 4 A.M. to study the eyes and ears of a Nicaraguan immigrant in a dated photograph.
He always does this before setting out to track down a fugitive alien.
Experience has taught him that the space between a person's eyes and the contours of his ears never change.
In the first light of morning, Mr.
Lazalde and Juan Bustos, his partner, donned bulletproof vests and tucked revolvers into their waistbands.
As they prepared to go after the Nicaraguan, Elias Yankobich, they downed coffee, and the caffeine mingled with a surge of adrenaline.


Combination of Genes Acting in Concert Is Cause of Diabetes
RESEARCHERS have found the locations of at least five genes that are associated with insulin-dependent diabetes, and they say that people who inherit particular combinations of these genes are extremely likely to develop the disease.
It is the first solid proof that diabetes is caused by several genes acting in concert, said Dr.
Kathleen Wishner, president of the American Diabetes Association, and a discovery that may have practical consequences in the not too distant future.


U.S. Court Rules That Black District in Georgia Is Not Justified by Law
A Federal judicial panel in Georgia ruled today that the newly drawn 11th Congressional District was unconstitutional because it was created solely to insure that a black person would be elected to Congress.
The 2-to-1 decision by a three-judge panel threw into doubt an election scheduled for Nov. 8.
The judges said they would redraw the district lines themselves in time for the election, but appeals were expected to be filed quickly to try to bar any redrawing of boundaries until after the vote.


Corrections
A chart on Sunday in The City, listing incumbents who are not being challenged today in the New York primary, misidentified the Assemblyman in the 24th District in Queens.
He is Mark Weprin; Saul Weprin, his father, died earlier this year.


Frederick Weisman, 82, Leader In the Business and Art Worlds
Frederick R. Weisman, a businessman, philanthropist and avid collector of contemporary art, died on Sunday at his home in the Holmby Hills section of Los Angeles.
He was 82.
He died after a long struggle with pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Health Impasse Souring Voters, New Poll Finds
Most Americans still say they want a major change in their health care system, but the long struggle on the issue has left them in a sour and skeptical mood, with a diminished view of many of the major players, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The new survey found the public casting blame all around for the difficulties in passing major health care legislation.
Fifty-eight percent said they blamed both Congress and President Clinton equally.
Two-thirds said Republicans opposed Mr.
Clinton's health plan for political gain, not because of honest disagreements.


N.F.L. Really Is Scoring Big in the Points Column
In what may be a trend related to the new rule changes, for the second week of the National Football League season point production was up over last season.
In the 13 games played on Sunday, 537 points were scored, an average of 41.3 points a game.
In the second week of last season, 14 games produced just 461 points, an average of 32.9.
On the opening weekend, the 28 teams scored 652 points, an average of 46.6 points a game, as compared with 587 points (41.9 a game) in 1993.


Unimpeded, Intruder Crashes Plane Into White House
Shortly before 2 A.M. today, a small red-and-white plane flew low over 17th Street in the heart of the capital's downtown, banked left in a U-turn near the Washington Monument, and headed straight toward the President's bedroom in the White House.
No one tried to stop it.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a Federal suit against a New York City union representing construction laborers referred incorrectly to legal action taken against the newspaper drivers' union in New York.
While the Manhattan District Attorney has sought the appointment of a trustee to oversee the union, the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, that action did not lead to the removal of leaders or to new elections.


METRO DIGEST
THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: TO THE VICTORS, ANOTHER RUN
State Senator George E. Pataki, a freshman Republican from Putnam County, easily won his party's nomination to challenge Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, clearing the way for the most contested gubernatorial election in New York since Mr.
Cuomo won office 12 years ago and became a national figure in Democratic politics.
A1.
The primary cleared the way for a gubernatorial election in New York between an incumbent whom many New Yorkers do not like and a Republican challenger whom most New Yorkers do not yet know.
B5.
William E. Curry Jr., a critic of the Democratic leadership that has dominated Connecticut government for decades, wrested the party's nomination for governor from one of its stalwarts, the leader of the State Senate, John B. Larson.
B6.


Beyond Disaster: Ill-Fated Coyote Lives to Sail, and Race, Again
It's not very often that there are second chances in life.
And lesser still are the odds that a race boat left adrift in the Atlantic Ocean, upside down and with its skipper lost at sea, would have the opportunity to sail again.
But the yacht Coyote, the aborted dream of the late Mike Plant, has been resurrected.
In a bold move to see Plant's lost vision realized, his former fiancee has retrieved the 60-foot yacht, restored it to racing readiness and chartered it to David Scully, a solo sailor from Chicago.


Burstein Wins Close Victory Against Koppell in Primary
With a whisper-thin margin, Karen S. Burstein, a former judge and state legislator, overcame her late start in the race and her trouble raising money to claim victory in the Democratic primary for New York State attorney general early this morning, edging out her three rivals.
Seeking to become the first woman elected to statewide office in 20 years, Ms.
Burstein actively courted female voters, played up her progressive politics and took advantage of high turnout in liberal areas like Manhattan's West Side.
Unlike her closest rival, G. Oliver Koppell, the longtime Assemblyman from the Bronx who was appointed Attorney General last December, she had virtually no political organization backing her candidacy, which is often considered a decisive advantage in an election with such a low turnout.


Where Is Tillman When He Is Needed?
Early last season, when Rodney Hampton was sidelined for four weeks after arthroscopic surgery on his left knee, Lewis Tillman replaced him at tailback and the Giants hardly missed a beat.
Tillman was a 6-footer who weighed 200 pounds and could batter the line much the way Hampton could.
Now Hampton is injured again with a bruised kidney and lower back and is expected to miss two or three weeks.
Tillman has moved on to the Chicago Bears as an unrestricted free agent, and the only potential replacements on the Giants have negatives.


Easy Rider Goes To College
REMEMBER how the restless young, hungry for experience and authenticity, wandered the land seeking out adventure, sensations and obscure gurus?
Remember Jack and Dean?
Well, that was then.
Now the restless young ride around in a wildly decorated bus and get college credit.
It's sort of like the Merry Pranksters meet Contemporary Civilization 101.
Sort of like Lollapalooza with final exams.
Sort of like sowing tame oats.
Consider the 18 students from seven colleges who rolled into town this week, a third of the way through a national tour organized by the University of New Orleans, for 12 credits.
In a 24-hour period they met and talked with three major novelists, one of them a Nobel laureate; one Pulitzer-prize-winning great American historian; one significant playwright, a rabble-rousing lawyer; the editor of a news magazine, some diplomats and a blues singer.


Langbourne Williams Is Dead; Retired Businessman Was 91
Langbourne Meade Williams Jr., the retired chairman of a company now known as Freeport-McMoRan Inc., died on Thursday at his country home near Rapidan, Va.
He was 91.
Mr.
Williams was born in Richmond and was the descendant of a family that had been socially prominent since the founding of the country.
One ancestor was Edmund Randolph, who was the Attorney General in George Washington's first Cabinet and in part of his second and also served as Governor of Virginia.
Another, Bartholomew Dandridge, was Treasurer of Virginia and the brother of Martha Washington.


Gap Cited in Rules on White House Threat
A day after a small plane crashed into the White House grounds, investigators told a senior lawmaker today that security and aviation officials had no rules or procedures for communicating about aircraft posing a threat to the Executive Mansion or the President.
Investigators also disclosed that a pathologist had found that the plane's pilot, Frank Eugene Corder, had alcohol and cocaine in his blood.
Mr.
Corder flew unimpeded to crash early Monday just under President Clinton's bedroom, prompting shaken officials to review whether the Secret Service should have blocked the plane or, at the least, detected it.


AT LUNCH WITH: John Gregory Dunne; The Bad Old Days In All Their Glory
John Gregory Dunne was upset.
The novelist and screenwriter, who lived in Los Angeles and worked in the movie business for 24 years, could not get a lunch reservation the other day at one of his favorite restaurants, the Ivy.


BBDO Toronto Gets A Miller Account
The Plank Road Brewery, the division of the Miller Brewing Company that introduced Icehouse ice-brewed beer last year, said yesterday that it had selected BBDO Toronto to handle the introduction of an American version of a new Canadian beer, Red Dog.
Billings were not disclosed.
BBDO Toronto handles the Red Dog account in Canada for Miller's partner, the Molson Breweries in Toronto; it was awarded the brand's American account without a review.
Richard Lalley, Miller's director of new product development in Milwaukee, said that many elements of Red Dog's American campaign would mirror the brand's Canadian efforts, which are aimed primarily at men in their 20's; some billboards in Toronto, for instance, simply present enlarged red dog bones.


Streetcar Gives Clue to Old Photo's Date
To the Editor:
What some historians maintain is the oldest photograph of a New York City street scene, a daguerreotype of Chatham Street, later Park Row, looking northeast from Pearl Street, with Chatham Square in the background, will be auctioned at Christie's in October (news article with accompanying illustration, Sept. 2).


Off the Menu
Just Like Home
Toukie's, a sassy little place at 220 West Houston Street (near Varick Street), is what Toukie Smith calls her "home away from home."
Ms.
Smith, who has been a model, an actress and a significant other of the actor Robert De Niro, said, "I opened this place because big parties are one thing, but now it's time for us to come together, to connect." A portion of the profits of the restaurant will go to the Smith Family Foundation, she said.
The organization helps people with AIDS and honors her brother Willi Smith, the designer, who died of the disease in 1987.


New Product By Compaq
The Compaq Computer Corporation, trying to stay a step ahead of rivals in the home computer market, will introduce today the next generation of its Presario computers equipped with new features, such as the ability to watch television on part or all of the screen.
Since introducing the Presario line in August 1993, Compaq has been gradually adding features and expanding the number of stores selling the machine, which has been the fastest-selling computer for Compaq.
Meanwhile, the market for multimedia computers, which can process data, sound or video, has exploded.
The International Business Machines Corporation, Apple Computer Inc., Packard-Bell Electronics Inc. and others have scrambled to introduce low-cost multimedia machines.


Dart Group Corp.(DARTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
JOHNNY DEPP, the star of "Edward Scissorhands" and "What's Eating Gilbert Grape" was arrested early yesterday and accused of smashing furniture and glass in his room at the Mark Hotel on East 77th Street, but officials said charges of felony criminal mischief would be dropped after he pays $9,767 for the damages.
"We told the court that this was the defendant's first arrest, and that he had agreed to make total restitution to the hotel," BARBARA THOMPSON, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan District Attorney, said after he was arraigned yesterday afternoon.


Sic Transit Gloria: An Italian Ex-Premier in Exile
A few years back, people clamored for a place at his table in the smarter restaurants of Rome.
His currency was power and patronage, artfully dispensed, gratefully received.
Today, Bettino Craxi, the former Italian Prime Minister and leader of the Socialist Party, lives in a sun-splashed villa in this Tunisian resort, refusing to return home because he has been sentenced to eight-and-a-half years in prison for corruption.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the table of Treasury bills, bonds and notes in Business Day yesterday included prices from Friday's trading rather than Monday's in some copies.
For identification, the first listing under Treasury bills in the correct table shows the yield on the bill maturing on Sept. 15 at 4.66 percent; in the incorrect table it is listed as 4.67 percent.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Metropolitan Diary
PLACE: Outside the Museum of Natural History.
Dramatis personae: Upscale mother, her 5-year-old daughter and Ellen S. Diamond, who observes mother coaxing daughter to eat a just-purchased bunch of grapes after the youngster had asked for a candy bar.
"Yes, Jennifer, I do so respect the fact that green is not your favorite color, but you may not have a candy bar."
. . .
A report from the Metropolitan Diary's undercover coin and currency monitor:
"The much maligned Susan B. Anthony $1 coins are making something of a comeback, thanks to a surprising assist from the United States Postal Service. During a recent visit to the Planetarium Post Office on West 83d Street, I noticed that the moving electric sign above the stamp vending machine promised the coins as change.
"Intrigued, I slid in a $20 bill, punched up a $5.80 order for a book of 20 29-cent stamps and duly received the stamps plus 2 dimes and 14 shiny Susies in change. Since I knew they had been greeted with derision when they first appeared in 1979 (too much like quarters, ran the whine) and had not been minted since 1981, I wondered how my Susies would fare in 1994 New York commerce.
"Not to worry. The first test came when I bought some grapes at a West 78th Street fruit stand. To pay for the $3.21 purchase I handed the cashier three Susies and a quarter. Without batting an eye she handed me four pennies in change. To buy a 50-cent newspaper at a West 77th Street newsstand, I proffered a single Susie and got back two quarters without so much as a 'Whaaa?'
"Encouraged, I decided to put the Susies to the ultimate acceptance test. I hailed a taxi and after a ride to Times Square I covered the $4.50
plus tip by brazenly dropping five Susies and a quarter into the outstretched palm of the cabdriver.
"I didn't hang around to plumb the depths of his reaction, but let the record show that Muddassar Hussain neither cursed nor called a cop."
. . .
THERE SHE IS  we can access  an encyclopedia  from a computer  the size of a Huggie,  but we can't
find a way  to make Miss America's crown  sit squarely on her head --  and stay?
SUSAN FISHMAN ORLINS
. . .
Dear Diary:
Strolling along a street in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn, I saw a young man man with a shy, fish-out-of-water look about him.
"Good yontif," I said in a loud, welcoming voice.
It was the second day of Rosh ha-Shanah; wishing him "Happy holiday" in Yiddish seemed the thing to do.
He stopped and asked if I'd heard the shofar being blown that day.
I answered no and my disappointment -- at not hearing the ritual blowing of the ram's horn on the Jewish New Year -- must have been all over my face.
So he opened his jacket, whisked out a small ram's horn, closed his eyes and gave me a private concert.
With joyful abandon, he played and played, conjuring the trills, stops and drones of a tune as old as the Bible.
I closed my eyes.
Then he stopped, tucked away the shofar, said "Shona Tovah" -- Happy New Year -- and was gone.
It was the best Rosh ha-Shanah I've had.
ELLIE SPIELBERG
. ..
Dear Diary:
Times sure change fast.
I was walking along Columbus Avenue, noticing the signs in car windows.
Gone are the once all-too-familiar "No Radio" signs.
Their replacements read "No Computer." PETER HOLLANDER
. . .
The scene is a supermarket in the suburbs.
The checker, a pleasant-looking young man, finishes packing, smiles and says, "Have a good day." And Harriet Lebowitz hears him add, "And I hope you find your car."


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Man in the News: Jacques Parizeau; Torchbearer For Quebec
The new Premier of Quebec, who some day wants to be the first President of a Quebec republic, seems more like an aloof Victorian gentleman than the committed, driving separatist he has been for three decades.
The Premier, Jacques Parizeau, 64, speaks impeccable English with an upper-class British accent, sprinkling his speech with expressions of yesteryear like "by Jove" and "humbug."


In America; Workers, Unite!
There seems to be no limit to the docility of American workers.
This is the one group that seems never to assert its rights, or even to acknowledge that it has any.
This is a group that will watch in humble silence as once-proud white collar employees are downsized out of their comfortable offices and into hamburger uniforms, as manufacturing jobs are rounded up and shipped overseas to semi-slaves working in squalid conditions, as massive amounts of research and development money flow into monumentally wasteful military projects at the expense of product development and technical innovation in private industry.


Personal Health; Avoiding skin ailments that come with exercise.
JUST as the painted surface of a car is more likely to get scraped, worn, pitted or rusted when on the road than when in a garage, the covering of an active person's body is subject to a host of insults that rarely afflict sedentary folks.
Few who pursue vigorous activities in the name of fitness and fun entirely escape insults to the vast organ that is meant to serve as a barrier to invaders from without.
Whether covered by skimpy shorts and tank top, sweat suit, leotard or regulation uniform, the skin can suffer from its direct exposure to the exercise environment.
Exercise-induced afflictions range from minor irritations, corns, calluses and blisters to hazardous microbial infections, unsightly acne and smelly feet.
That is not to mention sunburn, windburn, frostbite or chilblains, which can accompany any prolonged or frequent exposure to the outdoors.


Minor League Met Tosses No-Hitter
There are a couple of ways to look at Bill Pulsipher's pitching record against the Harrisburg Senators.
One is to note that in his three starts against Harrisburg this year, the 20-year-old left-hander for the Class AA Binghamton Mets has given up a total of 18 hits and 12 runs, 11 of them earned.
The other is to observe that every bit of that damage -- all 18 hits and each one of the 12 runs -- was inflicted by Harrisburg in two regular-season games.


Pier 1 Imports Inc.(PIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Senate Leader Loses Governor Race to Comptroller in an Upset
William E. Curry Jr., a longtime critic of the Democratic leadership that has dominated Connecticut government for decades, today wrested the party's nomination for governor from one of its stalwarts, the leader of the State Senate, John B. Larson.
On the Republican side, John Rowland, a former Congressman who was the party's candidate for governor in 1990, resoundingly defeated Secretary of the State Pauline R. Kezer, as expected, to gain the his party's nomination for governor.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  BATTLE PLAN ON HAITI  As President Clinton prepared to address the country on Haiti, aircraft carriers were dispatched to the Caribbean.
Officials outlined an invasion plan to take control of major installations quickly.
A1  HAITI UNPREPARED  Despite Haiti's violence against its own citizens, its military has neither recent experience in war nor the modern means to fight one, though it is inevitable that blood would be shed in any invasion.
A1


Discovering Eloquence Amid Silent Gestures
Florent, a little boy who seems about 6 years old, romps on the lawn with his mother.
He playfully grabs the film maker's microphone and mugs at the camera.
While his mother tries to teach the deaf child to speak, the stubborn Florent says, "I look so I can hear."
Nicolas Philibert, the director of the French documentary "Land of the Deaf," has said, "My idea was to make a film that would plunge the viewer into the world of the deaf, a film whose mother tongue would be sign language." Mr.
Philibert is not arrogant; he does not try to recreate the experience of being deaf.
Instead, he follows vivid characters like Florent and through them carries viewers into a different but completely understandable culture, a world with its own rich language.
Film is the perfect medium for capturing this beautifully lyrical, visual language of gestures.


Experts Doubt Effectiveness Of Crime Bill
The $30 billion crime bill signed into law today by President Clinton responds to the country's rising fear of crime, but law-enforcement experts contend that it is a symbolic swipe that does not go far enough toward stopping the kind of street violence that is increasingly haunting America.
The measure, which will help cities and towns hire 100,000 police officers over six years, spreads the new officers so thin that critics doubt they will make a difference.
It bans the manufacture, sale and possession of 19 military assault weapons, but leaves in circulation many thousands of the same firearms.
It imposes the death penalty for about 60 offenses, some of which had been capital offenses and most of which rarely occur.
It provides the biggest infusion of cash grants to cities for social programs since the Carter Administration, but does not guarantee that Congress will actually approve the outlays.


Disney Is Said to Join NBC Talks
The Walt Disney Company has rejoined the ranks of companies in discussions to acquire NBC, according to several executives close to the negotiations.
Some of those people said that Walt Disney's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, might pay as much as $5 billion, yet other media experts believe that is wishful thinking.
Representatives at both NBC and Disney declined to comment.
Mr.
Eisner had been in discussions with NBC's parent, the General Electric Company, to acquire NBC, but apparently the talks ran into difficulties several weeks ago.
Disney is believed to have held recent discussions with CBS as well.


Cartwright, 37, Joins the Show in Seattle
The Seattle SuperSonics yesterday signed a 37-year-old unrestricted free agent center, BILL CARTWRIGHT, who was limited to 42 games last season because of injuries.
It will be the 16th N.B.A. season for Cartwright.
He played the last six seasons with the Chicago Bulls after nine with the Knicks.
He played on three N.B.A. title teams in Chicago.
The Sonics gave him a three-year contract but have the option of not renewing it for the second and third seasons.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Accounts
*
Yonex Corp., Torrance, Calif., to Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif., to handle its golf account, previously at Mendelsohn/Zien Advertising, Los Angeles.
Team One, which already handles Yonex's tennis and badminton divisions, was awarded the golf account, with billings estimated at $5 million, without a review.


TOP U.S. OFFICIALS OUTLINE STRATEGY FOR HAITI INVASION
The White House said today that President Clinton would address the nation on Thursday about a possible invasion of Haiti, and the Pentagon sent a troop-laden aircraft carrier to the Caribbean.
Military officials said the plan called for sending Army and Marine forces from vessels just offshore into Port-au-Prince, Cap Haitien and other places as quickly as possible to seize critical installations and crush any resistance.


Taming of Inflation Buoys Centrist in Brazil Polls
With Brazil's presidential election less than a month away, a pro-American centrist has surged ahead of a leftist candidate in all opinion polls tracking the race to determine who will lead Latin America's largest country to the end of the century.
Not even the surprise resignation of the Finance Minister last week has shaken the commanding lead that Fernando Henrique Cardoso has taken in recent weeks over his Socialist rival, Luis Inacio Lula da Silva.


Football Has Virtues, Like Teaching Trust
To the Editor:
Re "Toward Saner Football" (editorial, Sept. 7): Can it be true that no one on your editorial staff has ever played organized football?
If they had, they would understand that football is about more than "mayhem," "misplaced values" and "the training of a boy to play an obedient role as one-eleventh of The Team."


In a Word, Dictionary's Title Stands
A Federal appeals court has apparently had the last word in a war over words in the United States Court House in Manhattan in ruling that a jacket design on a dictionary published by Random House was not an unlawful copy of a similar red cover on a dictionary published by Merriam-Webster.
A jury verdict two years ago awarded Merriam-Webster $2 million in damages on the ground that Random House's jacket "diluted" the value of Merriam-Webster's trademarked combination of the words "Webster's" and "Collegiate" in its title and that it both intentionally infringed and diluted Merriam-Webster's distinctive red-and-white cover with its singular bull's eye logo.


Japan Hardens Stand on Trade Talks
With a deadline looming in less than three weeks, Japanese Government officials toughened their position today on trade talks with the United States, saying that the prospect of a full resolution of the issues was impossible and that at best they might arrange a partial deal.
"At present, there are no prospects" for a deal on all the markets being discussed, said Ryutaro Hashimoto, the Minister for International Trade and Industry.
Instead, he said, the two sides would have to settle for a partial deal, something the United States has only reluctantly said it would consider.


Strike Checks for Players as Checkmate Is Awaited
Bud Selig's pronouncement of the comatose patient's death was still on hold yesterday, but the union was stirring, processing more than $10 million in checks for players on strike and other people who aren't, including Buck Showalter and Dallas Green.
Selig, the acting commissioner, went four days past his stated deadline without canceling the remainder of the season, the playoffs and the World Series.
However, barring a last-minute change of mind, he will make the announcement today following a 2 P.M. telephone conference call with owners.


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday with an article about competition among Israeli youth for elite units of the Army misidentified the activity shown.
Two young Israelis were being belayed down a steep rock face; rappelling would have entailed lowering themselves.


What Led Lieutenant To Take Treasures?
To the Editor:
Re your article on Joseph Thomas Meador as a thief and looter of the so-called Quedlinburg treasure in World War II (Arts pages, Sept. 3): Consider an equally credible hypothesis that explains the text of his letters home.


E.P.A. Urges Compromise On Auto Pollution Rules
Top officials of the Environmental Protection Agency urged officials of Northeastern states and leaders of the auto industry today to try to reach a new national compromise on tailpipe pollution standards in the next few weeks.
Formally, the agency proposed imposing tough auto emission standards like California's on 12 Northeastern states, including New Jersey and Connecticut, as those states had requested.
New York State is already requiring cars sold at dealerships to meet California clean air standards.


Advisory Panel Clears Way for Trying Genetic Therapy on Cardiovascular Disease
An advisory committee at the National Institutes of Health yesterday unanimously recommended approval of a proposal in which gene therapy is to be used for the first time to treat cardiovascular disease.
The idea is to add genes near a clogged artery in the leg to get new blood vessels to grow around a blockage.
One researcher compared the procedure to a bypass without the surgeon.


Tokyo Journal; Kingmaker Isn't Dead. The Report Was Premature.
After a year of political upheaval in Japan, one of the few things that had seemed certain was that when the corrupt old order fell, so had its power brokers, and that a new set of personalities had stepped forward to clean up the system.
It is a thought that Noboru Takeshita likes -- the new Noboru Takeshita.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Argentine Scores an Upset  Franco Davin, a left-hander from Argentina, upset second-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain, 7-6 (7-1), 3-6, 6-3, yesterday in the opening round of the Romanian Open in Bucharest.
Davin is ranked 93d by the ATP, and Bruguera is No. 4.
Bruguera seemed tired after playing at the United States Open, and said of the switch from the hardcourt surface, "It was difficult to adjust on clay here." The tournament also lost its third-seeded player when Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine withdrew because of problems with his right wrist.
Medvedev was replaced by Martin Blackman of the United States, who beat Oscar Martinez of Spain, 6-2, 6-2. (AP)


Work to Begin Soon on Tappan Zee Bridge Renovations
The last thing Robert Tissier wants to think about is an extensive renovation of the Tappan Zee Bridge.
Mr.
Tissier, a deliveryman for a Rockland County paint company, crosses the bridge at least four times a day and, like the 113,000 daily commuters who join him on the major Hudson River crossing, he has seen his share of snarled traffic.
"If it has to be done, I hope they do the work at night, that's all," he said.


As Students Stay Longer, Colleges Feel the Pinch and Say, Move Along
Johnny Ludden, 23, has just started his sixth year as an undergraduate at the University of Texas.
It is not that he had trouble choosing a major or getting all his required courses.
Rather, he has spent so much time working for the college newspaper that he sometimes took only three courses a semester, not the usual five.
He is typical of more than half of the college students around the country: They are taking more and more time to graduate.
And until now, there has been little consequence, except from bill-paying parents.
"My dad is getting sort of anxious for me to finish up," Mr.
Ludden said.


'It's Going to Be Different': Capriati Charts Her Return
Jennifer Capriati, the troubled tennis phenom whose career began as a fairy tale at 13 and derailed in despair at 17, plans to return to competition next month in Zurich at the European Indoors, a $750,000 event played in the 4,000-seat Sallsporthalle.
Capriati said she intended to implement the second phase in her comeback the following week in Filderstadt, Germany, at the Porsche Grand Prix.
Depending on her spirits and results, she will then determine her future schedule.


Kohlberg's Impetus in Borden Deal
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company stands to get up to $65 million in cash -- as well as unload $300 million worth of its stock in RJR Nabisco Holdings -- if its deal to acquire Borden Inc. falls through, Borden disclosed yesterday.
Most of that money would be paid even if Borden shareholders refused to tender their shares and go along with the complicated, $2 billion proposal by Kohlberg, Kravis to take over Borden.


Still a Chance on Health Care
When Congress left town last month, the health care debate simmered down.
But the staffs of the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and the bipartisan Mainstream Coalition continued to talk and have reportedly reached substantial agreement.
Though the emerging bill would be incremental -- leaving some individuals uninsured -- it would improve health care for most Americans.
Incremental reform would be substantial reform.
Why, then, does passage seem so distant?
Standing in the way are political calculations by Robert Dole, the minority leader of the Senate, and Richard Gephardt, the majority leader of the House.
They have yet to decide whether to go for limited reform this year or use defeat as an election-year strategy.
Health care security for millions hangs in the balance because no one expects Congress to rebound from total defeat this year to pass reform next year.


Arab Unity In the Form Of Melody
In the 1930's and 1940's, Arab immigrants and Arab-Americans gathered for pan-Arabic festivals, called mahrajanat, that might last an afternoon or a weekend, with music, dancing and food.
The Ethnic Folk Arts Center and an Brooklyn Arab-American community coalition tried to jump-start the tradition on Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Museum.
Mahrajan Al-Fan, a six-hour festival, featured continuous music and dance performances on one stage as well as poetry, storytelling, food, documentary films and a fashion show of traditional clothing.
While much of the music was Lebanese, reflecting the first wave of Arab immigration to the United States, there were also performers from Syria, Yemen, Algeria, Egypt, Iraq and Palestine.


Local Reaction to the Crime Bill: Delight, With Some Doubts
To say that officials in New York City and New York State are delighted with the crime bill is an understatement, and it is not hard to see why.
About $1 billion is expected to come their way over the six-year life of the bill, with up to three-quarters of that going to the city.
Meeting the criteria for the money will require little effort, since many of the programs in the package were patterned after efforts already under way in the city and the state.


Corrections
A brief report in the Press Notes column of the Media Business page on Monday, about a new Spanish-language newspaper supplement published by The Wall Street Journal, misidentified one area in which the supplement appears.
It is Peru, not Puerto Rico.


Strict Regulations Proposed To Keep Young From Smoking
In its strongest statement ever on the topic, the National Academy of Sciences today released a report saying that tobacco use was essentially an addiction that began in childhood or youth, and that the best way to prevent it was to enact strict new Federal and state regulations that would make it harder for those under 18 to start.
The major effect of the report is to give support to the idea that the Food and Drug Administration should bring tobacco products under regulatory control.
It also outlines proposals similar to those expected to come from the drug agency if it proposes regulations next year.
The agency is considering such action.


ABM Industries(ABM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Computing's Bold Alliance Falters
It was to be the alliance of former enemies, teaming up to conquer common foes.
At least that was the strategy three summers ago when I.B.M. and Apple Computer stunned their industry by announcing a joint plan to attack the domination of the personal computer industry by machines based on Intel chips and Microsoft software.
Apple and I.B.M. called their planned weapon the Power PC, and to make sure they had sufficient firepower, they recruited the big chip maker Motorola Inc. to their team.


Crown Books Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.73
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.58
4.61
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.97
4.99
3.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.41
7.44
5.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.68
7.71
5.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.58
7.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.46
6.47
5.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Patrick O'Neal, 66, an Actor And Manhattan Restaurateur
Patrick O'Neal, an actor who appeared on stage, on television and in more than a dozen films, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 66 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The immediate cause was respiratory failure, and he had tuberculosis and cancer, said his wife, Cynthia.


Public &amp; Private; Trade Arms For Kids
The stack of papers is probably taller now than the child it represents, the letters to and from elected officials, diplomats, government agencies.
"Please don't have people send any more letters," someone at the State Department once told Barbara Dooley.
"Your grandson's file is so full we can't fit any more into it."
It's been more than three years since Zaid Ziadeh, the only child of Mrs.
Dooley's only child, was picked up by his Jordanian-born father for what was supposed to be a weekend visit and taken to Amman instead.
Zaid will be 5 next month, and his mother, Kathleen, who lives in Santa Rosa, Calif., has little more than a recent snapshot that shows a serious little boy with enormous dark eyes and an out-thrust lower lip.
That, and the hundreds of letters she and her mother have written trying to get the boy back.


Composers From Taiwan
Composers of Taiwan like to make 1945 a year of beginning.
Before, they had looked to themselves or to neighbors for inspiration.
After 1945, Europe and the rest of the world lay open.
This coming-out has not been easy.
The music of 20 Chinese composers in three concerts at the Taipei Theater last weekend bore witness to that.
The struggle is familiar: identity versus assimilation.
How is one to be a Chinese musician in an international community of music?


Fabled Firm Turns to a Trader Again
The selection of Jon S. Corzine, a hard-nosed trader, to the top position at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company is a sign that the firm is returning to its trading heritage, a tradition forged decades ago by a legendary trader, Gus Levy.
And it is a signal of the crucial importance of global securities trading to a firm that has recently prided itself on its investment-banking prowess.
"Given where the firm is today, especially after the last year, Goldman is more of a hedge-fund trading mechanism than an investment bank," said a former Goldman, Sachs partner who insisted on anonymity.
"So you need a trader in charge who knows fixed income and who knows derivatives and who is on top of all that."


To Network Here, You Must Speak Geek
Even veteran computer users can find themselves dazzled at the jargon used in the esoteric world of "internetworking," the technical side of constructing the information superhighway.
At the Networld and Interop trade show in Atlanta this week, a visitor was greeted at the door with a 12-pound stack of networking publications that had such headlines as "Buyer's Guide to 32-Bit NICs" and "No More Desktop Chaos! DMI Gets Closer," "BBN Set With New FRAD" and "HP Delays MPE/IX 5.0."


Bid With Gang Aid Is Lost
Nelson Antonio Denis, who raised eyebrows by using members of the Latin Kings, a street gang, as campaign workers, nearly unseated Angelo Del Toro, the incumbent State Assemblyman, in the 68th District in East Harlem.
In unofficial returns last night, Mr.
Del Toro led by just 160 votes out of more than 10,800 cast in the Democratic primary contest, with all precincts reporting.


Hampton Feels 'Much Better'
In a telephone call today from his hospital bed in Phoenix, Rodney Hampton told the Giants that he expected to fly back to New Jersey on Wednesday.
He also said that the doctors stood by their original estimate that the bruised kidney and back he suffered in Sunday night's 20-17 victory over the Arizona Cardinals would sideline him for two to three weeks.
"I feel much better today than yesterday," Hampton, a Pro Bowl running back, told the Giants.
"The night of the game, I was in a lot of pain. In the last two days, I've improved, and I'm feeling better and better.


No Grudges as Wounded Tourist Leaves Hospital
Feeling little pain from the bullet wound to his shoulder and vaguely baffled at the attention, Ralf Bolowski, the German tourist who was shot Monday on the Circle Line, was released from the hospital today and shrugged off any attempts to make him the latest poster boy for urban violence.
Asked if he was angry, outraged or sickened by the horrors of the city, Mr.
Bolowski said simply: "I imagined my vacation a little differently."


Where to Live? Crows Like New York City; Vast Parks, a Pleasant Climate and Plenty to Eat Draw Them to the Five Boroughs
From the sidewalks of Broadway to lawns in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens and to a giant roost in Staten Island, crows are invading New York City.
Once considered a country species, the jet-black birds are enthusiastically adapting to the crowded environment of the five boroughs.
Parks officials, bird-watchers and ornithologists say their traditional habitats have been overrun by development in recent decades, and having already moved into the suburbs, they are now being drawn to New York City and its vast parks by its plentiful food -- read garbage -- and warmer temperatures.


Mullen Set For Stride On Long Road Back
The Islanders are looking at it as nothing more than a tryout.
But after surviving a stroke, open-heart surgery and a seizure, Brian Mullen does not care.
All he wants to do is get back on the ice and play competitive hockey in the face of long odds.


Haiti's Forces: Poorly Armed And Seasoned Only in Terror
The Supreme Commander of the Haitian military often comes to work at noon and leaves at 2 P.M.
The Haitian Navy has immaculate uniforms, but only one ship with working engines, although several others float.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Named Terry Ryan general manager.
Signed Tom Kelly, manager, to a contract extension through the 1997 season.


U.N. Population Meeting Adopts Program of Action
After nine days of arguing about sexuality and morals, the United Nations population conference ended today with a broad endorsement of a new strategy for stabilizing the world's population, mainly by giving women more control over their lives.
The 20-year "program of action" drew unexpected if limited support from the Vatican, which fought a rear-guard campaign throughout the conference against any language suggesting that an abortion could be safe or legal.


Messier Closer To Signing New Pact
Mark Messier's new contract is far from a done deal, but there was optimism expressed by both sides yesterday as the Ranger captain stayed away from training camp for a fourth day.
"We think it'll be finished up in the next couple days," Messier said in a conference call with reporters from his home in Hilton Head, S.C.


Haytaian Endorses Proposal For Flat 17% Federal Tax Rate
Adopting a populist strategy that proved crucial to Christine Todd Whitman's upset victory in last year's New Jersey gubernatorial race -- the promise of a huge tax cut -- the Republican candidate for the United States Senate, Chuck Haytaian, said today that he would support a plan for a flat Federal tax rate of 17 percent.
"Under a flat tax, everyone would pay the same rate," Mr.
Haytaian said.
"That's fair and it's user-friendly. The more you earn, the more you will pay, and the many loopholes the rich have used in the past to avoid paying taxes will be gone forever."


Parking Rules
Because if Yom Kippur, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


On the Circle Line, Life, and Sightseeing, Goes On
Susan-Ann Walker, a 30-year-old singer visiting New York City from Melbourne, Australia, concluded that it was the ideal moment to take the Circle Line.
The way she computed the risk of being on the Manhattan sightseeing boat a day after a German tourist was shot was:
"My friends and I figured that the odds of the Circle Line getting shot at two days in a row were pretty slim. Australians are pragmatic people. And we make jokes out of the worst thing. So when we heard about the shooting, we thought, 'Oh good, then they can't get us.' "


Ex-Film Executive Chosen To Head Bertelsmann Unit
A little more than a year after leaving as head of a movie studio to run a Silicon Valley start-up, Strauss Zelnick is returning to the corporate media world.
BMG Entertainment, the television and music arm of Bertelsmann A.G., named Mr.
Zelnick today to the newly created position of president and chief executive of its North American operations.
BMG Entertainment's music and multimedia unit, which Mr.
Zelnick will head, accounts for nearly half of BMG's $4.3 billion in annual sales; the remaining revenue comes from television and film operations in Europe and international record distribution.


Malone Wouldn't Mind A Trade to the Knicks
The attorney for Karl Malone said yesterday that the All-Star forward would welcome a trade to the Knicks if the Utah Jazz decide to deal him.
Asked whether Malone had requested to be traded, his attorney, J. Randall Call, said from his office in Salt Lake City: "I can't confirm or deny that. I can say that Karl has a strong desire to win an N.B.A. championship. He sees what Phoenix and other teams have done, and he has serious concerns about whether Utah has improved. If the Jazz feel that the only way to improve their team is to trade Karl, I'm sure he'd say, 'Trade me.' He has been in Utah his entire career."


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with the obituary of Jessica Tandy referred incorrectly in some editions to her appearance in the film "Driving Miss Daisy." The year was 1989.
In some editions the obituary also misstated the year for the film "Fried Green Tomatoes." It was 1991.


Life, Not Politics, Inspired 'On the Waterfront'
To the Editor:
In your review of Marlon Brando's autobiography, "Brando: Songs My Mother Taught Me" (Books of The Times, Sept. 8), Mr.
Brando repeats, to my surprise, the old revisionist chestnut that Elia (Gadg) Kazan's movie "On the Waterfront," made after Mr.
Kazan's testimony before the House Committee on Un-American Activities, was "really a metaphorical argument by Gadg and Budd Schulberg: they made the film to justify finking on their friends."


A Nudge for Students
College students are taking more and more time to graduate, which has had few consequences except on bill-paying parents.
But with enrollments rising, administrators, particularly at public universities, are starting to prod their perennial students to finish their studies.
Article, page B9.


In House Races, Incumbents Defeat Challengers Handily
Hamilton Fish Jr.  19th District, Democrat
Hamilton Fish Jr. was elected last night by Democrats in the 19th Congressional District in the lower Hudson River Valley as their nominee to replace his Republican father, Representative Hamilton Fish.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HAWAIIAN AIRLINES INC., Honolulu, an airline passenger and cargo company, has emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The company is issuing new stock and canceling all shares in its former parent, HAL Inc.


BJ Services Seeks a Chief Rival
The BJ Services Company, one of the largest suppliers of pressure pumping services to the oil and gas industry, made public today an offer to acquire one of its chief rivals, the Western Company of North America, for about $450 million in cash and stock.
Western, an oilfield service company whose co-founder was the late Eddie Chiles, a Fort Worth oilman and former owner of the Texas Rangers baseball team, last month had spurned BJ Service's offer, which was made in a letter on July 29.
BJ Services proposed a price of $18.50 a share -- 50 percent in cash and 60 percent in BJ Services common stock -- for each of Western's 18.2 million outstanding shares.
BJ Services said that the offer represented a premium of 51 percent over the $12.25 closing price of Western shares on Monday.
Western, in a statement, said that its board decided the timing was not right to sell the company and that it would not be in shareholders' best interests.
The company noted that Western shares had traded at $19.50 within the last 12 months and recently have been trading near their 12-month low.
A Good Deal for Shareholders
But analysts said the proposal was a good deal for shareholders of both companies, and Wall Street agreed.
Shares of Western jumped 27 percent, to $16.75, up $4.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
BJ Services shares also rose to $20.125, up $1.25, on the Big Board.
J.
W. (Bill) Stewart, the chairman and chief executive of BJ Services, said that executives of the two companies, both of which are based in Houston, had talked about a possible combination over the last two and a half years.
He said the company was "very surprised" when Western's board rejected its proposal and decided to make it public to stimulate "constructive communication" between the companies and to let shareholders know about the offer.
Mike McShane, the chief financial officer of BJ Services, also said that company executives had talked to a number of Western's large shareholders today about the proposal and said that they were "excited."
BJ Services said that its lead bank, the First National Bank of Chicago, had expressed interest about financing the cash portion of the offer.
Sheldon R. Erikson, the chief executive of Western, said in a brief statement that "BJ is simply trying to take advantage of market cycles to the disadvantage of our stockholders." He added, Our desire is to do what is in the best interests of our stockholders."
Shareholders today filed suit against Western in Delaware Chancery Court over the the proposal.
Court papers show that Croyden Associates, a shareholder group, sued Western saying its directors violated their fiduciary duty to investors in their response to the buyout offer.


Wine Talk
THE Durand family has been farming and making wine here in Provence for about 250 years.
They are, in a word, newcomers.
Two thousand years ago, this was the land of the Sixth Roman Legion.
The legionnaires had conquered Egypt for the Empire, and what is now Nimes and the country around it was their gift from the Emperor Augustus.
Nimes is 15 miles west of Beaucaire.


Pataki Easily Wins the Right to Oppose Cuomo
State Senator George E. Pataki, a freshman Republican from Putnam County, easily won his party's nomination to challenge Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday, clearing the way for the most contested gubernatorial election in New York since Mr.
Cuomo won office 12 years ago and became a national figure in Democratic politics.
In the region's tightest race, Karen S. Burstein, a former Family Court judge, edged out the incumbent, G. Oliver Koppell, for the Democratic nomination for New York State attorney general, giving Mr.
Cuomo a female running mate to oppose a Republican ticket on which two women are running for statewide office with Mr.
Pataki.


In House Races, Incumbents Defeat Challengers Handily
Eliot L. Engel  17th District, Democrat
Representative Eliot L. Engel, the incumbent representing the 17th District in the Bronx and lower Westchester County, won the Democratic nomination for a fourth term over Willie Colon, a internationally known salsa musician making his first run for office.


Judge Rules on the Grant-Magic Deal
The ball was in HORACE GRANT's court yesterday after a Federal judge ruled that the all-star power forward's $22.3 million contract with the Orlando Magic could be illegal.
Magic officials indicated they would not pursue the issue in court but would try to sign Grant to a contract acceptable to the National Basketball Association.
United States District Judge DICKINSON DEBEVOISE decided Monday in Newark that a one-year escape clause in the contract could be a circumvention of the N.B.A.'s salary cap, which is intended to prohibit the richest teams from signing all the best players.


Midas Expands Role With Levlane
The Midas International Corporation of Chicago said yesterday that it had expanded its relationship with Levlane Advertising and Public Relations in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., by awarding the agency advertising responsibilities throughout Florida.
For the last nine months, the regional account, with billings estimated at $2 million to $3 million, had been at West Advertising and Marketing in Tampa, Fla., until that agency resigned last week, citing an increased workload from several other new clients.
Levlane, which already handles the regional Midas account in markets like Baltimore, Philadelphia and Washington, now handles combined billings of $6 million.
Levlane was awarded the Florida account after a review that also included four other agencies: Fahlgren Benito in Tampa; FKQ Advertising Inc. in Clearwater, Fla.; Moroch &amp; Associates in Dallas, and Tinsley Advertising in Miami.


Fragrant Flavors By Way of Greece
ONE of the secrets of efficient and quick cooking is to combine tasks when possible.
In this menu, both the chicken and rice dishes call for chopped onion, so all of the onion can be cooked together.
When it has browned, it can be divided up.
While the onion cooks, the rice can be started.


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Barry Wins in Washington 4 Years After Drug Violation
Just four years after a conviction for smoking crack drove him from the District of Columbia mayor's office, Marion S. Barry Jr. won the Democratic primary on Tuesday to stand on the verge of reclaiming the job he had held for 12 years.
In a comeback that was as stunning as his fall from office, Mr.
Barry handily beat his successor, Sharon Pratt Kelly, and also overcame a far stronger effort by a fellow City Council member, John Ray.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with an article about President Nelson Mandela of South Africa misstated the day when the picture was taken.
It was Thursday, not Friday.


For Now, Eagles' Brotherly Love
The tension in the air was unmistakable at Veterans Stadium on Monday night before Philadelphia battled Chicago.
The chatter and rumor among Eagles fans was, too.
From end zone to end zone, the murmur persisted: Rich Kotite was going to be fired and Jimmy Johnson was going to replace him sooner or later.
The new Eagles owner, Jeffrey Lurie, has been courting Johnson since the first day he bought the team.
Randall Cunningham may be traded.
Randall Cunningham's best football may be over.
The Eagles simply can't fly.
The Eagles are dead.


Clinton Signs Crime Bill


Norman Becomes No-Show For His Very Own Show
Greg Norman won't be playing in the inaugural edition of the Presidents Cup, and there is cruel irony in that.
Norman, who is suffering from persistent gastrointestinal problems, including abdominal cramping, is one of the major reasons this new competition was conceived and created within an amazingly short gestation period of six months.
His withdrawal today came as an unhappy surprise.


No Headline
"I imagined my vacation a little differently." RALF BOLOWSKI, a German visitor to New York who was shot on the Circle Line.  [ B1:2. ]


Chairman of Goldman Will Retire
Stephen Friedman, the head of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the richest partnership on Wall Street, with more than $2 billion in profits last year, surprised the firm and much of the securities industry yesterday by saying that he would retire in November.
Mr.
Friedman will be succeeded as senior partner and chairman of the management committee -- a post he has held for two years -- by Jon S. Corzine, 47, now co-head of Goldman, Sach's bond business.
Henry M. Paulson Jr., who is 48 and co-head of the investment banking division, will assume the No. 2 job as vice chairman and chief operating officer.
Both men were handpicked by Mr.
Friedman.


Not-Guilty Plea in Attack on Bridgeport Prostitute
A 29-year-old man who authorities say may have killed as many as 12 prostitutes pleaded not guilty today in the sexual assault and attempted murder of a prostitute here last month.
The suspect, Nabil Kaddah, also is charged with killing another prostitute, Jennifer Williamson, 24, of Bridgeport, whose body was discovered on Aug. 27 on Maplewood Avenue in the city's North End.


Listen Hard: Steinbrenner Is as Silent as Yankee Stadium
George Steinbrenner, the boss who relishes being a leader, trumpeted his status as a follower over and over again yesterday.
George the follower?
Steinbrenner said it was true, while praising Bud Selig, the Pied Piper whom the baseball owners are, grudgingly or not, following.
Because of his proclaimed confidence in Selig, Steinbrenner has been surprisingly silent during the strike and has not publicly exhibited the blustery approach that has marked his tenure as owner of the Yankees.
Bud, the acting commissioner, has apparently tamed the Boss.


Foley Urges Republicans to Meet With Democrats on Health Care
Speaker Thomas S. Foley suggested today that House Democratic and Republican leaders meet to see if there was any sort of incremental health insurance legislation they could agree on, but Republican leaders promptly disagreed among themselves about accepting the offer.
The House Republican leader, Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, "is receptive to the idea," a spokesman said.
"He will be meeting with the Speaker to discuss it."


The Fate of Gambia
To the Editor:
For more than eight years Gambia followed International Monetary Fund austerity programs.
In return, the I.M.F. ignored widespread, conspicuous corruption and mismanagement.
While the average Gambian bore the brunt, the Government, with the help of "surplus" United States arms, formed a semiliterate army, which deposed the Government.


Officer Wounded in Subway Said to Describe 4 Shots in Back
The transit police officer badly wounded by an off-duty New York City police officer in a subway shootout last month has told prosecutors that he remembers being shot four times in the back, twice after he had fallen and was prone on the ground, according to law-enforcement officials working on the investigation.
In his account, given on Monday to prosecutors with the Manhattan District Attorney's office, Transit Officer Desmond Robinson said he was not shot in the chest and never saw the off-duty officer who opened fire on him.
Officer Peter Del-Debbio, traveling home from Police Headquarters on the night of Aug. 22, shot the plainclothes transit officer after mistaking him for a criminal.


A Multimedia Networking Challenge
As businesses seek ways for workers to collaborate on work and conduct meetings without having to actually assemble in person, a smattering of computerized "whiteboards," video-conferencing products and document management programs have recently hit the market.
But conventional networking technology is unable to transmit the mixture of text, images and sounds at high enough speeds to make these applications useful.
It is exactly this set of problems that Ralph Ungermann, a longtime Silicon Valley executive who is considered a founding father of the data communication industry, has set out to solve with his newest company, the First Virtual Corporation.
And he plans to do it at a much lower price than the products of his many competitors in the same chase.


Canada Goes Own Way On Foreign Policy
To the Editor:
Senator Bob Dole has suggested that Canada can help United States authorities control the massive Cuban emigration to the United States by eliminating trade and tourism with the Castro regime.
Underlying his statement is the United States history and attitude to Communist governments, which is an important element in your foreign policy.


I.B.M.
Shares of the International Business Machines Corporation surged yesterday in trading on the New York Stock Exchange, adding more than 3 points to the Dow Jones industrial average.
The stock neared its 365-day high of $70.125.
The gain came in response to the company's announcement on Monday of six more lower-cost mainframe computers in its System 390.


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


A Cajun Feast From the Land of Tabasco
I'VE had the experience of visiting New Orleans and the bayou country around Lafayette, La., and I greatly enjoyed the hot Creole and Cajun food served there.
My wife and I remember with fondness a trip we made a few years ago to Avery Island, the home of Tabasco sauce.
Paul McIlhenny, the fourth generation of his family to produce this sauce, served us an authentic Cajun feast.
Hot andouille sausages, corn, potatoes and garlic, and mounds and mounds of fresh crawfish were cooked outdoors in a fiery broth.


Ryan Becomes Twins' General Manager
The Minnesota Twins yesterday promoted TERRY RYAN to general manager, replacing ANDY MACPHAIL, who left for a job with the Chicago Cubs.
Ryan's first move was to give Manager TOM KELLY a contract extension through the 1997 season.
Ryan, 40, has been with the Twins since 1986.
For the last three years as vice president of player personnel, he was responsible for scouting and evaluating all talent at the major league level and assisting MacPhail in personnel decisions.


C.I.A. Colleagues Call Fallen Star a Bias Victim
By all accounts, Janine Brookner was a terrific spy.
In the Philippines in the 1970's, she infiltrated the Communist Party.
"An almost impossible task," said her boss.
"But not for Janine." Later, in Venezuela, she recruited a Soviet-bloc agent.
And as the Central Intelligence Agency's station chief in Jamaica from 1989 to 1991, she again won praise.
"Superb," the agency's barons said in their 1991 evaluation of her job performance.
"Top notch."


Washington Homes Inc.(WHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Reputation on the Line In a Buried-Memory Case
"A Teacher's Touch," the title of tonight's "48 Hours" report, is meant to be taken literally.
After more than 20 years as a physical education teacher at an elementary school in Fairfax, Va., Craig Gordon was brought up before the school board on charges of having fondled and kissed some of his students a decade earlier, when the girls were about 10 years old.
The reporting is so fair that you may find yourself veering between sympathy for the man, a father of four who flatly denies all the charges, and suspicion that something inappropriate if not felonious happened.


Innocent Pleas Entered for Sanders Case
A lawyer representing DEION SANDERS entered written pleas of innocent yesterday to a felony charge and two misdemeanor charges stemming from a confrontation with an off-duty police officer.
Sanders, the Cincinnati Reds' center fielder, was not required to appear at an arraignment before Judge WILLIAM MALLORY Jr. in Hamilton County Municipal Court in Cincinnati.
All five charges stem from an alleged scuffle in which police said started when Sanders tried to drive his motor scooter through a restricted gate after an Aug. 8 game at Riverfront Stadium.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE COMEBACK Man in the News; From Disgrace to 'Amazing Grace': Marion Shepilov Barry Jr.
Four years and a half-mile from the lowest point of his political career, Marion S. Barry Jr. celebrated one of the highest points tonight.
At a wild and noisy victory party at the Washington Convention Center, just blocks away from the hotel in which he was arrested for smoking crack, the city's former Mayor stood before more than 3,000 screaming supporters as a monument to perseverance over personal difficulty.


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing candidates in the primary election omitted two New York City congressional races where Democratic incumbents faced challengers.
In the 12th District Nydia M. Velazquez was challenged by Pedro L. Velazquez.
In the 14th District, Carolyn N. Maloney was challenged by Rob Rosenthal.


Dole Explains Trade Treaty Stand
The Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, said today that contrary to some earlier signals he had given, he was not unalterably opposed to passing the new global trade treaty this year.
But Congress has a limited amount of time before it recesses for the November elections, Mr.
Dole said, and the Clinton Administration may have to choose between the trade accord worked out by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and its other priorities like health care and campaign finance reform.


At Tully Hall, Celebration and Self-Searching
Twenty-five years ago, Alice Tully Hall opened its doors and its resident ensemble, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, began its career.
This is a youthful anniversary, but the society has been experiencing problems associated with senior institutions.
It has had a fractious history since Charles Wadsworth left as its artistic director in 1988.
Audiences have grayed.
Reviews have been mixed.
Chamber music itself has been eclipsed by the current rage for opera.
The need for celebration, though, remains strong, particularly in an era of crisis and transition.
On Monday night in Alice Tully Hall, there was also real impetus behind the society's gala concert festivities: one of its own had made it.
Beverly Sills, who regularly sang with the society through the 1970's, has just begun her first season as the chairwoman of Lincoln Center.
The society now has a friend in high places.


Book Notes
Nyah-Nyah
Jill Paton Walsh, the British writer, grew so irritated when no British publisher bought her novel "Knowledge of Angels" (Houghton Mifflin) that she decided to import 1,000 copies from the United States and sell them herself.
"They're all afraid of their jobs and they make their decisions by committee," she complained of the dozen or so publishers who rejected the book.
"I think they like social realism here and it isn't. It's a rather strange book."


Mad Flight, Fragile Faith


Population Debate: The Premises Are Changed
Despite the lingering discord at the end of the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo yesterday, few experts disagree that the meeting, and the social changes its debates reflected, have altered many of the premises for dealing with the crisis of too many people on earth.
The phrase "population control" is gone from the official vocabulary, and with it several decades of policies that relied on targets or quotas, goals that often went unmet because women in poor countries had little say in family planning.
At their most extreme, some policies were and occasionally still are life-threatening or coercive, such as the sterilization and abortion programs of India and China.


7 Hours of Unconsummated Spanish Passion
To watch Manoel de Oliveira's seven-hour epic romance, "The Satin Slipper," is to be transported from a secular age back to a time and place (16th-century Spain) where the conflict between earthly desire and religious faith could ignite a lifetime of unconsummated passion.
The two major characters, Don Rodrigue (Luis Miguel Cintra) and Dona Prouheze (Patricia Barzyk), represent opposing arguments in an impassioned religious debate.
Is the pursuit of earthly happiness wrong, the film asks, because it distracts one from preparing for the afterlife?
Ultimately, it suggests that the refusal to give in to erotic desire is a kind of self-imposed purgatory that will speed the soul into heaven.
Our time on earth, it implies, is but a dutiful and agonizing prelude to something infinitely sublime.


Confessions of a Motor Home Dropout
I WAS behind the wheel of our rented motor home, barreling down a two-lane country road in Maine, when I realized that in the eyes of the world, I'd changed: a passing RV driver gave me the Wave.
He grinned and waved heartily with a full arm motion, easily visible through his bus-size windshield.
It was a wave that spoke of good cheer and happy trails and the clubby campground camaraderie that true mobile-homers everywhere recognize.
For no reason other than we shared a similar mode of transportation, he had reached out in kinship from his fiberglass behemoth to mine.
I'd already decided by then, only days into my family's weeklong experiment with the motor home life, that I did not deserve such a wave and probably never would.
Though I waved back, my response was hesitant and flat.
I was not born to ride the recreational-vehicle trail.
I was an impostor.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 9
Sept. 2
Sept. 10
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.3
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.2
Gasoline stocks
209.4
205.7
201.5
Distillate stocks
139.3
136.3
128.6
Crude imports, daily
7.1
8.4
6.5
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.3
1.9
Crude stocks
321.4
321.6
341.1
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.7
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
96.0
94.7
92.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


New York Democrats: The Race for Attorney General
%Rptg.
Burstein
Hynes
Koppell
Spitzer
Albany
55
3,979
1,082
2,880
1,843
Allegany
95
154
32
126
58
Bronx
100
9,691
11,118
27,578
10,517
Brooklyn
100
24,899
44,279
30,397
22,366
Broome
100
1,398
760
2,276
869
Catargus
100340
88
357
215
Cayuga
100
349
237
337
158
Chataqua
100
582
122
575
332
Chemung
100
335
206
198
170
Chenang
100
135
52
262
104
Clinton
100
327
118
462
88
Columbia
100
586
155
447
186
Cortland
100
199
189
201
83
Delaware
31
88
56
87
41
Dutchess
94
1,876
789
1,389
924
Erie
96
12,215
5,585
15,585
10,597
Essex
92
198
78
168
54
Franklin
100
224
103
188
66
Fulton
100
228
101
196
160
Genesee
72
136
72
188
73
Greene
100
259
100
370
132
Hamilton
100
77
21
63
32
Herkimer
100
298
130
185
184
Jefferson
100
778
585
953
273
Lewis
100
66
48
94
50
Livingston
98
270
133
262
88
Madison
98
212
120
213
102
Manhattan
100
49,477
17,342
30,377
17,768
Monroe
73
5,742
3,692
4,660
1,598
Montgomery
100
401
149
394
299
Nassau
100
16,235
5,563
7,263
6,250
Niagara
100
1,736
694
2,855
1,967
Oneida
98
1,279
1,829
897
701
Onondaga
100
2,776
1,473
2,360
1,227
Ontario
51
293
83
132
254
Orange
100
1,688
1,058
1,201
1,228
Orleans
100
141
46
170
76
Oswego
100
642
210
448
288
Otsego
0
0
0
0
0
Putnam
99
791
398
708
484
Queens
10024,865
25,836
26,080
20,911
Rensselaer
100
1,312
327
824
510
Rockland
99
2,796
2,812
2,247
2,534
StLawrence
99
570
288
683
192
Saratoga
100
1,170
332
845
551
Schenectdy
83
3,248
631
2,091
1,331
Schoharie
100
170
49
161
99
Schuyler
100
72
33
61
38
Seneca
100
139
59
151
47
StatenIsl
98
2,836
3,423
3,277
3,041
Steuben
100
316
142
225
136
Suffolk
99
7,511
3,297
3,337
2,878
Sullivan
97
614
316
387
408
Tioga
100
179
110
297
174
Tompkins
100
1,548
253
593
295
Ulster
99
1,499
664
686
494
Warren
100
328
108
282
159
Washington
92
271
97
183
140
Wayne
64
221
129
215
79
Wstchester
79
10,965
4,465
8,716
6,816
Wyoming
100
98
37
120
65
Yates
100
90
48
103
31
Totals
94
201,918
142,352
189,066
122,834


Consumer Prices Increased 0.3% in August
Calming fears that inflation might be rising sharply, the Government reported today that consumer prices climbed in August by the same three-tenths of 1 percent that they rose in June and July.
The latest figures caused none of the consternation of Friday, when producer prices showed a surprising surge of six-tenths of 1 percent, roiling the financial markets.
Still, many economists maintain that the pace of inflation is increasing, forecasting that consumer prices will rise around 3.5 percent this year after two years of increases of less than 3 percent.


John Bradshaw Holt; Former Diplomat, 84
John Bradshaw Holt, a career diplomat who was the deputy chief of the United States Embassy in Vientiane, Laos, during civil strife there in 1960, died on Friday at the Mid-Coast Hospital in Brunswick, Me.
He was 84 and lived in Brunswick.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Elizabeth Holt Muench.


In House Races, Incumbents Defeat Challengers Handily
Charles B. Rangel  15th District, Democrat
In a campaign filled with echoes from a race 24 years ago, Representative Charles B. Rangel easily survived a challenge from City Councilman Adam Clayton Powell 4th.


10 Essential Devils Looking for an Option
With 10 Devils regulars going into the option year of their contracts, Lou Lamoriello is busier than most general managers in the National Hockey League these days.
John MacLean, Claude Lemieux and Martin Brodeur will cost Lamoriello plenty, perhaps as much as the $17.1 million the Devils paid to match the offer St.
Louis gave to Scott Stevens.


Man Rescued From Bronx Fire
Firefighters crawled through a burning apartment in the Bronx last night to rescue a man who had been badly burned and choked by smoke, then brought him back from the brink of death, fire officials said.
Firefighters from Ladder Company 52 were the first to reach the fire, in a five-story brick apartment building at 3804 Greystone Avenue near 240th Street in the Kingsbridge section.
Lieut.
Kevin McMann and Firefighters Ken Kumple and Charles Malara entered a second-floor apartment that was engulfed in flames and smoke, said Firefighter John Baldassarre, a Fire Department spokesman.


A Rare Success at the Border Brought Scant Official Praise
Silvestre Reyes, chief of the Border Patrol here, accomplished something no other officer of the Immigration and Naturalization Service ever had.
He got the border in his sector under control.
Not just for a brief, flashy demonstration, but permanently.
El Paso had been the nation's second-busiest border crossing for illegal aliens.
Every day, 8,000 or more people waded across the Rio Grande, then melted into the city's Hispanic neighborhoods.
But in September 1993, Mr.
Reyes devised a new border-control tactic.
He positioned 400 of his officers right on the border, forming a blockade of sorts.
It brought illegal immigration to a virtual halt.


Boris B. Yegorov, 57, First Physician in Space
Boris B. Yegorov, the first physician to fly in space, died in his apartment in Moscow on Monday night, Russian news agencies reported yesterday.
He was 57.
The cause was a heart attack, the Itar-Tass news agency said.


Western Publishing Group Inc.(WPGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


New Rebel for the 90's: Meet Johnny Cash, 62
While the recent hip appeal of musicians like Tony Bennett and Tom Jones may seem manufactured, the comeback of Johnny Cash is about a lot more than market exposure.
Young audiences don't have much in common with the honky-tonk romances and alcohol-numbed heartbreaks of classic country music, but they can relate to a mind that strays from what it knows is right, especially when it's attached to a voice as deep and foreboding as Mr.
Cash's.
"There is that beast there in me," Mr.
Cash, 62, said in a recent telephone interview.
"And I got to keep him caged, or he'll eat me alive."


Canseco Plans Telethon for Refugee Kids
JOSE CANSECO says the plight of refugee children from his native Cuba has overshadowed his concerns about the baseball strike.
So rather than chasing the pennant, the Texas Rangers slugger will play Santa Claus.
Canseco, who came from Cuba when he was 9 months old, yesterday said he is heading up a campaign to raise toys and sports equipment for the Cuban rafter children detained at United States camps in Cuba and Panama.
Toys will also be distributed to Haitian refugees who, along with Cubans, have fled their homeland and are being detained at the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay on Cuba's southwest tip.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Walt Disney is said to have rejoined discussions to acquire NBC.
Several executives close to the talks said Disney might be willing to spend as much as $5 billion, though other industry experts doubt the company's enthusiasm.  [ Page D1. ]


FCB/Leber Katz And Avon Part Ways
Avon Products Inc. and FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York are parting ways on the company's account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $20 million, because of a conflict with a client of FCB/Leber Katz's parent, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding.
Vonda LePage, a spokeswoman for FCB/Leber Katz, confirmed a report of the account's departure yesterday in the Advertising Age Daily Fax edition.
"We mutually agreed earlier in the month that we would end our relationship because of the conflict," she said.
FCB/Leber Katz has handled Avon's account since 1990.


Riser Foods Inc.(RSR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


FOOD NOTES
Country Fairs
This is the weekend for country fairs, rain or shine.
The New Jersey organic country fair will be held on Saturday and Sunday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., on Titus Mill Road (off Route 31) in Pennington.
It is one of the largest organic fairs in America.
Among the events will be seminars about growing and cooking fruits and vegetables, a tour of an organic farm, contests for the longest, shortest, biggest and smallest vegetable in several categories and a farmers' market.


Fielder and Wife Get Their Day in Court
A jury in Dallas has awarded the Detroit Tigers' first baseman, CECIL FIELDER, $1.7 million in a civil suit he brought against a woman he hired to finish, decorate and landscape his home in 1990.
In a judgment rendered last week, the jury ordered MARGEE MOODY to pay Fielder and his wife, STACEY LYNN FIELDER, about $180,000 for overcharging and defrauding them in connection with work on their home in Las Colinas, Calif., then added $1.5 million in punitive damages.


Democrats Hope to Avoid Embarrassing Vote on Haiti
In the face of strong Congressional opposition to an invasion of Haiti, Democratic leaders tried today to find a way that Congress could vote on the issue next week without seriously embarrassing President Clinton.
Democratic and Republican Senators had separate meetings to discuss the situation.
Afterward almost everyone who spoke publicly expressed opposition to an invasion.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Kmart will sponsor a new radio feature that seeks to deliver an upbeat message for troubled times.
THE Kmart Corporation has signed on as the sole advertising sponsor of a new syndicated radio feature that seeks to deliver an upbeat message with stories about unknown heroes and quotations by famous people.
Although it may be coincidence, Kmart's chief rival in discount stores, Wal-Mart, also sponsors a national radio show.
Both sponsored shows are part of a trend by some advertisers to search for a programming niche that not only hits a demographic target, but is also compatible with a corporate image.


Being Overeducated and Underemployed
To the Editor:
There is no mystery why the pay of college-educated men is slipping.
Many of these men -- one-third or more -- work in occupations not requiring a college education.
Another reason is the "ripple effect." What I as a professional earn is directly related to my patients' earnings.


At Harvard Club, Work Rules Stall Settlement
To the Editor:
Michael T. Kaufman's distorted picture of the strike against the Harvard Club (About New York, Sept. 3) sheds little light on the facts of the dispute between the club and leaders of Local 6 of the Hotel, Restaurant and Club Employees Union.
By indulging in stereotypes, Mr.
Kaufman does a disservice to all who want the strike settled sooner rather than later, with an agreement that's fair to employees and to the club.


The Better to See Nature's Wonders


Fox Adds Some Pucks to Its Expensive Collection of Footballs
"Isn't icing the puck a cooking term?" David Hill, the president of Fox Sports, asked yesterday, his face lit by a Cheshire cat smile, as he celebrated adding National Hockey League rights to his division's pro football package.
"Everyone is stoked at the opportunity to do N.H.L. games," Hill said, "and I'll be able to get cheap Mighty Ducks T-shirts for my kids."


Interstate-Banking Bill Gets Final Approval in Congress
The Senate overwhelmingly approved and sent to the President for signing today a bill that would allow banks to operate branches across the nation.
The interstate banking bill has been the Clinton Administration's top legislative priority in banking this year, and Congressional approval of it represents a victory for the President and for big banks that want to set up branch networks nationwide.
The bill would eliminate the remaining barriers to interstate banking in a dozen states and a requirement that banks operate separate subsidiaries in each state.


Giuliani Cites Drop in Crime In Assessment
In an annual assesment of the government's performance, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday painted a statistical portrait of a city that has seen crime drop to its lowest rate in 15 years but still faces staggering social problems and service burdens, including a welfare roll that has climbed to its highest point in at least two decades.
The Mayor's Management Report also found dirtier streets, less inviting parks, skyrocketing overtime costs and increased waiting times for citizens pursuing taxi and consumer complaints, compared with the year before.


Restrictions Are Proposed For News Boxes on Corners
In an effort to unclutter sidewalk space while not infringing on free-speech rights, New York City is proposing restrictions on news boxes, hundreds of which are now chained to light posts at some of Manhattan's busiest street corners.
The City Department of Transportation has said it is not only considering requiring permits for the boxes, but may also prohibit chaining them to lampposts or other street fixtures and may limit their numbers on the most congested blocks in Manhattan.
A draft of the proposals was distributed to 40 publishers and civic groups recently for their comment.


Sports of The Times; '94 Season: May It Rest In Disarray
THE 1994 baseball season is all but hooked up to a suicide machine.
Any moment now, Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner, will put the game out of the protracted misery caused by a strike and the intransigence of both owners and players.
When, not if, Selig acts, the focus will switch from New York and Milwaukee -- the power bases of the union and of Selig, who also owns the Brewers -- to Washington, the power base of the only government officials that could do something about this travesty.


United Way's Ex-Chief Indicted in Theft
The ousted president of United Way of America, one of the nation's leading charities, was indicted today along with two of his executives on charges of stealing more than $1 million from the organization and spending much of it on personal luxuries.
The 71-count Federal indictment said William Aramony, president of the United Way of America from 1970 to 1992, devised elaborate schemes to steal hundreds of thousands of dollars from United Way, and spent the money on an apartment on the fashionable Upper East Side of Manhattan, foreign vacations, first-class hotels, chauffeurs and other extravagances.


Jets' Sweeney Has Only Praise for Marino
Jim Sweeney likes to think that Pittsburgh people are tougher than they are anyplace else.
So Sweeney, the Jets' center, seemed proud that Dan Marino has not only returned from last season's Achilles' tendon injury, but has also been spectacular in leading the Dolphins to a 2-0 record.


INSIDE
New Population Premises
The world population conference altered the approach to the issue, accepting that given adequate choices, people often choose to have fewer children.
News analysis, page A3.
Consumer Prices Up 0.3%
Consumer prices rose three-tenths of 1 percent in August, a pace that was lower than expected, calming some fears that inflation was rapidily picking up steam.
Page D1.
United Way Indictments
The ousted president of United Way of America and two executives were charged with stealing more than $1 million from the charity.
Page A12.
Good and Evil in the 50's
"Quiz Show," the film directed by Robert Redford about the scandal in television's early days, opens today.
Janet Maslin's review, page C11.


CHRONICLE
It was not an official stop on her book tour, but when PATRICIA CORNWELL was summoned to the White House last week to meet an admirer of her fifth novel, "The Body Farm," she could hardly refuse.
The unexpected visit has its roots in a letter that Ms.
Cornwell, a prize-winning author of crime novels, had sent to Sen.
Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, two years ago.
"I was distressed about budget problems at the F.B.I. Academy," Ms.
Cornwell said yesterday, "so I wrote Senator Hatch an impassioned letter asking for his help. We had lunch, and he spent a day with me at the academy in Quantico, Va. As a result, there is $50 million in the new crime bill for the academy." In doing research for her books, which center on a female medical examiner and are steeped in forensic science, Ms.
Cornwell has spent a lot of time at the academy.


Experts Doubt Effectiveness Of Crime Bill
The $30 billion crime bill signed into law today by President Clinton responds to the country's rising fear of crime, but law-enforcement experts contend that it is a symbolic swipe that does not go far enough toward stopping the kind of street violence that is increasingly haunting America.
The measure, which will help cities and towns hire 100,000 police officers over six years, spreads the new officers so thin that critics doubt they will make a difference.
It bans the manufacture, sale and possession of 19 military assault weapons, but leaves in circulation many thousands of the same firearms.
It imposes the death penalty for about 60 offenses, some of which had been capital offenses and most of which rarely occur.
It provides the biggest infusion of cash grants to cities for social programs since the Carter Administration, but does not guarantee that Congress will actually approve the outlays.


Rutgers Foes Keep Watching Skies
Rutgers Coach Doug Graber has an imposing name for his tailback combination of Bruce Presley and Terrell Willis, the back-to-back Big East rookies of the year the last two seasons.
Graber dubbed the two running backs Thunder and Lightning, and with both of them returning after combining for 2,002 yards last season, the coach had hoped they would have opponents seeking shelter this season.
The 5-foot-10-inch, 215-pound Presley, a junior, is designated Thunder because of his straight-ahead, run-over-people style.
The 6-0, 200-pound Willis, a sophomore, is called Lightning because of his speed and moves.


The Final Heat Is Between Cuomo and Not-Cuomo
Yesterday's primary in New York cleared the way for a gubernatorial election between an incumbent whom many New Yorkers do not like and a Republican challenger whom most do not yet know.
Until now, New York's gubernatorial campaign has revolved around a simple question: is Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo so unpopular that the Republicans can end his 12-year reign without ever making a compelling case for his opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki?


A Tunnel in Boston for Ted Williams


In House Races, Incumbents Defeat Challengers Handily
Jerrold L. Nadler  Eighth District, Democrat
In the Eighth Congressional District, the incumbent Jerrold L. Nadler easily defeated Thomas K. Duane, a second-term City Councilman, last night.


A Net Told to Go on Record About Guns
JAYSON WILLIAMS will soon be part of an advertising campaign, his lawyer said yesterday, but the New Jersey Nets forward won't be selling sneakers.
Williams, as part of a deal to avoid trial on charges that he fired a shot after a game at the Meadowlands, was ordered Monday to place ads warning youths to avoid guns.
Williams was arrested in January, accused of shooting at the hubcap of an empty security truck.
A semiautomatic handgun believed used in the shooting was found in his vehicle.
He was charged with reckless endangerment and possessing a weapon without a carry permit.


E.P.A. Moves to Reduce Health Risks From Dioxin
Calling the potential risk to human health from dioxin worrisome but significantly less than that posed by smoking, the Environmental Protection Agency said today that it was ready to take steps to reduce the chance that people would be exposed to harm from the toxic chemical.
In a news conference, the agency said that in February it would propose rules for controlling dioxin and other air pollutants emitted by medical incinerators.
These devices have been identified as a significant, uncontrolled source of the chemical compounds, which are byproducts of various industrial activities.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $100 million of notes due in 1997 at 100 to yield 6.88 percent through Citicorp Securities.
The issue is callable in one year.
Rating


Fat, by the Slice
MILLIONS of Americans eat pizza for lunch.
Sometimes one slice, sometimes two.
It's quick.
It's inexpensive.
And it tastes good.
So what's the problem?
Fat.
Whether pizza eaters know what they're actually getting, or care, is another matter.


Good and Evil in a More Innocent Age
The brilliantly unsettling prologue to "Quiz Show" is a seduction scene in an automobile showroom, with a shiny new Chrysler working its wiles upon a wary young man.
The car promises late 1950's-style perfection, but its allure is undercut by an air of sleek unreality and a hint of danger.
The salesman looks uneasy.
The car's radio mentions Sputnik.
The film's soundtrack, delectably sinister, accompanies the opening credits with "Mack the Knife."
"Hey," says the customer, aptly anticipating what will follow.
"I thought it used to be the man drove the car. Now the car drives the man."


The New Population Control Weapon
The acrimonious debate over abortion at the world population conference in Cairo has obscured the truly radical element in the document approved by delegates at the final session yesterday: the notion that enhancing the educational, political and economic opportunities for women is perhaps the surest way to curb further population growth.
Previous conferences in this once-a-decade event have favored other solutions, such as economic growth ("development is the best contraceptive") or the provision of family planning services.
Each approach can claim successes, and the world has made great progress in reducing the rate of growth in recent decades.
But the absolute number of births continues to rise and major problems remain in many impoverished countries.


Chinese Dissident Reported Ill With Cancer
A leading Chinese dissident who was imprisoned for his role in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement in 1989 is suffering from cancer, family members have said.
The dissident, Chen Ziming, 43, who was released in May on "medical parole" and has been under house arrest, underwent surgery Monday in the People's Hospital in Beijing to remove a testicular growth that proved to be malignant, they said.


Almost-New 'Carmen' Offered by City Opera
Jonathan Eaton's almost-new production of "Carmen," returning to the City Opera for a third season on Saturday afternoon, serves as an unassuming, highly efficient vehicle for Robynne Redmon's vivid rendition of the title role.
Which is not to say that the conception is bland; Paul Shortt's sets, with their sun-worn Mediterranean colors and rugged surfaces, shroud the action in palpable atmosphere.
This "Carmen" has an exact comprehension of time and place.
But there's little in the production that calls attention to itself or strives for whimsy.
The village square in Act I is set off by stark columns and overhung with light-filtering blinds.
The mountain pass in Act III, Scene 1 is given focus by the ominous form of a ruined church.
The final scene has a splendid sense of depth, and the imposing gate to the bull ring strongly suggests the festive space offstage so important to the conclusion's multi-layered effect.
Jeff Davis's lighting gives a bronze luster to each scene.


The Price of Rape  5
During World War II, as many as 200,000 teen-aged girls and women from Korea and other Asian nations were recruited to the Japanese war effort.
They were forced into brothels and ordered to have sex with Japanese soldiers.
They were not prostitutes but victims of serial rape.
By way of atonement, Japan has now decided to commit $1 billion to programs ranging from youth exchanges with other Asian nations to a vocational training center for women in the Philippines.
Furious at what they regard as "symbolic compensation," some of the surviving women recently conducted an egg-throwing, slogan-hurling protest in front of the Japanese Embassy in Seoul.


Amid Ivy, Dinkins In New Role
Like any other university professor facing his first class of the semester, former Mayor David N. Dinkins chose to open his lecture at Columbia University with a bit of levity.
"To those of you who voted for me this fall, I thank you," he told the 150 students sitting in Room A of Jerome L. Greene Hall.
"And if you didn't vote for me, thanks anyway. That's how I got to be here."


Fighting Over Art In a Costly Limbo
In a financial tangle that has scandalized and diverted the art world for more than a year, about 40 contemporary artworks valued at more than $1 million are being held hostage in Venice for a ransom of $150,000 in unpaid bills.
Paintings and sculpture by important artists like Roy Lichtenstein and David Salle, Chuck Close and Louise Bourgeois are among the works that have been sitting in packing crates these many months, and the man whose dealings led to the mess, an eccentric 30-year-old curator named Christian Leigh, seems to have vanished.
The art was sent to Venice to be included in a show called "Transactions," which by all indications was part of the prestigious 1993 Venice Biennale.
The show was the brainchild of the American-born Mr.
Leigh, who, if he was present and accounted for today, would be surrounded by piles of mounting debts and dozens of angry dealers, artists and collectors who say they lent their artworks to the show because of the prestige of the Venice Biennale.


Oracle Group Names President
Doug Salthouse, chief operating officer at the Hastings Healthcare Group in Flemington, N.J., has been named president at the Oracle Group, a medical marketing agency being formed by Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello in New York.


Maybe He Will or Maybe He Won't: Mayor Waits on Endorsing Pataki
George E. Pataki may now be the Republican Party's undisputed choice for governor of New York, but Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani remained decidedly equivocal about his fellow Republican yesterday.
"I'm not just a private citizen," Mr.
Giuliani told reporters at City Hall.
"I'm the Mayor of New York City. And the governor of New York has a great deal to do and say about what happens to the future of New York City. So it's very important that I understand the positions that the candidates have.


A Cash Cow Transforms Itself Into a Dead Horse
Baseball's labor mess is a case study in dreadful marketing.
The 34-day-old players' strike, compounded yesterday by the cancellation of the remainder of the season, has transformed a monthlong blunder into a disaster.
"I'd give it Hall of Fame status for bad decisions," said Jack Trout, a marketing strategist with the Trout &amp; Ries firm in Greenwich, Conn.
"It's a classic. Up there with New Coke and Edsel."


Closing the Pentagon Budget Gap
It did not take long for the Pentagon's "bottom-up review" to bottom out.
That review, undertaken last year, adopted the lavish premise that the U.S. should prepare to wage two regional wars simultaneously.
The excessive force levels needed to satisfy that requirement were certain to put upward pressure on the defense budget, currently $263 billion, for years to come.
Now the Pentagon is conceding that there is a gross mismatch between those force requirements and the means to pay for them.
The budgetary shortage, by the Pentagon's own calculations, will exceed $40 billion over the next five years.
Taking a grimmer view of the requirements for a two-war strategy, the Government Accounting Office puts the gap closer to $150 billion.


U.S. Allows Citibank to Sell Derivatives
Bucking a trend toward more regulatory restrictions on derivatives, Federal bank regulators said today that they had given formal permission for the first time for a bank to sell stock-index derivatives.
Derivatives are potentially volatile financial contracts that vary in value with other financial instruments, like stock indexes.
Because of heavy losses this spring at some industrial companies and mutual funds that invest in derivatives, Congressional pressure has been mounting on regulators to control them.


3 Giants Try to Fill Running Shoes
Rodney Hampton was on his way back from Phoenix tonight after spending several days in the hospital with a bruised kidney.
He won't be running over any linebackers for at least a couple of weeks.
So what's a team to do when it bases its offense on the running game and its Pro Bowl running back is laid up?


Theo Crosby Dies; Architect Was 67
Theo Crosby, an architect and a founding partner of Pentagram, an international design company, died on Monday in London, where he lived.
He was 67.
He died in surgery for a lung infection, Pentagram said.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Pair of Provocateurs Find Drama in Discipline Planting Fields Arboretum


CHRONICLE
A new image for SHARI BELAFONTE:
"Very few people know that I read or that anyone in Hollywood reads," the actress said the other day, but that gap is about to be remedied.


Burstein Is Back, With Gusto
After her underdog victory, Karen Burstein, the Democratic nominee for New York attorney general, went on the attack.
Page B6.


Ballet Theater and College Plan Partnership
American Ballet Theater and the State University College at Purchase announced a five-year partnership yesterday that will include the use of the college's Performing Arts Center and dance division studios for rehearsals and performances, the establishment of a summer dance institute, and classes at the college taught by company dancers.
Students will also have the chance to appear as extras in Ballet Theater performances.
"I think we're in a collaborative period in the arts, whether we like it or not," said Bill Lacy, the president of the college in Westchester County, about a 35-minute drive from Manhattan.
"We'd like to do this with our theater and music programs. And visual arts. I'd like the students to work with a gallery in New York City."


Putting a Price Tag on NBC Proves a Tricky Task
For Time Warner, ITT, Disney and other potential buyers of NBC, the big questions are how much it is worth and how much of it are they willing to buy.
Pricing in this case is a tricky task.
The Walt Disney Company is said to be offering nearly $5 billion for all of NBC, while Time Warner Inc. is considering a deal for mainly the television network at about $2.5 billion.


Real 'Star Trek' Drama: Enlisting New Skipper
In one of the strangest episodes yet in the nearly 30-year-long "Star Trek" story, a Federation vessel is lost in space at the edge of the galaxy, without its captain, who has abruptly abandoned ship.
That only the first part of this scenario is fiction is producing anxious moments for Paramount Television, which is struggling to launch "Star Trek: Voyager," the third television spinoff of the original "Star Trek" science-fiction series.


Congressman's Personal Story Opens Session on Black Families
Representative Kweisi Mfume, chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, described his personal salvation today and urged a group of black leaders to help young blacks facing similar difficulties to take control of their lives and prepare for their futures.
"Unlike many in this room, I came out of a disjointed family structure," Mr.
Mfume, a 45-year-old Baltimore Democrat, said in opening a conference here that will focus on problems faced by black families.
"I grew up in the worst possible conditions. I became homeless after my mother's death, hit the streets and dropped out of school, flirted with every temptation that was around, became a teen parent before my time, felt left out and victimized."


Agreement on a Waste Tax
Insurance companies and the reinsurance companies they hire to absorb extremely large risks agreed late on Tuesday to a new arrangement for sharing the burden of a proposed tax to help pay for the cleanup of hazardous wastes.
The proposed tax is a key part of legislation to reform Superfund, the Federal program for cleaning up about 1,300 heavily polluted sites.


In Performance; JAZZ
The Elegant and the Robust In a Delicate Balance  Blue Note
The violinist Stephane Grappelli doesn't have to do much more than play a song's melody to wake it up.
At 86, Mr.
Grappelli hasn't lost a bit of his improvisational powers, and he'll take a melody and add trills or wafting counterlines or blues riffs substituting for the original melody.
It's improvisation the old-fashioned way, based on the tune, and encrusted with elaboration and ornament.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Retail sales surged eight-tenths of 1 percent, to $186.56 billion, in August.
The report showed that consumer spending was growing at a brisk pace.
In a separate report, the Federal Reserve found business activity expanding through the summer.  [ D1. ]
The baseball strike is a case study in dreadful marketing.  [ B15. ]


Magellan Restaurant
Shares of Magellan Restaurant Systems, which operate Pizzeria Uno restaurants in New Jersey, fell sharply after Magellan announced it would buy Grill Concepts Inc. for 8.5 million Magellan shares.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the Government's report on consumer prices in August misstated the period for which the annual pace of inflation is expected by many economists to increase to 3.5 percent.
It is next year, not this year.


Hospital Chaplains Play a Tangible Role
To the Editor:
I read with interest your Sept. 7 news article on the chaplain's role in hospital care.
As a physician I have guided patients and their families through many health crises.
My personal experience two years ago brought home to me the importance of a chaplain's role.


In Port-au-Prince, the Signs Of Invasion Are in the Air
A propeller-driven airplane swooped noisily over the Haitian capital just before 3 o'clock this morning, awakening thousands of people and seeding the city with thousands of leaflets bearing the image of the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Hours later, a pair of United States military helicopters flew lazily over the port and adjoining seaside slum areas as curious residents gaped.
Washington may say that its preparations for an invasion of Haiti are not yet complete, but the long arm of the Pentagon is already being felt here.


Whitman Aide Proposes Limits on Legal Damages
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's administration gave a strong indication today that it would push for a major overhaul of the state's laws governing damage lawsuits, to include placing limits on the liabilities of defendants and on the amount of punitive awards.
If the administration's proposals are adopted as suggested, New Jersey would go from being one of the most litigious states in the nation, second only to Massachusetts in the number of legal damage claims, to being one of the toughest in which to file a damage suit.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Virginia Senate campaign misidentified the target of Senator Bob Dole's criticism of an unspecified Virginia Senator for supporting the crime bill.
At a campaign rally for Oliver L. North, Mr.
Dole referred to Charles S. Robb, a Democrat, not John W. Warner, a Republican, Mr.
Dole's office said.


First of Subpoenaed Newark Documents Turned Over to Federal Authorities


For the Presidents Cup, Some Quick Instructions
If Nick Price walks up to Mark McNulty's golf ball in the first fairway on Friday and hits it on to the green with an 8-iron, don't call the PGA Tour to report it as a rules violation.
What you will be seeing will be a legal play in an alternate shot match called Foursomes, one of the three match-play style competitions in the inaugural Presidents Cup.
For casual golf fans who are used to seeing stroke play events week after week on television, the Presidents Cup will be a dramatic departure from the norm.


Dwindling Synagogue Holds On, and Worries
With Yom Kippur, the Jewish Day of Atonement, just ahead, Bill Rosen unlocked the door at Temple B'nai Israel today and pointed to a table, already set in the small brick synagogue, where the town's Jewish population will gather after services on Thursday to break the day's fast.
Everyone is expected, said Mr.
Rosen, president of the synagogue, He paused, then added, "Everybody that's left."


At Catholic Schools, Matters of Conscience; Strikers Fear Intrusion by Bishop
To the Bishop of Camden, his new policy to control and discipline teachers in the parochial schools reflects a need to enforce moral authority in morally tenuous times.
But to the Roman Catholic schoolteachers in South Jersey, 85 percent of them lay people, who have gone on strike, the Bishop's action is an attempt to reach beyond church and classroom and into their private lives.


In Memoriam
The National Pastime, which was buried yesterday, died a long time ago.
Baseball, which survived, will live forever.
And somewhere between the myth of the Pastime and the glory of the game was the annual major league season, which seems to have collapsed of exhaustion toward the tail end of a centurylong search for its soul.
Of the three, the major league season will be the easiest to forget, and eventually to resurrect in some other form.
It had become an increasingly sour male soap opera, and may just need a year or two of detoxification.
It has to purge itself of the rage between the owners, who regard business as a competitive sport, and the players, who regard competitive sport as a business.


Talks Leave North Korea And U.S. Split
The United States held productive talks with North Korea this week on two key issues, but America's chief negotiator indicated today that the remaining differences were so deep that it was unlikely the two sides would either open diplomatic relations or resolve questions over North Korea's nuclear program soon.
Robert L. Gallucci, who has been leading the American team in the talks, said at a series of news conferences today that two sets of working-level discussions this week in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, and Berlin had been useful and helped the two sides understand each other's positions.


Eye-Opening Boutiques
IF you want to see some of New York's hottest new interiors, go and get your glasses.
As eyeglasses become the fashion statement of the 1990's, eye-wear shops are making their own design declarations.
Competition is fierce: of the eight boutiques on Madison Avenue between East 56th and 80th streets, at least four are new or getting face lifts.


CLINTON OFFERING HAITIAN LEADERS CHANCE TO LEAVE
In a last-ditch effort to avoid an invasion of Haiti, President Clinton has approved a plan to offer the country's three top leaders a comfortable life in exile, senior Administration officials said today.
At the same time, Mr.
Clinton authorized his aides to conduct covert activities that might undermine the three-man military leadership in Haiti, the officials said.


Ending Low Profile, Weicker Attacks G.O.P. Candidate
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., who had maintained a low political profile in the weeks leading up to the primary elections on Tuesday, re-emerged today with a searing attack on the Republican candidate who wants to succeed him, John G. Rowland.
The Governor's comments, and radio spots that began today on behalf of Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark, who is running for governor, suggest a new phase of the campaign and a more prominent role in it for Mr.
Weicker.


School Safety Division Tries to Hold the Line
If New York City's Board of Education ranked high schools like students, Sheepshead Bay in Brooklyn, where a 15-year-old boy was shot in the neck at midday yesterday, might stand somewhere in the middle of the class in terms of security.
According to the Board of Education, the school, with some 2,859 students, stood 56th last year among the system's 118 high schools in so-called major incidents, like assault, rape and robbery.


A Special Horse, A Special Trainer
Except for gray hair, they don't have much in common as they approach the day when they will try to pre-empt two championships in one race and settle the controversy of the year.
The horse, Holy Bull, is tall and imposing, even imperial, explosive out of the gate, swift on the lead and the most dramatic show-stopper in racing since Secretariat.
He is so commanding that, even without winning any of the Triple Crown races or running in the Breeders' Cup, he will try to outrun an all-star field in the Woodward Stakes on Saturday and then go home for the winter as the heir presumptive to the two titles: best 3-year-old colt in North America and Horse of the Year.


Take 700 Players and 28 Owners And It Winds Up to 0 Solution
IN one of the darker hours of the 1990 lockout, Donald Fehr called the baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, to say goodbye.
When asked why, Fehr told Vincent that it was appropriate given the fact that the lockout was most likely to go on for a year or two or three, and that if it did, none of the principal players would be around when it was over.
When asked what his response was at such somber moments, Vincent said it was usually: "Oh, Donald, lighten up. Don't take things so seriously."


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Pair of Provocateurs Find Drama in Discipline Planting Fields Arboretum


PHP Healthcare Corp.(PPH,N) reports earnings for Year to Apr 30


Consumer Spending Is Brisk
After a brief respite, shoppers flocked to stores and showrooms again in August and spent freely for a surprisingly broad range of back-to-school and other consumer goods, Commerce Department figures showed today.
Retail sales, which account for about one-third of the economy, jumped eight-tenths of 1 percent, to $186.56 billion for the month, solidifying expectations that personal spending in the July-September quarter will more than double its second-quarter growth pace of 1.4 percent.
That could mean the overall economy may not be slowing as much as the Federal Reserve would like.


All the Magic Is Gone From the Yankees' Numbers
The season that could have been special for the Yankees, the season that might have ended their 12-year post-season drought and the season that they often conceded might never be duplicated officially ended yesterday without a resolution on the field.
When Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, canceled the remainder of the baseball season, the Yankees were left to wonder what might have been.
They possessed the finest record in the American League at 70-43, they had the top hitter in the league in Paul O'Neill, they had perhaps the elite pitcher in the league in Jimmy Key and they had a wonderful chance to rumble to the World Series for the first time since 1981.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  Six American Crews Make It to the Final  United States crews continued to do well at the world rowing championships in Indianapolis yesterday.
Six crews qualified for the finals, to be held Saturday and Sunday, including the men's and women's heavyweight eights, and seven others will row in semifinal races today.
More than 1,000 men and women from 47 nations are competing in 23 events.
John Riley, the United States' men's heavyweight single sculler, advanced to the semifinals when he finished second to Zeno Muller of Switzerland, the former Brown University sweep oarsman, in a repechage event yesterday.
GOLF  Griffin Wins Playoff of Women's Met Open  Lisa Griffin, an amateur from the Greenwich Country Club, defeated Terri Migliaccio of the same club on the first hole of a sudden death playoff to win the Cadillac Women's Met Open championship at the Ridgeway Country Club in White Plains, N.Y.
Griffin and Migliaccio each registered a 79 for a 36-hole 159.
Griffin then bogeyed the par-4, 385-yard playoff hole but Migliaccio had a double bogey and Griffin earned the $3,000 first-place check.


Air France Sells Meridien Hotels to Forte
Meridien Hotels Inc., the French luxury-hotel chain, has been sold by its principal owner, Air France, to Forte P.L.C. of Britain to generate cash for the airline, the companies said today.
Air France sold its 57.3 percent stake in Meridien for 1.09 billion francs, the equivalent of $207 million at today's exchange rate.
The sale is part of a three-year plan to restructure the airline, which is state-owned and on the list of companies for privatization; increase productivity by 30 percent, and cut costs.
Air France lost $1.6 billion last year and is under pressure from the Government to streamline operations.


Benetton Team Stands Behind Schumacher
MICHAEL SCHUMACHER plans to return to drive for the Benetton team, the suspended Formula One leader's management team said yesterday in Frankfurt.
"Contrary to reports and speculation, Michael Schumacher will in all cases continue to drive for Benetton in the 1994 season, with the end goal of winning the championship," the statement from Germany said.


Japan Trade Surplus Drops
Japan's trade surplus fell 18.8 percent in August as imports rose sharply.
The figures provide some evidence that the steep appreciation of the yen in the last year and a half may finally be working to cut the huge trade imbalance.
However, Japan's politically sensitive surplus with the United States continued to rise, to $3.49 billion in August, up 2 percent from $3.42 billion a year earlier.
That is because the strong American economy continued to soak up such Japanese products as semiconductors, liquid crystal displays, autos and auto parts and machine tools.


Rwanda's Gorillas Face Many New Threats Besides Poachers
To the Editor:
Frank Smyth notes in "Can Rwanda's Gorillas Survive" (letter, Sept. 6) that "direct gorilla poaching was entirely wiped out in Rwanda by 1984." It was Dian Fossey's tireless dedication in her last years that must be credited, in large part, for stopping the poaching for prized gorilla heads and hands.


Unican Security reports earnings for Year to June 30


No Amendments Veto
To the Editor:
William Safire's Sept. 8 scenario for a coming Republican-controlled Congress that will pass a term limits amendment is a fanciful flight, but is shot down when he adds that the amendment would "be vetoed by a gutsy President Clinton, and have a chance of passage over his veto."


Clinton Plans Speech to Head Off Clash With Congress
Running out of time to make the case that restoring democracy to Haiti is worth the costs of invasion, President Clinton plans to address the nation Thursday not so much to persuade the public as to head off an ugly clash with Congress, Administration officials said today.
It was plain today that Mr.
Clinton remains a reluctant warrior.
As Administration officials disclosed that he had approved a plan to offer Haiti's military leaders a comfortable life in exile, the image of fortitude that he sought to convey to visiting reporters was tempered by one of a man searching for a way out of a political quandary.


Parking Rules
Because of Yom Kippur, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


CHRONICLE
In the social frenzy of New York, it is no longer possible, it seems, simply to invite people to a party and give the party.
Now "save the date" notices precede actual invitations, and parties for the committees that organize the parties precede the actual parties.
Still, there was a new wrinkle in the event given Tuesday at the East Side apartment of NADINE B. HACK, a former New York City Commissioner to the United Nations Consular Corps and International Business.
Sixteen people who have served as hosts at past dinners for the Women's Campaign Fund gathered to give advice to 10 people who will be hosts for the first time on Oct. 3.


In Performance; POP
A Swath of History In the Mavericks' Songs  Tramps
The Mavericks, who played on Friday night, are an inch or two from being a great live band.
But the last inch is the toughest.
Raul Malo, the group's leader, singer and guitarist, is a historian in his writing, often assisted by some of the better Nashville songwriters, from Kostas to Al Anderson.
The tunes suggest a classic 1950's sensibility: early rock appears, and so does Okie boogie, western swing and Nashville country.
Mr.
Malo's voice, a high tenor, likes the rounded stratospherics of Roy Orbison, but it is just as happy cracking around a country version of the blues.


Moderate Senators All Smiles Over Progress on Health Care
Senator George J. Mitchell and several members of a bipartisan group of senators met for more than an hour today and emerged smiling, pronouncing themselves optimistic that they could reach agreement next week on a significant health insurance bill.
But they would not say what they agreed on or disagreed on, and acknowledged what Mr.
Mitchell called "the severity of the time constraints" they face in trying to pass any bill before Congress's likely adjournment in mid-October.


Chicago Trading Disrupted
Trading was halted for nearly four hours today on the Chicago Board of Trade because of a malfunction in the computer system that posts prices of completed trades.
The disruption depressed trading nationwide in bonds and grains, as banks and other dealers became reluctant to enter deals without being able to see where futures prices were headed on the board.
It also prevented traders elsewhere from hedging their risks with Board of Trade contracts.


New York Democrats: The Race for Attorney General
% Rptg.
Burstein
Hynes
Koppell
Spitzer
Albany
55
3,979
1,082
2,880
1,843
Allegany
95
154
32
126
58
Bronx
100
9,691
11,118
27,578
10,517
Brooklyn
100
24,899
44,279
30,397
22,366
Broome
100
1,398
760
2,276
869
Catargus
100
340
88
357
215
Cayuga
100
349
237
337
158
Chataqua
100
588
123
567
333
Chemung
100
335
206
198
170
Chenang
100
135
52
262
104
Clinton
100
327
118
462
88
Columbia
100
586
155
447
186
Cortland
100
200
191
207
85
Delaware
100
289
204
290
139
Dutchess
100
1,920
808
1,421
944
Erie
96
12,568
5,757
16,012
10,888
Essex
100
207
84
180
59
Franklin
100
224
103
188
66
Fulton
100
228
101
196
160
Genesee
72
136
72
188
73
Greene
100
259
100
370
132
Hamilton
100
77
21
63
32
Herkimer
100
298
130
185
184
Jefferson
100
778
585
953
273
Lewis
100
66
48
94
50
Livingston
100270
133
262
88
Madison
98
212
120
213
102
Manhattan
100
49,477
17,342
30,377
17,768
Monroe
73
5,959
3,782
4,769
1,658
Montgomery
100
401
149
394
299
Nassau
100
16,235
5,563
7,263
6,250
Niagara
100
1,736
694
2,855
1,967
Oneida
98
1,279
1,029
897
701
Onondaga
100
2,791
1,476
2,330
1,230
Ontario
100
499
237
422
122
Orange
100
1,688
1,058
1,201
1,228
Orleans
100
141
46
170
76
Oswego
100
462
200
448
288
Otsego
100
368
103
277
112
Putnam
100
918
404
715
492
Queens
100
24,865
25,836
26,080
20,911
Rensselaer
100
1,312
327
824
510
Rockland
982,796
2,812
2,247
2,534
StLawrence
100
577
288
685
194
Saratoga
100
1,172
332
847
553
Schenectdy
100
3,248
631
2,091
1,331
Schoharie
100
170
49
161
99
Schuyler
100
72
33
61
38
Seneca
100
139
59
151
47
StatenIsl
100
2,836
3,423
3,277
3,041
Steuben
100
316
142
225
136
Suffolk
100
7,536
3,308
3,348
2,888
Sullivan
100
634
321
397
473
Tioga
100
179
110
297
174
Tompkins
100
1,548
253
593
275
Ulster
99
1,499
664
786
494
Warren
100
328
108
282
159
Washington
98
293
108
194
150
Wayne
100
221
129
215
79
Wstchester
79
10,977
4,476
8,728
6,824
Wyoming
100
98
37
120
65
Yates
100
90
48
103
31
Totals
96
203,373
142,284
190,539
123,379


Simmons Market Research Bureau changes its methodology to try to reverse some setbacks.
THE Simmons Market Research Bureau is overhauling its longtime survey methodology and naming a new president and chief executive.
The important changes come as the company seeks to resolve a fractious dispute over magazine audience measurement.
Data from Simmons and its principal rival, Mediamark Research Inc., help agencies decide where to spend billions of dollars a year in magazine and newspaper advertisements.
With the 1995 survey to be released in May, Simmons will change how its interviews ask questions for the first time since its founding in 1963.


Three-Alarm Spots and Dots at Disney World
THE Dalmatians have taken over the firehouse -- or at least it looks that way at a real fire station and emergency center that Venturi, Scott Brown &amp; Associates of Philadelphia has designed for Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla.
The Reedy Creek Improvement District Emergency Services Headquarters, alongside the road to the Magic Kingdom, looks like your vernacular small-town fire station.
Until you notice that the walls are made of porcelain enamel panels, some resembling bricks, others covered with giant Dalmatian-like spots.


A Top Macy Executive Is Leaving
As Macy and Federated sort through the nuts and bolts of their merger, some of Macy's executive ranks are being thinned out.
Arthur E. Reiner, who many had expected to help command the thorny consolidation of the two companies' New York area chains became the first senior Macy executive to publicly announce his departure.
Mr.
Reiner, a courtly merchant who survived a decade of corporate turmoil at R. H. Macy &amp; Company, said yesterday that he would leave the company on Oct. 14.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Argentina filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $1.5 billion of debt securities and warrants to purchase debt securities.
*
Bear Stearns Cos., New York, is selling $200 million of 7.625 percent notes due in 1999 at 99.635 to yield 7.714 percent through Bear, Stearns.
The noncallable issue is rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Maestro of 92d St. Y
To the Editor:
A Sept. 8 news article about the problems the 92d Street Y is having with its musical programs reported that the "Lyrics and Lyricists" series accounted for half the audience that attended all musical programs and produced a substantial surplus, which was used to subsidize other programs.
Note that "Lyrics and Lyricists" was conceived by Maurice Levine, a distinguished conductor.
For more than 25 years he has produced, directed and written programs and is preparing next year's series.
EDWARD M. CRAMER  New York, Sept. 8, 1994


CHRONICLE
Who says AL GORE isn't witty?
The Vice President has hardly missed an opportunity to poke fun at himself since a basketball injury last month put him in a cast while his ruptured Achilles tendon heals.
Even when presenting PRESIDENT CLINTON an interim report yesterday on his effort to streamline the Federal bureaucracy, he couldn't resist the urge to joke, The Associated Press reported.


No Headline
"A lot of people have gone out of their way to make this a cold, rude, insensitive and inefficient agency." -- A.D.
MOYER, director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service district in Chicago.  [ A18:1. ]


Cunningham's Event Is Now 30
When the curtain rose at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night, the 16 members of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company entered one by one and formed a line, as if they were introducing themselves.
When the curtain fell at the end of the evening, they gathered in a cluster like friends posing for a photograph.
Between these moments of calm came beautifully swirling movement.
It was quite an event.
It was also an Event.
The performance, called "Joyce Event" in the program, was the first in a series the company is presenting at the theater.
The occasion also marked the 30th anniversary of the invention of this theatrical form.
As Mr.
Cunningham defines the term, an Event is a 90-minute presentation, without intermission, in which his company offers bits of old choreography and sometimes fragments from works in progress.


Beyond the Bargain Horizon: Far East Ninth
LAST Saturday, a fashion designer named Samantha Senack discovered an Art Deco chair with soft lines and even softer upholstery -- pink mohair, a fabric that is beginning to enjoy cult status.
The price? $150.
"A total bargain," Ms.
Senack triumphantly announced.
The same afternoon, Marisa Tomei, the Academy Award-winning actress, jumped out of a four-wheel drive vehicle, bought a bath-crystals holder and drove off.
Made in France in the 1920's, the enameled tin relic was priced at $195.


What Hungarians Wrought
SILVER-GILT beakers (right) and chain mail studded with jewels are among the 200 objects in "Baroque Splendor: The Art of the Hungarian Goldsmith," an exhibition through Oct. 30 at the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts.
"In 1526, Hungary had just been torn apart by the armies of the Ottoman Empire and was divided up," said Susan W. Soros, the center's director.
"Many goldsmiths, fleeing the area controlled by the Turks, settled in North Hungary and Transylvania, and the decorative arts flourished there."


'Are We There Yet?'


An Encouraging Signal From Quebec
The narrowness of the popular vote that has restored the separatist party to power in Quebec is heartening news for North America.
Splitting Canada in two would be wrong, but the vote count suggests Quebecers are not ready to do it.
For the U.S., and for continental stability, it is a reassuring indication that our northern neighbor -- closest ally, biggest trading partner and best friend -- will continue to be all of those things.
The victory of the separatist Parti Quebecois was expected.
The party will have a solid majority in the provincial parliament, but pre-election polls predicted it would be significantly larger.
Moreover, the separatists' failure to win 50 percent of the popular vote, and their slim margin over the Liberal candidates -- less than one-half of 1 percent -- say voters are less than enthusiastic about their new government's aim to create a sovereign nation.
Indeed, the Liberals' defeat had more to do with high unemployment and low regard for the party after nine years in office.


Beijing to Impose Huge Fees To Limit Migrants in City
Reacting to a flood of workers moving into the capital, Beijing's municipal authorities have announced that they would begin imposing fees of up to $11,600 for the privilege of living in Beijing.
"People from outside Beijing must pay for the right to live permanently in this capital of China from Nov. 1," the official New China News Agency said on Monday.


Bozell Chicago Picks A Senior Manager
The Chicago office of Bozell Worldwide said that it had named Richard A. Corelitz to a high-level senior management position with responsibilities of overseeing the agency's important National Pork Producers Council account as well as other duties.
For the last seven months, Mr.
Corelitz, 45, has served as a consultant after resigning from Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago, where he was an executive vice president and managing director.
He has not yet been assigned a title at Bozell Chicago as the agency revamps its management structure from officers to partners.


Discounting Hits a Barrier in Japan
Price discounting in Japan hit a roadblock today when the Tokyo High Court reversed a lower court ruling and upheld the right of the cosmetics giant Shiseido to stop supplying its products to a retailer who sold them below list price.
The ruling goes against the recent trend in which some Japanese businessmen have circumvented the country's rigid and inefficient distribution system and lowered the high price of everything from soft drinks and suits to gasoline and airline tickets.


Transit Officer Does Not Forgive Shooting in Back
Transit Officer Desmond Robinson, offering a chilling account of his shooting in a Manhattan subway by an off-duty officer, said yesterday that he had little recollection of a bedside meeting with the officer that police officials and the Mayor had portrayed as a tearful reconciliation.
And he added that he could not imagine forgiving a man who shot him in the back.
He also said Police Commissioner William J. Bratton had been premature in asserting that the incident involved "two good cops who got caught up in an awful situation."


Cardinals Make McMahon Their Starter
JIM McMAHON, 35, will replace STEVE BEUERLEIN at quarterback for the Arizona Cardinals on Sunday when they play the Cleveland Browns and try to end a two-game losing streak.
"I looked at everything, and I thought we have to do something to win some ball games," Coach BUDDY RYAN said.
"To me, this is the most positive thing we can do. Jim, I know, will take the challenge."


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Senate Ponders Antitrust Legislation
With the remainder of the baseball season canceled, two Senators are still hoping to pass a floor amendment, tacked on to other legislation, that would remove part of baseball's antitrust exemption should the club owners decide to unilaterally impose new labor conditions.
If the amendment is passed, Donald Fehr, the baseball union leader, has indicated to Senator Howard Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, that he would recommend that players end the strike, Metzenbaum said.
The floor amendment is co-sponsored by Metzenbaum and Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah.


California Grocery Deal: Yucaipa to Buy Ralphs
The Yucaipa Companies announced today that it would acquire the Ralphs Grocery Company in a merger that will create the largest grocery chain in California and one of the 10 biggest in the nation.
The deal, in which Yucaipa will pay Ralphs shareholders $425 million and assume $1 billion in Ralphs debt, ends several weeks of merger negotiations.
A Ralphs shareholder, Banque Paribas, had opposed the deal.


Holyfield Fails to Get Medical Clearance
The former heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD has failed to get medical clearance to fight again, although he has not given up thoughts of a boxing comeback.
Holyfield, who recently underwent another examination with a cardiologist in New York, was told Monday that his heart ailment, a noncompliant left ventricle, has not sufficiently healed to allow him to resume boxing, The Atlanta Constitution reported yesterday.


Ault Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


The Once and Future Montauk
"THE premises thus offered for sale comprise a large peninsula . . . 9 or 10 miles in length and 3 miles in width at its widest part. It embraces in all about 11,500 acres, including the ponds, which cover over 1,000 acres. The land is rolling, and a great part of it is a considerable elevation from the sea. The shooting and fishing on the property are excellent. The climate is unsurpassed, and the location is healthy."
Maine?
Nova Scotia?
Try Montauk, L.I., or at least Montauk 115 years ago, when its neighbors were a few villages with names that ended in Hampton but there was no such place called "the Hamptons." Montauk, 130 miles from Manhattan at the easternmost tip of Long Island, was largely wilderness, the home of a few Indians, the keepers of the lighthouse at Montauk Point and the tenders of the livestock that had turned most of the land into a vast grazing prairie by the sea.
Montauk was as unpopulated as the Adirondacks and at least as inaccessible.


Mid Ocean Ltd.(MOCNF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Japanese Taking to Wide-Screen TV
With its once vaunted high-definition television set meeting disappointing acceptance from consumers, Japan has begun moving toward another new system that promises to make home viewing more like going to the movies.
Japanese consumers have been flocking in recent months to buy television sets with wider screens than the conventional boxy ones, heralding what could be a permanent shift in shape of television pictures here and eventually worldwide.


Refund Policies Being Formed
If you have a ticket for a canceled Yankees or Mets game you may get an immediate refund.
The Mets will accept exchanges for a game next season, if there is one.
Mets season ticket-holders will be notified by mail of exchange and refund policies.
The Yankees said their season box-holders and combination-plan box-holders would receive automatic refunds.


In Washington, Murals Are High Art
For many people, including native Washingtonians, the nation's capital raises images of marble statues and pin-striped bureaucrats.
But the more discerning can catch a glimpse of the city's soul by looking up -- at the walls.
Murals have added character to Washington's landscape for years.
"Murals rank highly as a form of public artwork in the city," said Alec Simpson, the assistant director of the D.C.
Commission on the Arts and Humanities, which finances murals and other art projects.
"Murals provide a public service and add to the community. You find that the people raise a hue and cry if you try to take them away."


Selected Primary Results
x-Denotes winner, (i) Denotes incumbant.
All results represent 100 percent of the precints reporting except where noted.
Candidate, Total votes - % of vote NEW YORK GOVERNOR DEMOCRAT - 95% Reporting x-Mario M. Cuomo (i) 521,192 - 79 Lenora B. Fulani 136,249 - 21 REPUBLICAN - 96% Reporting George E. Pataki 261,160 - 75 Richard M. Rosenbaum 85,428 - 25 CONSERVATIVE - 96% Reporting George E. Pataki 14,450 - 78 Robert G. Relph Sr. 4,996 - 22 U.S.
SENATE DEMOCRAT - 96% Reporting Daniel Patrick Moynihan (i) 496,062 - 74 Al Sharpton 176,210 - 26 CONSERVATIVE - 95% Reporting Bernadette Castro 11,922 - 78 Henry F. Hewes 7,125 - 37 U.S.
SENATE REPUBLICAN x-Gerald LaBriola 70,125 - 68 Joseph Bentivegna 34,839 - 32 U.S.
HOUSE DEMOCRAT 5TH DISTRICT x-James H. Maloney 12,100 - 55 Thomas S. Luby 10,035 - 45


Mets' Season of Promise Comes Up Empty
Yesterday afternoon, while major league baseball owners decided to cancel the remainder of the season, John Franco -- one of the Mets' union representatives -- went to Macy's to buy new underwear.
He saw no reason to sit home and wait for a phone call that would tell him what he already knew.
Franco and his teammates will not be returning to Shea Stadium this season.
The owners' decision left Franco angry and frustrated.
But it did not come as a surprise.


Teen-Ager Shoots Fellow Student At Their High School in Brooklyn
Three days into a new school year, a 10th grader apparently smuggled a .32-caliber handgun past metal-detectors, then shot and gravely wounded another student at Sheepshead Bay High School in Brooklyn yesterday.
The incident, which left one teen-ager in critical condition and another in jail, marred what Board of Education officials were calling a remarkably smooth and peaceful beginning to the school year.


Town Up in Arms Over 6 Feet of House
In this township where well-off New Yorkers buy picturesque farms for weekend homes, people come to Crystal's luncheonette for the gossip as much as for the fried eggs.
A year or so ago, the hot topic was a local woman embroiled in a zoning dispute over the ostriches she was breeding on her four-acre farm.


Cellular Giants in Rush for Alliances
Cellular telephones may be getting smaller and lighter, but the wireless industry is on the way to being dominated by a handful of great big companies.
With the AT&amp;T Corporation expected to complete its $12.6 billion purchase of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. any day now, the regional Bell companies are rushing to form cellular telephone partnerships that can match AT&amp;T in reach and marketing clout.


A Grass-Roots Candidate Bolts the Campaign Trend
One day after rocking the state's Democratic Party with a primary victory over its endorsed gubernatorial candidate, William E. Curry Jr. today heralded his success as a sign that voters are tired of heavily-financed, television-oriented political campaigns.
Mr.
Curry, the State Comptroller, pulled off an upset on Tuesday, when he received 55 percent of the vote against John B. Larson, the leader of the State Senate, who outspent Mr.
Curry by at least a 5-to-1 ratio for television commercials.


Back to the Basics: Taylor, and Tutor, Revisit Chavez
Willie Rush remembers "the old Meldrick Taylor," a flurrying dervish of a fighter whom he began training when Taylor was a 79-pound, 8-year-old in the Frankfort section of Philadelphia.
Rush trained Taylor for the next 11 years, until Taylor's second professional fight, after which the emerging junior welterweight contender left him for another trainer.


After Hard Race, Burstein Plunges Into Attacks on Republican Rival
Minutes after her underdog victory was finally proclaimed, Karen S. Burstein bounded forth to accept the hard-won Democratic primary nomination for state attorney general early yesterday, fairly bobbing and weaving in search of the next round.
The 52-year-old former legislator, state commissioner and judge was wide eyed and exultant in thanking a rally of screaming celebrants at the Sheraton New York in Manhattan.
She paused only briefly to ruffle her tightly curled hair in a signature gesture.


S.E.C. Reaches Settlement With Socialite
The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that it had reached a final settlement of an insider trading case with the Southampton socialite Edward R. Downe Jr. that could total more than $11 million and leave him with nothing more than a few personal belongings.
And in a rare display of social commentary, the S.E.C. declared Mr.
Downe a financial and social has-been, portraying him in a press release as a "once prominent New York businessman and socialite."


One Giant Step for the Islanders' Mullen
rian Mullen was asked this morning how it felt to skate at Nassau Coliseum for the first time since he suffered a seizure here almost six months ago.
After thinking for a moment, the 11-year veteran looked up from where he was sitting and said: "I guess I felt like a rookie again."
The 32-year-old Islander forward, who has been away from the game for more than a year, took his first step toward a comeback from a stroke, open-heart surgery and an epileptic seizure when he practiced for half of his split-squad's double-session.


Illegal Aliens Put Uneven Load on States, Study Says
The first systematic study of the costs of illegal immigration, released today, confirms that illegal immigrants cost states more than they contribute in taxes.
But the total immigrant population, legal and illegal together, is a boon, not a burden, for the country over all, generating a surplus of $25 billion to $30 billion, according to research by the Urban Institute, a Washington research group.


Peace? Belfast Trial Explodes Into a Donnybrook
It was Tuesday afternoon, and Gina Adair was rounding up "the boys." There had been trouble at the Crumlin Road courthouse that morning, a pitched battle between Catholics and Protestants, and the police had waded in with riot sticks against Gina's people, the Protestants.
Gina, with short platinum-dyed hair, gold-loop earrings and a fearsome reputation among people who follow sectarian violence, was working the phones.
Her summons was successful: a knot of men and boys began gathering behind the courthouse at 2 P.M.
It grew to about 40 or 50.
Some of them carried ax handles and cudgels.


Rangers Reassign Their General Manager
The Texas Rangers' TOM GRIEVE, who has run a major league team without winning a division title longer than any other general manager in the major leagues, was reassigned to become an assistant to TOM SCHIEFFER, the club president.
SANDY JOHNSON, director of player personnel, was chosen interim general manager and will be a candidate for the permanent spot, Schieffer said.


Pearlstine Is Named to Fill Time Inc.'s Top Editing Job
Reaching outside the company for the first time to fill its top editorial position, Time Warner yesterday appointed Norman Pearlstine, former executive editor of The Wall Street Journal, as editor in chief of Time Inc.
Mr.
Pearlstine, 51, will be the fifth editor in chief in a line that began in 1923, when Henry R. Luce became founding editor of Time magazine.
He will succeed Jason McManus, editor in chief since 1988, who will retire Dec. 31, a year before his five-year contract expires.


Bus Herding Makes Some Psychological Sense
To the Editor:
Allow me to add to the comments about New York City buses in your Sept. 8 letters:


3 Charged With Rape Of Passer-By
A place of shelter became a scene of horror on Tuesday night when a woman walking by a home for homeless youths in the Bronx was seized, dragged into the building and raped by two teen-age residents and a member of the home's staff, the police said.
The victim, a 32-year-old woman, was attacked at 10:30 P.M., on the sidewalk in front of the two-story brick town house at 2194 Valentine Avenue, in the Fordham section, the police said.


Magna Intl(MGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.88
4.64
3.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.56
4.58
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.93
4.97
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.39
7.41
5.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.67
7.68
5.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.50
6.96
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.46
5.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Biomet Inc.(BMET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Rangers Start a Backup Derby in Net
When the Rangers opened their exhibition season against the Penguins tonight, the goaltending chores were shared by Glenn Healy and Corey Hirsch.
With Mike Richter firmly established as the first-string netminder for the Stanley Cup champions, one of the key decisions of training camp will be to assign the backup role to either the veteran Healy or the youthful Hirsch.


In Performance; THEATER
The Lizzie Borden Story With a Rock Attitude  Here
When the title character of Tim Maner and Steven Cheslik- DeMeyer's rock musical, "Lizzie Borden," hacks up two dummies with an ax, it is impossible not to think back to 1970's rock shows in which Alice Cooper performed similarly ghoulish antics.


Seats of Fancy
SAPORITI ITALIA has been known more for rigor than whimsy, till now.
One of its best-selling chairs, by Alberto Salvati and Ambrogio Tresoldi of Italy, is called Omaggi.
Inspired by contemporary art, it comes with any of six backs, in lacquered wood or imitation suede.
In cartoon colors, $993, sold through the trade.
Saporiti is at 225 East 57th Street; (212) 371-3700.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.S.
OFFERS DEAL TO HAITIANS  In a last-ditch effort to avoid an invasion, President Clinton has approved a plan to offer Haiti's three top leaders a comfortable life in exile, officials said.
A1


My Brother, the Slugger
In May, my parents and I went to Yankee Stadium for the first time together.
My father is a dreamy man, whose sense of time becomes exacting only when focused on the appointed moment of the first pitch of any given baseball game.
He likes to arrive about two hours early.
His preference is partly due to loving the game and adoring his youngest son, my brother Paul, the Yankee outfielder.
It is also because being early is the only way my father knows of avoiding being late.
He says that he can predict the outcome of a ball game by the first six pitches.
But that soft May night, when Paul was hitting .458 and realizing hopes that my father must have harbored since the end of his own minor league pitching career, I watched the Old-Timer survey the empty, manicured diamond the way some people regard the ocean, with awe and infinite calm.


Western Star Trucks Holdings reports earnings for Year to June 30


Special Circumstances at Home
After an especially taxing day of school and football practice, Amos Zereoue and two of his teammates were starved for some old-fashioned home cooking the other day.
So they headed to a two-story, stone-constructed cape, just off Jerusalem Avenue.


SWIPING AT CUOMO, PATAKI GIVES OUT PLAN ON GOVERNING
After campaigning for 10 months on hazy promises to cut taxes, fight crime and reduce spending, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, yesterday issued the first of what he said would be a series of detailed plans for changing state government.
And he used the occasion to attack Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as the author of "failed liberal policies" that had caused great problems for the state.
On the day after both Mr.
Pataki and Mr.
Cuomo easily won their primary races, the Governor, a three-term incumbent, kicked off his general election campaign by announcing a new state-financed transportation program in Buffalo.


A Rival Takeover Offer for Borden Is Reportedly Prepared
A Rhode Island investment firm headed by Paul B. Kazarian is preparing a rival bid for Borden Inc., people familiar with the investment firm's plans said yesterday.
Mr.
Kazarian, a former Sunbeam-Oster chief executive with experience turning around consumer-products companies, declined to comment.
But industry executives familiar with the strategy of Mr.
Kazarian's firm, Japonica Partners, said it was assessing investor support for a rival bid for Borden and actively pursuing financing for a deal.


Booooooo! Crowd Doesn't Like Call
To fans who had already suffered and smoldered their way through five weeks without baseball, yesterday's formal cancellation of the season was a distinct nonevent, merely confirming what had become all too obvious.
As many of them made clear, well before yesterday's announcement, embittered fans had already canceled baseball, some, they vowed, forever.


TV Makes Ohio Candidate, Then Turns and Hurts Him
Television spots are the miracle drugs of modern politics.
They can make weak candidates strong and put hope into hopeless causes.
But a television spot, as Joel Hyatt has discovered, can also be a sword with two sharp edges.
With an expenditure of tens of millions of advertising dollars over the last decade, he built a national chain of storefront law offices, and in the process made himself well-enough known to win the Democratic nomination for an open Senate seat in Ohio.
But the advertisements also firmly implanted in the minds of voters here a picture of a smooth-talking lawyer, an image that many find unsuitable for the job he is seeking.


In the Ivy, Columbia Tries New Approach
In his sixth year as head coach at Columbia, Ray Tellier is simply a survivor.
Coming off a 2-8 record in 1993, he decided he had to improve this team.
Somehow.
No defense? Move some offensive players to defensive positions.


Council May Force Its Approval for Police Merger
Angered by what they said was a lack of details about the Mayor's plan to merge New York City's three police departments, several members of the City Council suggested yesterday that they were prepared to pass a measure that would require the Council's approval before the merger could occur.
Their concerns were expressed during hearings on a bill sponsored by Councilman Walter L. McCaffrey of Queens that would require Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to get explicit authorization for his plan to place the housing police and transit police under the jurisdiction of Police Commissioner William J. Bratton.
Although Mr.
Giuliani signed an executive order last week to carry out the merger of the housing police and the Police Department on Oct. 1, Council members said they could still act before that date.
Mr.
Giuliani plans to merge the transit police into the larger force in January.
Still it remains unclear whether the Council could indeed block the merger, which some members fear would compromise police protection in housing projects and in the subways.
Mr.
McCaffrey suggested that if the Council approves his legislation and the Mayor presses ahead with the merger, a court might have to decide who prevails.
At the hearing, Commissioner Bratton sought to assure the Council that the merger would create sweeping efficiencies in personnel and expenses.
"I am here to win your confidence and even your support for an action which is the only way to dissolve the climate of fear that has seized many housing developments," Mr.
Bratton said.
"We can no longer afford to have three police departments with three detective bureaus tracking one individual who happens to commit a robbery on the subway, a mugging on the street and an assault in a housing development."
He said that the merger would lead to the immediate placement of an additional 140 officers on patrol in the city's housing projects, since they would be freed from administrative duties that would be assumed by the enlarged Police Department.
But in his testimony before the Public Safety and Government Operations Committees of the Council, Commissioner Bratton seemed to have forged little success in assuring Council members.
"I don't think the administration has made much of a case for the merger so far," said C. Virginia Fields, a Councilwoman who represents Harlem and the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
"They are involved in a public relations effort to sell a plan for which they have not taken the time to answer questions on impact, cost savings or residents' concerns about the possibility of a decline in service. Until they answer those questions, no merger should be implemented."
After the hearing, Mr.
McCaffrey said the Giuliani administration would meet with several Council leaders in the next few days to address the concerns about the merger.
Mr.
Giuliani met with several leaders on Tuesday to deal with their questions.
Even so, Mr.
McCaffrey said he would continue to press for passage of the bill by two committees on Monday and by the full Council within 10 days after that.
The committees had considered voting on the measure yesterday, but decided, on the urging of the Giuliani administration, to wait.
The administration contended that it wanted to answer Council members' questions and to assure them that residents of housing projects would not be adversely affected.
But administration officials also criticized the Council leaders, saying that the lawmakers had, in essence, agreed to a merger in June by passing a budget that made funds available for a combination of the police forces.
They also charged that by waiting to hold the first public hearing just two weeks before the first part of the merger was scheduled, Council leaders were seeking to score political points with their constituents, rather than earnestly seeking to resolve differences over the merger.
The hearing was attended by about 200 spectators, many of them residents of housing projects and many of them constituents of the committee members.
Indeed, rather than asking questions of Commissioner Bratton or other witnesses who testified, several Council members offered lengthy statements chronicling their concerns and opposition to a merger of the housing police with the larger force.
In each case, the speeches were met with thunderous applause.
No matter what happens with the McCaffrey bill, the Giuliani administration still needs the formal support of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, which provides about $75 million a year, a third of the budget for the housing force.
Mr.
Giuliani said he has negotiated the details of the merger with the housing department.
But Michael A. Siegel, a spokesman for the Housing Secretary, Henry G. Cisneros, said that before a merger with the housing police could be made final, a public hearing must be held on the merger.
"The department feels that a merger can only occur if the end result is maintenance or an enhancement of security and police services for the residents of the New York City Housing Authority."
A hearing on the matter is scheduled for Monday in Harlem by Representative Floyd H. Flake, the Queens Democrat, the Mayor's office said.


Quebec Separatist Says Slim Margin Won't Change Timetable
Jacques Parizeau, Quebec's Premier-designate, said today that despite his separatist party's slim plurality in the popular vote in provincial elections on Monday, he is sticking to his timetable for a referendum on independence sometime next year.
Meeting the press for the first time since Monday, he also tried to reassure minorities in Quebec -- more than one million of seven million Quebecers whose mother tongue is not French and about 50,000 Indians -- that their rights would be preserved in a Quebec republic.


Wilder to Quit Senate Race In Virginia
Former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia decided tonight to abandon his quest for the United States Senate, hours after two polls were made public showing he had little support in the four-man race, a close adviser said.
The adviser, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the decision would be announced on Thursday morning.
He said Mr.
Wilder made the decision at a meeting that included his son, Lawrence D. Wilder Jr., who is a Richmond lawyer and former member of the state legislature.


METRO DIGEST
THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: UPSETS AND ATTACKS AS THE SPOTLIGHT NARROWS After campaigning for 10 months on hazy promises to cut taxes, fight crime and reduce spending, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, issued the first of what he said would be a series of detailed plans for changing New York State government.
And he used the occasion to attack Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as the author of "failed liberal policies" that had caused great problems for the state.
A1.
Mr.
Pataki may now be the Republican Party's undisputed choice for governor, but Mayor Giuliani remained decidedly equivocal about his fellow Republican.
B7.


In Performance; POP
A Mexican Stage General Offers Something for Everyone  Radio City Music Hall
Juan Gabriel, a Mexican pop star who performed two sold-out shows on Saturday and Sunday, came out for his second show backed by 13 string players, 14 singers, 8 horn players, 3 percussionists and a synthesizer player.
In the middle of his three-hour extravaganza, Mr.
Gabriel brought out a large mariachi band, too.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 5 about the campaign to succeed Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine misidentified the college, in Waterville, Me., where Anthony Corrado, who commented on the race, is a professor of government.
It is Colby College, not Bates.


Texas Oil Family in U.S. Tax Inquiry
A Federal grand jury is investigating the Moncriefs of Fort Worth, one of the nation's most colorful and fabled oil families, on suspicions of tax fraud, according to recently filed court documents.
The Moncriefs' lawyers say that 64 armed agents of the Internal Revenue Service staged a "Gestapo-like" raid on their building on Sept. 1, terrorizing them and their employees and carting off so many records -- 300 boxes, 20 file cabinets -- that the business, the Moncrief Oil Company, has nearly had to shut down.


Israel Asserts Group Plotted To Kill Arabs
Although they are skimpy with details, the Israeli authorities suggest that a terrorist network of rabidly anti-Arab Jews has sprouted, with roots in this militant settlement on the outskirts of Hebron.
Eight or nine men have been arrested in recent days, including two young army officers, and Government officials say that some were caught "at the last minute" as they were about to go out and kill Palestinians.


CUNY's Open Admissions Fail Miserably; Strivers of Our City
To the Editor:
Kudos to Blanche Wiesen Cook and Sandi E. Cooper for responding with eloquence and not a little common sense to the trashing of the City University of New York (Op-Ed, Sept. 8).
It is indeed true that "the past always has a rosy glow that wasn't there when we lived in it." CUNY's mission of inclusion continues to provide a chance at college for thousands of students who would not otherwise have had the opportunity to attend college at all.


How the Tickets Match Up
THE DEMOCRATS
MARIO M. CUOMO, Governor, 62, lawyer, leader of state Democratic politics who brings to the race all the advantages and burdens of three terms in office.
Controls statewide web of jobs and party political organizations.
Must use his considerable eloquence to sell voters on his record and convince them he has not overstayed his welcome.


Poland and Banks Agree To Reduce Unpaid Debt
Poland signed an agreement with Western banks tonight that reduces its defaulted commercial debt of $14 billion by nearly half, opening the door to what many here hope will be a new economic era.
Foreign banks had already expressed interest in opening operations in Poland, a country with one of the fastest-growing economies in Europe, yet until now with limited growth potential because of restricted financing opportunities.


9 Revered Innings of American History
It is my cheerful duty to report that the expectations aroused by the announcement that Ken Burns was undertaking a television history of baseball are not disappointed by the 18 1/2-hour series that begins on Sunday.
Like the game itself, these nine programs (or innings, as they are called here) occasionally drag, but the rewards keep coming.
Here again are many of the elements that made "The Civil War," Mr.


INSIDE
Algeria Courts Detainees
Hoping for peace talks, Algeria shifted an Islamic party's leaders from prison to house arrest.
Page A12.
Warning Sign in Belfast
A melee in Belfast signaled how elusive peace will be unless it is backed by Protestant militants.
Page A2.
Consumer Spending Picks Up
Shoppers spent freely in August, lifting retail sales by eight-tenths of 1 percent for the month.
Page D1.
Wilder to Quite Senate Race
L.
Douglas Wilder plans to drop out of the race for Senate in Virginia, an adviser said.
Page B8.
Wounded Officer Speaks Out
The transit police officer wounded by another officer gave his account of the subway shootout.
Page B1.


Beethoven Sonatas On Period Pianos
Musicians who specialize in period instrument performances are in an odd place these days.
Authenticity, once their battle cry, has been shown to be unachievable, and has been abandoned as both a goal and as a buzzword.
So have the movement's descriptions of modern instrument performances as necessarily bloated and, well, inauthentic.
Now they have adopted a new universalism, taking pains to praise the beauty and depth of modern instrument performances.
But, they gently add, only the instruments used during a composer's lifetime yield the timbres, balances and articulations the composers wrote for.
Fair enough, and essentially what less dogmatic voices in the movement were saying all along.
Malcolm Bilson and six of his students from Cornell University are making this argument in the grandest possible way this month at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
In eight concerts -- four were presented on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday; the others are Sept. 22, 24 and 25 -- Mr.
Bilson and his colleagues are playing the 32 Beethoven sonatas on early keyboards.
The cycle is the first of its kind in New York; in fact, it was apparently never done anywhere until these pianists played the series at Cornell and in Utrecht, the Netherlands, this summer.


To Our Readers
Starting today, The New York Times has increased the size and spacing of the type used in news articles, in letters to the editor and on the Op-Ed page.
The goal of the change is ease of reading.
The change should be most noticeable on news pages inside The Times, where white space has been added between lines of body type.
Previously, extra spacing was largely confined to the front page and the editorials.
In the next few weeks, the change will be extended to Sunday sections; article typography will then be consistent on all standard-size pages.


Is Hasty Up to the Task? Carroll Confident He Is
Facing Jim Kelly and John Elway in consecutive weeks can be quite stressful if you're a Jets defensive back.
So what does cornerback James Hasty have to look forward to on Sunday? Dan Marino.


Calendar: Tours, Shows And Talks
Artisans' Open House  40 Main Street, Warwick, N.Y.; (914) 258-4716.
It's harvest time in upstate New York, but there will be more than apples for the picking this weekend, when 40 artists and artisans in Warwick Valley, N.Y., 50 miles northwest of New York City, open their studios to the public.
They include weavers, stained-glass designers, mosaic makers, potters, illustrators and photographers.


Essay; Showdown Ahead
After the President has addressed the nation about his need to make good on his stream of threats to the Haitian junta; after partisans in Congress do their mutual somersaults on the War Powers Act; after we hail a victory over a pipsqueak principality in a war of nerves or forces -- then a real foreign-policy crisis will have to be faced.
The Bosnian clock now stands at one month to midnight.
Being put to the test is the credibility of NATO and the strength of the new relationship between the U.S. and Russia.


Moses Shelesnyak, 85, Is Killed; Studied Human Contraception
Dr.
Moses C. Shelesnyak, a physiologist who carried out research on human fertility and contraception, was found bludgeoned to death on Monday morning at his home here.
He was 85.
On Tuesday, investigators booked an acquaintance on suspicion of murdering Dr.
Shelesnyak.
The acquaintance, Paul Joseph Donovick, 31, was arrested as he strolled along a sidewalk in Buellton, three miles west of here.


Sanders Says He'll Join 49ers
Deion Sanders said today that he expected to sign with the San Francisco 49ers.
Carmen Policy, the 49ers' president, said that if an agreement could be reached, there was a 60 percent chance Sanders could play in Sunday's game against the Rams.
"We should get it done Thursday," said Eugene Parker, the agent for Sanders.


Court Halts Ad For Credit Repair
After the first false-advertising complaint by the Federal Trade Commission involving the worldwide computer network known as the Internet, a Federal court in Sacramento, Calif., halted a credit-repair promotion yesterday.
The complaint charged Brian Corzine, also known as Brian Chase, with making false claims in selling a credit-repair program for $99 through a business called Chase Consulting.
The commission said that while the company claimed to provide legal ways to repair bad credit, its advice was actually illegal.


Prudential To Buy Back Investments
Prudential Securities Inc. plans to buy back more than $70 million worth of mortgage investments that were improperly sold to hundreds of retail investors as being less risky than they actually were, executives with the firm said yesterday.
The investments were improperly sold during the spring and early summer of this year, the executives said, and they are showing large losses.
Prudential believes customer losses on the investments totaled at least $10 million.


Zoning, Sex and Videotape
With his stringent proposals to curb New York City's sex-oriented adult entertainment business, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is operating on his campaign pledge to improve the quality of life in city neighborhoods.
His plan to regulate the location and concentration of adult video stores, topless bars and other such establishments is a response to legitimate community anger.
That anger has grown as these businesses have spread into residential areas from Rego Park in Queens to Manhattan's Upper East Side, provoking realistic concerns about neighborhood ambiance, property values and crime.


Biedrusko Journal; The Cold War Armies Meet, Just to Link Arms
Sgt.
Timothy Britt came off the target range at the military training field in this small Polish village brimming with relief.
"They're more disciplined than I thought," said the American soldier, who is based in Germany, as he looked toward the platoon of Polish soldiers.
"To put it bluntly, I'm glad they are our friends now. I wouldn't want to go against them."


Corrections
An article on Sunday about legislation facing Congress this fall misstated the position of the insurance industry on a measure to extend the Superfund law, which requires polluters to pay to clean up toxic waste.
While segments of the industry opposed the measure, most large insurance companies now support it.


Zubov Out for Early Season
Sergei Zubov, who led the Rangers in scoring last season, will probably miss the start of the new season with a knee injury.
The third-year defenseman from Russia suffered a sprain of the medial collateral ligament of the left knee Tuesday.
Zubov, who will be sidelined three to five weeks, was injured while trying to avoid a collision during practice in Glens Falls, N.Y.
Zubov plays the right side on the second defensive platoon, usually with Kevin Lowe.
He also mans the right point on the power play.
Last season, he led the team with 89 points on 12 goals and 77 assists.


F.T.C. May Block QVC Sale
The Federal Trade Commission is considering blocking the sale of QVC Inc., the cable home shopping company, to the Comcast Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc., according to a person close to the discussions.
The F.T.C. is said to be worried about the concentration of power in the cable home shopping industry that Tele-Communications would hold after such a deal.
Tele-Communications, the nation's largest cable operator, already owns 80 percent of Home Shopping Network Inc. and would own 43 percent of QVC after a merger.


Government Says Court Is Impeding Effort to Ease Nuclear Threat
The Energy Department said yesterday that a Federal judge's order blocking the department from importing spent nuclear fuel from European reactors was undermining the Government's effort to reduce the spread of nuclear weapons.
The judge, Matthew J. Perry Jr., ruling in a suit brought in Federal District Court in Columbia, S.C., by the State of South Carolina, issued a restraining order on Tuesday that prevents the Energy Department from importing the rods.
Two ships carrying several hundred fuel rods are already at sea, due to land within days at the Sunny Point Military Terminal in Wilmington, N.C.
The rods are supposed to be shipped by rail to the Savannah River Site near Aiken, S.C., for storage.


Sports of The Times; Biggest Loss For Baseball: Do You Care?
EVEN before the baseball season was proclaimed dull and void by Bud Selig yesterday, some people's reaction had been clear.
"I don't care," you heard more and more people saying.


Nassau Incumbent Loses, Tarnishing G.O.P. Leader
In a stunning setback for one of the most powerful Republican political organizations in the nation, a freshman Congressman from Nassau County's South Shore was defeated in Tuesday's Republican primary by a political maverick in a rematch of their primary battle two years ago.
Representative David A. Levy of Baldwin, a longtime protege of Joseph N. Mondello, the Nassau Republican Party county chairman, lost to former Assemblyman Daniel Frisa of Westbury by less than 300 votes out of 24,648 votes cast, according to the Nassau County Board of Elections.
He is the only incumbent Republican in the House who has lost a primary election this year, national Republican officials said.


Judge Chides CNN in Contempt Trial Over Noriega Conversations
In a criminal-contempt case against CNN, defense lawyers said today that the network believed it was not defying a Federal judge when it broadcast prison phone calls by the former Panamanian strongman, Manuel Antonio Noriega.
But that defense appeared not to impress Judge William M. Hoeveler of Federal District Court, the judge who barred the broadcasts in 1990.
He told CNN's lawyers that they had not completely understood his ban or the issues surrounding it, at one point asking, "Have you read the law recently on that subject?"


BASEBALL: THE PLAYERS
The way Pete Harnisch has prepared for the aborted end of the baseball season is a story that his next-door neighbors can tell.
Instead of watching the Houston Astro pitcher retrieve the baseballs that he frequently threw in his backyard and that rolled into theirs, they've seen him coming after more and more golf balls that he chipped awry.
"When I go over there to get the balls," Harnisch recalled today, "my neighbors kind of look at me, and I smile and give them a wave."


Summer Vacation: A Time to Savor Life
I DIDN'T make a pie again this summer.
Or canoe across the salt pond on a steamy afternoon; or rent a Windsurfer for a morning's humiliation.
The can of tennis balls is sitting unopened on the hall table.
The books are piled up, a couple half-read, by the low, wide bed with the pink and white quilt.
Each year, I try to cram real life -- life that makes me feel most alive -- into a few weeks away from work, away from the city.
So much gets left out.


Worthington Industries(WTHG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Through Glass Artistically
WITH her bee- and fish-inspired mirrors (above), Lisa Stimpson of New York is helping to revive the ancient art form of eglomise -- painting and gilding on the back of glass.
She also paints large round table tops and insets for small metal drink tables.
Her bee mirror, 10 inches in diameter, costs $300; the fish mirror, at 22 inches, is $750.
Exclusive at Arkitektura, 96 Greene Street (near Spring Street), in SoHo; (212) 334-5570.


Insider's View of the I.N.S.: 'Cold, Rude and Insensitive'
Jamie Gorelick's baby sitter, a Colombian immigrant, could barely wait until the day she would be sworn in as a United States citizen.
But when the notice of her swearing-in ceremony arrived, her heart sank.
The ceremony had already taken place.
The baby sitter missed a second and then a third swearing-in because subsequent notices from the Immigration and Naturalization Service also arrived too late.
So, anxious and confused, she turned last spring for help to her boss, who happened to be the Deputy Attorney General.
Ms.
Gorelick oversees the immigration agency, but she said she had called the I.N.S.
"just as myself." Transferred from number to number, she lingered on hold "for what seemed like forever," she said, until she was finally disconnected.
She tried again and reached an answering machine.
She left her name, home phone number and a request for assistance.
But the immigration service never returned the Deputy Attorney General's call.
With that brief encounter, Ms.
Gorelick got a taste of how the I.N.S. often treats its principal clients, for illegal immigrants, criminal aliens and corrupt brokers do not consume the bulk of its time.
Rather, the agency expends most of its effort serving more than four million people from around the world who each year make simple and perfectly legal requests for benefits, from working papers to citizenship.
Every one of these clients pays a fee, generating $576 million this year, or a third of the agency's budget.
Yet immigration officials acknowledge that the agency often fails to provide them with humane, efficient service, leaving people like Ms.
Gorelick's baby sitter (who eventually was sworn in) unnecessarily anguished.
"We're a monopoly, yet we make people suffer," said Phil Waters, the acting director of the agency's San Francisco office.
"It's crazy. People are paying good money to get service from the Government, and we're not giving it."
Every day, across the country, immigrants' phone calls go unanswered and their letters sit unopened.
Their files get lost, and their cases get improperly entered in antiquated databases.
And often, because they get only a busy signal or a recording by phone, immigrants stand for hours, sometimes even overnight, in lines that snake through office buildings and parking lots.
In an interview, Attorney General Janet Reno said she had not quite believed a friend in Miami who told her that it was impossible to reach the agency by phone.
So she tried calling the Miami number herself -- and could not get through.
With 19,000 employees and 65 nearly autonomous offices around the world, the immigration service is not a monolith.
Every day, some immigration officers rise above their daily tribulations and hobbling constraints to offer compassionate, intelligent service.
And any agency that serves almost five million clients a year is going to offend some of them and make mistakes with others.
But the I.N.S. mishandles far more cases than its share because the agency is organized in a way that allows some barely trained employees to bark at the clients, turn a deaf ear to their complaints or mishandle their requests.
"A lot of people have gone out of their way to make this a cold, rude, insensitive and inefficient agency," said A. D. Moyer, director of the immigration district in Chicago.
The I.N.S. is charged with two missions that many people inside and outside the agency find to be in conflict.
On the one hand, the agency polices the borders and airports, arrests criminals and expels illegal immigrants.
On the other, it provides services to an overwhelming majority who travel or already live here legally.
Of these two sides of the agency's personality, law enforcement has always dominated.
In fact, making arrests at the border has always been the road to advancement.
As a result, many legal aliens have long complained that some immigration agents treat them like criminal suspects.
This attitude, coupled with the inefficiency that riddles the agency, often causes headaches and worse.
"The I.N.S. is completely like a Soviet bureaucracy," said Leonid Zagalsky, 39, a Russian immigrant in New York.
"Every sign starts with the word 'no': No smoking. No standing. No sitting. No asking questions. You cannot reach a human being by phone. And when you go, you stand for many humiliating hours in line only to reach a semi-human who answers your measly question by talking in a cabalistic language: 'I-95, dash, point 6, dash, B-52.' " (Mr. Zagalsky was referring to the agency's complex numbered forms.)
Many of the agency's own employees, interviewed in roundtable discussions at district offices across the country, openly ridiculed some of the agency's efforts to serve its clients.
And almost without exception, the employees said nothing had improved for them since Bill Clinton took office -- in client service or any of the agency's other fields of responsibility.
"There've been changes, but it's not really better," Mr.
Waters said.
"We're falling even farther behind."
But the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, Doris M. Meissner, said that she and others were struggling to improve.
They are trying, for example, to promote the idea that immigrants should be treated with "humanity and respect," as Ms.
Gorelick said.
Ms.
Meissner has directed officials to stop calling immigrants "aliens" and to practice "enforcement with a heart."
T.
Alexander Aleinikoff, who became the agency's general counsel in March, said, "I go around telling people: 'This is not the Deportation and Detention Service. This is the Immigration and Naturalization Service.' "
But as with all the agency's problems, the leaders are dealing with an internal culture that may be difficult to change.
One senior official at headquarters, for instance, rolled his eyes at the idea that "illegal alien" was no longer an acceptable term.
He asked, "What are we supposed to call them, 'out-of-status visitors' ?" The System 10 Years In the Wrong Line
On their first days on the job, immigration employees learn that efficiency is usually the goal, not the reality.
They confront mountains of paper files, and they inherit backlog upon backlog.
In the meager training courses that only some of them attend, many only skim the surface of the very complicated laws they will administer.
And they are taught to be vigilant about the deceitful practices of immigrants.
Overworked and guarded, they can make mistakes.
And when they do, it can take months to correct them, if not years.
Michael and Corazon Graves of Newark, Calif., believe they are paying a high price for what they see as the agency's willful refusal to correct its own error.
In essence, an immigration official mistakenly told them to wait in the wrong line, and that line was 10 years long.
On May 13, 1982, an immigration examiner in San Francisco approved Mr.
Graves's petition to sponsor his stepdaughter, a Filipino, for an immigrant visa.
With that, he placed the stepdaughter, Maria Isabel Cruz, at the end of a long waiting list for prospective Filipino immigrants.
In 1992, the year Ms.
Cruz and her three sons were finally due to arrive, Mr. and Mrs.
Graves completed an addition to their home for them.
Half a world away, Ms.
Cruz thought her final interview, with United States consular officials in Manila, would be little more than a formality.
She was wrong.
She emerged from the interview in tears, her mother said.
The consular officials denied her a visa because the I.N.S. had made a mistake in approving the original petition.
A stepfather, it turned out, cannot sponsor a stepchild who was married before the age of 18, as Ms.
Cruz was.
The Graves were unaware of this fine point of immigration law, and the examiner who approved their petition had either failed to read it thoroughly or had not known this herself.
The Graves should have been advised in 1982 that only Mrs.
Graves, who is 50, had the right to sponsor her child.
But they were not, and so they were told 10 years later to start from the beginning, returning to the bottom of another decadelong waiting list.
"We were in a state of shock," said Mr. Graves, a carpenter.
He hired a lawyer, who requested humanitarian parole for Ms.
Cruz.
That would have allowed her to enter the country and wait here for her visa.
The parole was denied, in a letter from the district director in Thailand, who acknowledged that "the facts presented are certainly unfortunate."
Crying, Mrs.
Graves said, "Sometimes I wonder, 'Will I still be alive by the time my daughter gets her papers?' " Record Keeping Filed Away In a Hodgepodge
The I.N.S. lost Jusuf Becovic's file in 1992 but refused to acknowledge it for almost two years.
Every few weeks, Mr.
Becovic's lawyer, Diane George, would call about the file, and an agency employee would say they were still searching for it.
Finally, Mr.
Becovic, a building superintendent in Manhattan, sued the agency.
After 10 months of litigation in Federal court and the intercession of two Congressional offices, the agency created a new file for Mr.
Becovic, a Montenegro-born immigrant, and his wife, Hatidza.
With that, he and his wife were finally able to renew their work authorization.
"For two years, I had to keep it secret from my company" that his work card had expired, Mr.
Becovic said.
"I would be fired."
Problems like this have their roots in a record-keeping system that combines 44 million paper files with a hodgepodge of more than a half-dozen outdated computer systems that cannot talk to each other.
Despite almost 20 years of consultants' studies, promises and plans, the I.N.S. still does not have a unified computer record-keeping system.
It maintains only one very basic central index system, and even that is incomplete.
Over the last two decades, different branches of the agency have cobbled together their own computer networks, as have a few of the 33 district offices.
But none of these networks can communicate with the others.
So an agency worker checking an immigrant's record in one system has no way to know whether there are other records in another system -- showing, for instance, that an applicant for residency has a criminal history.
"If we had automation, we would double or triple our work," said Robert Reed, a supervisory special agent in Los Angeles.
In his office, agents still use manual typewriters and carbon paper.
The automation problem slows nearly every service the agency tries to offer.
Officials across the country say they waste hours hunting through paper files and the various computer systems to settle immigrants' cases.
That in turn lengthens the endemic backlogs -- like the 480 days it takes to become a citizen in San Francisco, according to the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
Ordinarily, it should not take more than a few months.
The agency's central index system in particular contains much information that is incorrect or incomplete.
Last year, California and several other states asked the I.N.S. to review the files of 3.6 million immigrants applying for welfare and other benefits.
It turned out that about 18 percent of these people, or 650,000, were not even listed in the central index, an omission that should have meant that they were in this country illegally.
Before denying them benefits, however, the states pushed for more information, and found out that nearly all were here legally.
Ms.
Meissner acknowledges the computer problem and says she has persuaded the Clinton Administration to remedy it.
On Aug. 30, the agency signed a $300 million contract for new computer equipment, the largest such contract in the agency's history.
By 1996, the immigration service hopes to merge all its data into three integrated computer systems.
But this is not the first time the agency has tried to solve the problem, nor the first contract it has signed for new computer equipment.
Longtime I.N.S. employees wonder whether these plans will turn out any better than the agency's many failed efforts of the past.
Attitudes  Unpleasantness As the Norm
Immigration officers learn to be hard-nosed in their first days at the agency's academy in Glynco, Ga.
During basic training, "we historically have told our employees that it's our job to keep them out and our job to keep them from getting benefits," said Tom Farris, an assistant district director in Chicago.
The training inculcates an intrinsic suspicion of immigrants, some I.N.S. officers say.
This often translates into rudeness and even vindictiveness, Mr.
Farris acknowledged.
It can create an atmosphere in some immigration offices that Maria Valencia, a Filipino immigrant in Virginia, described as a "sea of unpleasantness."
While not totally out of place for law-enforcement officers on the border, this attitude creates problems when displayed by examiners reviewing routine applications.
It has prompted many critics of the agency and even friends of it to suggest that it should be split in two -- a service side and a law-enforcement division.
But Ms.
Meissner says she believes that the agency's "cultural cleavage" can be bridged.
Some local offices are already trying to do that.
The agency's 33 district directors run fiefs.
They make their own rules, often quite different from one place to the next, and set the tone.
In Chicago, Mr.
Moyer is the host of a weekly television show in Spanish about immigrants' rights.
He says he has found it trying, but possible, to buck the entrenched mentality.
"When I first got here to Chicago, we had agents who would brag about their weekend raids on Spanish-language movie theaters, and how all the Mexicans would be jumping out of the balconies," Mr.
Moyer said.
"I have worked hard to try to correct that. We do no more neighborhood raids. Our enforcement is as strong as exists, but we go about it differently."
In Baltimore, the district managers say they demand that immigrants be treated with respect.
So it was no coincidence that Wiltrude Rasmussen, a Baltimore deportation officer, took a closer look at the seemingly straightforward deportation case of Adilio Diaz.
A 25-year-old Salvadoran, Mr.
Diaz applied for political asylum in 1987.
He settled in Maryland and hired a lawyer, Guillermo Diaz-Fontana, who kept assuring him that his case was going well.
Nothing could have been further from the truth.
His lawyer, who later pleaded guilty to Federal fraud charges, had already lost the asylum case, and Mr.
Diaz had already been ordered deported.
He just didn't know it.
So one day in December 1990, Mr.
Diaz, who said he had paid his lawyer about $1,250, arrived at the Baltimore I.N.S. office, hoping to be told he could have a green card.
He left in handcuffs.
When Mr.
Diaz's new lawyer, Alison Brown, of the Washington firm of Maggio &amp; Kattar, filed a motion to reopen the case, the I.N.S. did not oppose it; the deportation officer, Mrs.
Rasmussen, said she was already suspicious of the first lawyer.
The judge reopened Mr.
Diaz's case, and, at 6 P.M. on Dec. 22, Mr.
Diaz was released from a prison in rural Maryland, 120 miles from his home.
He had no money because the Government had issued him a check for his cash -- only about $6, in any case -- and the banks were closed.
Officially, the agency had no further responsibility for Mr.
Diaz.
But David Talley, supervisor of the detention unit, said: "I couldn't put him out on the street that way. It just seemed cruel."
So Mr.
Talley drove Mr.
Diaz home, a five-hour round trip, just in time for Christmas with his family.
Mr.
Diaz still lives in suburban Washington and works at a skilled job as a rug repairman.
His lawyer, Ms.
Brown, said the case offered an important lesson.
"It goes to show," she said, "that you can be a human being, that you can handle enforcement of the immigration laws without an attitude that every alien must be thrown out." Chaos at the Gates
SUNDAY: Immigration agency is mismanaged; its ranks, demoralized.
MONDAY: Corruption virus: It spread through the Washington office.
TUESDAY: Themost wanted: A poor record of deporting criminal aliens.
YESTRERDAY: A Border Patrol success story fell on deaf ears in Washington.
TODAY: Cold, rude and insensitive: The agency ill serves its clients.


Cott Corp.(COTTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Owners Terminate Season, Without the World Series
With a four-paragraph resolution providing the final out instead of a ball nestling into a glove or soaring over a fence, major league baseball owners called off the rest of the season yesterday, sweeping away 89 years of the World Series and sending the game staggering into the great unknown.
Led by Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, the owners voted, 26-2, to cancel the remainder of the regular-season schedule, two rounds of the playoffs and the World Series.
They blamed the players' 34-day strike and what they charged was the union's unwillingness "to respond in any meaningful way" to the clubs' demand for cost containment.


A Long Road to a Stalemate
Significant dates in baseball's modern labor history:
Spring, 1966: Marvin Miller is hired to form and run Players Association.
Oct. 8, 1969: St.
Louis Cardinals trade Curt Flood to Philadephia Phillies.
Flood, unhappy with the trade, challenges baseball's reserve system, which binds players to teams and loses his case in court.
April 1, 1972: Players strike over pension and benefit plan, wiping out the first 86 games of the season.
Febrary, 1973: Owners lock out players from spring training in dispute over changes in the reserve system.
Agreement creates salary arbitration, giving players their first leverage in individual contract negotiations.
Dec. 13, 1974: Arbitrator Peter Seitz declares Catfish Hunter a free agent in a contract grievance.
Hunter's signing by the Yankees on New Year's Eve shows what players could earn in a free market.
Dec. 23, 1975: Arbitrator Peter Seitz rules that Andy Messersmith and Dave McNally, who had not signed new contracts, are free agents, in effect creating the system that would trigger an unprecedented escalation of salariesend of reserve clause.
Feb. 23, 1976: Owners lock out players from spring training in dispute over implementation of free agency.
Commissioner Bowie Kuhn orders camps open March 17.
April 1, 1980: Players strike last eight days of spring training over owners' demand for professional compensation for free agents.
Players and owners reach agreement on all issues but compensation, leaving it to be resolved the following year.
June 12, 1981: Players strike over compensation for free agents, reaching agreement on a pool system 50 days later, July 31.
Season resumes Aug. 10 with 712 games missed.
Aug. 6, 1985: Players strike, rejecting owners' attempt to develop a salary system based on average payroll.
Owners drop plan, players agree to raise salary arbitration eligibility from two years to three and dispute is settled Aug. 7.
Season resumes Aug. 8, and 25 missed games are made up.
Sept. 21, 1987: Arbitrator Thomas Roberts rules in the first of three collusion grievances, finding that clubs violated the collective bargaining agreement by conspiring not to sign free agents following the 1985 season.
Faced with subsequent adverse rulings by aribitrator George Nicolau -- Aug. 31, 1988, in the 1986 case and July 18, 1990, in the 1987 case -- the owners agree to pay a total of 280 million in damages Dec. 21, 1990.
March 18, 1990: After a 32-day lockout, owners and players achieve a new four-year labor agreement that gives either side the right to reopen key issues after three years.
Nov. 19, 1991: Concerned that Commissioner Fay Vincent has undercut their position in negotiations, owners name Richard Ravitch, a prominent New York lawyer, as their labor chief.
Sept. 7, 1992: After rebuffing demands by owners that he remove himself from labor negotiations, Vincent resigns as commissioner.
Bud Selig, the owner of the Milwaukee Brewers, becomes acting commissioner.
Dec. 7: With more than a year to run on the 1990 agreement, owners vote to reopen the agreement for the 1993 season in areas of free agency, salary arbitration and minimum salary.
They provide notice they may impose a lockout after 60 days.
Jan. 13, 1993: Talks begin on reopened issues with Ravitch annoucing he will recommend no lockout for 1993.
Aug. 12: Owners pledge they will impose no lockout during 1994 season and will not unilaterally change terms of collective bargaining agreement before the end of the 1994 season.
Dec. 31: Collective bargaining agreement expires.
Jan. 18, 1994: Owners agree on a new revenue sharing formula conditioned on players' acceptance of a salary cap.
June 14: Owners make salary cap proposal, asking players to accept salary limit equal to 50 percent of club revenues.
July 18: Players reject salary-cap proposal.
July 28: Player union's executive board, fearing owners will take advantage of their antitrust exemption and simply impose salary cap and other restrictions after the season, votes unanimously to set an Aug. 12 strike date.
Aug. 12: Strike begins after another bargaining session.
Sept. 2: Selig announces tentative Sept. 9 deadline for canceling season if there is no agreement.
Owners provide additional revenue-sharing data to union.
Sept. 7: Talks resume in New York.
Sept. 8: Using new financial information, union makes proposal to achieve part of owners' goal of cost control and revenue sharing without a formal salary cap.
Sept. 9: Owners reject the players' proposal. No new bargaining sessions take place.
Sept. 14: Selig calls off the rest of the season.


State Voting In Germany Reveals Shift
Results of two state elections held on Sunday have lent support to the view that the German political landscape is entering a period of fundamental change after decades of stability dictated by the need for national unity during the cold war.
In Brandenburg and Saxony, eastern states where elections were held, incumbent Premiers won resounding victories that consolidated their positions as the most powerful politicians to have emerged from the former East Germany.


Lamonts Apparel Inc.(LMNT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


ON CAMPUS WITH: Eric Liu; Last Job? Speeches For Clinton
It's a sun-drenched afternoon with the familiar September snap to the air on the Harvard Law School campus.
The new students wander from ivy-clad building to ivy-clad building, looking a little dazed, heavily laden with backpacks full of their new textbooks.
In a classroom in Austin Hall, surrounded by huge oil paintings of distinguished-looking men from an era when robes and powdered wigs were all the rage, an orientation group of 15 new students is assembled, most of them in sneakers and T-shirts.
They take turns introducing themselves.
One says he is a competitive long-distance runner, one speaks fluent Arabic, one ran his own computer business for seven years.
But all heads turn when a young-looking man in the back row describes his most recent experience: "I just got back from a job in Washington writing speeches for President Clinton," he says.


Economic Scene; The not so clear and present danger of inflation.
"STOCK up on canned sardines and ammo for the deer rifle, mama, and spend those greenbacks while you can. . . ."
Inflation hysteria has not yet brought the survivalists out of the woodwork, and news this week that consumer prices rose at an annual rate of less than 4 percent in August may keep them there a while longer.
But as Van Doorn Ooms, the chief economist for the Committee for Economic Development, puts it, "there's an edginess out there" that is rubbed a little rawer by every ambiguous Government report on inflation and every passing remark by a member of the Fed that does not begin and end with a genuflection toward the gods of price stability.


CUNY's Open Admissions Fail Miserably
To the Editor:
In attacking my City Journal article on the City University of New York, Blanche Wiesen Cook and Sandi E. Cooper ("The Trashing of CUNY," Op-Ed, Sept. 8) make factual errors and ignore my main argument: Open admissions at CUNY have given rise to a vast and unsuccessful remediation industry that has turned large parts of the university into a glorified high school.


Mayor Cutting City's Roster Of Buildings
Trying a new tactic to rid New York City of the costly burden of managing apartment buildings, the Giuliani administration announced yesterday that it would turn several hundred city-owned buildings over to private managers, including local for-profit entrepreneurs.
City officials said they intend to shift about 250 apartment buildings -- which fell into the city's hands through tax foreclosures -- to private managers over the next nine months.
The buildings represent about 10 percent of the apartment buildings now owned and managed by the city.


Back Injury Will Keep Graf Out of Action
STEFFI GRAF, the world's top-ranked women's tennis player, will be out of action for three weeks while she recovers from a back injury, her doctor said yesterday in Frankfurt.
Graf lost the United States Open singles final Sunday to second-seeded ARANTXA SANCHEZ VICARIO, then flew home to be examined by her doctor in Essen, Hartmut Krahl.
The extent or nature of the injury is not known. (AP)


Catherine Claxton vs. the U.N.
In the middle of New York City, 7,000 employees work beyond the reach or protection of the law.
They can be harassed, discriminated against or fired, and they have nowhere to turn.
Their employer is not some sweatshop in Chinatown but the Secretariat of the United Nations.
A particular group of employees has special cause for complaint: women.
In spite of several General Assembly resolutions calling for improvement, women have been all but excluded from positions of power in the U.N. since it was founded nearly 50 years ago.
Worse, there are disturbing charges of sexual harassment at the organization and insensitivity to those charges at the highest levels.


Market Place; Assessing the Exxon Valdez trial, analysts are divided.
AS the jurors deliberate on whether Exxon should pay punitive damages for the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989, should investors worry?
Responding to that question, Wall Street analysts are in conflict.
Some analysts say avoid the stock until the damages are awarded.
Others advise waiting even longer, because Exxon's bill could be reduced after appeals.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., the aerospace, auto products and engineered materials company, announced plans to build a $27 million plant in Shanghai for the production of truck turbochargers.
JOHNSON CONTROLS INC., Milwaukee, said that its Automotive Systems Group had begun producing seats for the 1995 Chrysler Cirrus and Dodge Stratus models.
Terms of contract were not disclosed.


Two in Congress Who Fought to Improve Immigration Policy
More than any other members of Congress, Senator Alan K. Simpson and Representative Romano L. Mazzoli have fought the immigration wars, and when they reflect on more than a decade of effort, both speak with weary despair.
Mr.
Mazzoli, a Democrat from Kentucky, is chairman of the House immigration subcommittee, and Mr.
Simpson, a Republican from Wyoming, is the ranking minority member of the Senate counterpart.
They were co-sponsors of the most important immigration legislation in the last 20 years, the Simpson-Mazzoli Act of 1986.
And now both men say they have come to the disturbing conclusion that Congressional oversight of the Immigration and Naturalization Service just does not work.


W. T. Liberson, 90; Doctor Specialized In Physical Medicine
Dr.
Wladimir Theodore Liberson, a physician and medical researcher, died on Sept. 3 at the Miami Heart Institute in Miami.
He was 90 and lived in North Miami Beach.
The cause was respiratory failure, said his wife, Dr. Cathryn Liberson.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Matt Gay, safety, to a two-year contract.
Placed Tim Watson, free safety, on injured reserve.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Placed Napoleon McCallum, running back, on injured reserve.
Signed Jarrod Bunch, fullback.


With Talk of Jets Spell, Can Dolphins Cast It Off?
Ask a Miami Dolphins player to explain the Jets' recent mastery of the team -- five victories in the last six games -- and he is very likely to scratch his head as if he had been approached about solving Rubik's Cube.
There are a few theories, however, as the undefeated teams head into Sunday's showdown at Joe Robbie Stadium.


Journal; That Nice Mrs. Bush
With health-care reform in tatters, her $100,000 commodities profits in disrepute and her poll numbers down, Hillary Rodham Clinton has dropped off the radar screen almost as completely as the Cessna that crashed into the White House.
Newsweek says that Mrs.
Clinton might now assume a more traditional First Lady's role, and Liz Smith reports she's idling away the hours watching a new sitcom by First Mogul Linda Bloodworth-Thomason.
The vacuum left by Mrs.
Clinton's retreat, however, represents a golden marketing opportunity for Barbara Bush -- and Mrs.
Bush is making the most of it.
Eager to sell the 600,000 copies so far in print of one of the dullest memoirs ever to lay waste to a forest, the former First Lady is giving interviews to every television personality in the land (with the exceptions of her named nemeses, Jane Pauley and Judy Woodruff).
"Barbara Bush: A Memoir" is already elbowing William Bennett and Dan Quayle off the best-seller list.


Accounts
*
National Review Inc., New York, to the Cox Group, New York, to handle the account of National Review magazine, previously inactive.
Billings were not disclosed.


Trafficking in Ideas Across the Borders Of 10 Languages
In a loftlike space on a side street in eastern Berlin, earnest young people bustle about, planning and designing and mailing a literary magazine.
The scene is repeated every day, with minor variations, all over the world.
But language remains the greatest barrier, not just between people and nations but between intellectuals and artists who might be especially eager to overcome such barriers.
And that is why the hydra-headed, multi-lingual magazine Lettre International (or its variants in nine European languages besides German) is so interesting.


Scientists Identify a Mutant Gene Tied to Hereditary Breast Cancer
Capturing a genetic trophy so ferociously coveted and loudly heralded that it had taken on a near-mythic aura, a collaborative team of researchers has announced the discovery of a gene whose mutation causes hereditary breast cancer.
Although the researchers caution that they are still far from developing a diagnostic test as a result of their finding, the announcement will be of great relevance to many of the women who now suspect they carry a familial risk of breast cancer.


Two Overviews of '92: He Says, She Says, Etc.
All's Fair  Love, War and Running for President  By Mary Matalin and James Carville  With Peter Knobler.
Illustrated. 493 pages.
Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
Perhaps because the modern Presidential campaign has become so much a duel of imagery, sound bite and spin, the impression you get is that the people who manage these contests must be geniuses of storytelling.


Under Pressure, Algeria Moves Militants From Jail to House Arrest
The Algerian Government has allowed the top leaders of the banned Muslim opposition party to leave prison for house arrest, inviting them to negotiate an end to the conflict between secularists and militants that has taken the lives of more than 10,000 people over two-and-a-half years.
The move represents an admission by the military-civilian Government that it has failed to end a 30-month-long quest to drive the Islamic Salvation Front from politics.


CUNY's Open Admissions Fail Miserably; Setting Priorities
To the Editor:
Two and a half cheers for "The Trashing of CUNY" (Op-Ed, Sept. 8) by Blanche Wiesen Cook and Sandi E. Cooper, their eloquent reply to Heather Mac Donald's misguided attack in the City Journal.


Race for Governor: Pataki Lists His Differences
CANDIDATE -- George E. Pataki PRODUCER -- Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va., and Sacramento, Calif.


Bridge
Players from all over the world are converging on Albuquerque, N.M., where the NEC World Championships will be played during the next two weeks.
The top positions in the main events, pairs and teams in open and women's divisions, are likely to be dominated by experts from Europe.
At the last championships, open to all comers, in Salsomaggiore, Italy, two years ago, the major titles were won by France and Austria.
The Italians no longer win titles as they did in the days of their celebrated Blue Team, but they still have plenty of talent.
On the first day of the 1992 championships, Luciana Capodanno of Naples, a former world champion, was the only player to overcome the bad trump split on the diagramed deal and bring home six diamonds.
West's Michaels cue-bid, showing length in the major suits, suggested that bad breaks were likely.


It's Official. It's Over.
Following is the text of the resolution signed yesterday by 26 of the 28 major league clubs canceling the rest of the baseball season:
Whereas, the 28 Major League Baseball Clubs ("the Clubs") and the Major League Baseball Players Association ("the MLBPA") have been engaged in collective bargaining over an extended period; and


Barry Victory Reveals Widening Racial Rift
Even in a city with a long tradition of racial polarization, the split between black and white voters in Marion S. Barry Jr.'s dramatic victory in the Democratic mayoral primary on Tuesday was a surprise.
Not because Mr.
Barry swept Washington's poor black neighborhoods and won almost no support in the rich white ones, but because he attracted a surprisingly large number of voters from the city's middle-class blacks.
The results only seemed to widen the gulf between the races here.


Foreign Chips in Japan
The share of Japan's semiconductor market held by foreign manufacturers reached a record 21.9 percent in the second quarter, the United States and Japan announced today.
The result will keep the semiconductor trade issue from flaring up again as the two nations race to reach several trade agreements.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Chamber Ensemble With a Flair For the Classical Repertory  Good Shepherd Presbyterian Church
Jens Nygaard, the creator and conductor of the Jupiter Symphony, cuts an eccentric figure on the podium.
On Monday night, he ambled back and forth while conducting, addressed the audience in a folksy twang between movements (despite his Scandinavian name, he's from Arkansas) and prematurely strolled offstage during the closing measures of Haydn's Symphony No. 23.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart in some editions yesterday listing primary election results misstated the tally for the Brooklyn Republican race for New York State Senate in the 23d District.
The incumbent, Robert J. DiCarlo, won with 3,739 votes.
The chart also misstated figures in the Bronx Democratic race for New York State Assembly in the 76th District.
The incumbent, Peter M. Rivera, won with 2,767 votes, or 53 percent; his challenger, Tyrone R. Woods, received 2,460 votes, or 47 percent.


Stocks Gain Ground, With Dow Up 15.47
In the second consecutive day of advancing prices, the stock market yesterday gained back about three-quarters of the ground it lost when it received a clear and unambiguous signal of wholesale inflation on Friday.
Since then, the inflation data have returned to being unclear and ambiguous to the market, with the Consumer Price Index appearing mild on Tuesday and the Federal Reserve's "beige book" report yesterday showing a slowing economy.
The specter of the Fed again raising interest rates has receded somewhat, although many economists say that the inflationary pressures seen in the producer price report on Friday have not yet worked their way to the consumer level.


Inside Art
A Big Party in SoHo
The fall contemporary-art season is getting off to yet another collective start tomorrow with the second annual SoHo Block Party and Performance Art Festival.
"It's three times bigger than last year," said Simon Watson, one of the organizers, who is the director of the Contemporary, a nonprofit space on Greene Street.
The term block party, however, is a bit misleading.
It is, in fact, a neighborhood party.
This year 93 museums, nonprofit institutions and galleries, primarily in SoHo, are holding simultaneous openings from 5 to 8 P.M.
Participants include Brooke Alexander, Artists Space, the Drawing Center, Fawbush, David Zwirner, the Guggenheim Museum SoHo, the Dia Center for the Arts, Pace Gallery and Sonnabend.
In addition, performance art may be seen throughout the day at the alternative space at 45 Greene Street.
Changes in the Neighborhood
Those strolling SoHo tomorrow will notice changes over the summer.
For starters, two galleries have moved into 40 Wooster Street, across from the Drawing Center.
After five years at 594 Broadway, Michael Klein has moved to 40 Wooster Street's ground floor.
"We outgrew the space," Mr.
Klein said.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday, with an article about Bayer A.G.'s purchase of the North American rights to Bayer aspirin, misstated the estimated 1994 sales outside the United States for the Warner-Lambert Company's joint venture with Wellcome P.L.C.
The estimate is $850 million, not $925 million.


Campbell Soup Seeks Next Warhol
The Campbell Soup Company's soup labels became the subject of art when Andy Warhol turned his attention to them in creating his pop-art paintings.
Now the company is reaching out to the next generation of contemporary artists -- those who are commercially minded enough to make soup the subject of their work, anyway.
Campbell is sponsoring a contest, called "The Art of Soup," to encourage new artworks featuring the recently redesigned versions of its familiar red-and-white soup labels.
Contestants can create their own interpretations of Campbell's labels using media from painting and drawing to sculpture and crafts to photography.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a study of costs of illegal immigration misstated two figures in a discussion of California's spending on the education of illegal immigrant children.
The state had said it was spending $2.1 billion a year (not $2.1 million), a figure that the Urban Institute found to be $800 million too high (not $800,000).


Art in Review
Lonnie Holley
Luise Ross Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 22
Lonnie Holley is a 42-year-old artist working near Birmingham, Ala., where the acre of land surrounding his home is filled with hundreds of sculptures of the kind seen in his second New York show.
They are made largely of cast-off materials, tied, wired and woven together into deft assemblages, supplemented with small totemic heads carved from industrial sandstone.


At the Bar; Secret tape-recording: a debate that divides old-line ethicists from new-wave technocrats.
Not many lawyers fancy themselves Sam Spade, but more often than they like to admit they are embracing a common form of electronic skulduggery: secretly tape-recording conversations with clients, witnesses or opposing counsel.
As microelectronics make such clandestine recordings as easy as flipping a light switch, this practice is tying bar association ethics committees in knots.


Shift at Harvard Review
In the latest shake-up at the Harvard Business Review, Nan Stone has moved up from editorial director to editor, the magazine's top editorial position, a spokesman for the Harvard Business School said yesterday.
Ms.
Stone has had a number of senior editorial jobs at the Review for more than a decade.
She follows Joel A. Kurtzman, who had held the title of executive editor.
He resigned after a disagreement with Ruth McMullin, who was president of Harvard Business School Publishing.
Ms.
McMullin was succeeded in March by Linda S. Doyle.


Holyfield Plans to Fight Before Year's End
Confirming that he plans to fight again "by the end of the year," EVANDER HOLYFIELD said that even being rejected by the boxing commissions across the United States won't block his comeback.
"I'm coming back and if they don't give me a license here, I'll fight overseas," the former heavyweight champion said Wednesday night in Las Vegas, Nev.


A Rooftop Sniper Is Sought In a Fatal Shooting in Bronx
Detectives have been scouring a neighborhood in the South Bronx for three weeks, searching for a rooftop sniper who apparently has fired on three people, killing one and wounding another.
The police said they did not believe the three shootings were connected with the wounding of a German tourist on a Circle Line cruise along the Harlem River on Monday.


Guilty Verdict in Slaying Linked to Racial Hatred
As a boy, Sam Nang Nhem had witnessed hatred and learned to survive.
He saw war in Cambodia, lived under the heel of the Khmer Rouge, escaped to Thailand and languished for five years in a refugee camp.
But he did not survive an outburst of racial hatred in Fall River, Mass., and a jury today convicted a 25-year-old white man in the death, agreeing with prosecutors that Mr.
Nhem was slain because he was Cambodian.


Newest Deal: Torchmark Buys Insurer
The Torchmark Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy American Income Holding for $35 a share, or $563.5 million in cash, in a deal that reflects continuing consolidation in the insurance industry.
R.
K.
Richey, chairman of Torchmark, an insurance-company group in Birmingham, Ala., said the acquisition would complement Torchmark's growing operations in niche insurance markets.
American Income sells life, accident and health policies to credit unions and labor unions.


Bill D. Ross, 73; Wrote War Books
Bill D. Ross, a Marine Corps combat correspondent in World War II who wrote books on two Pacific-island campaigns, died on Aug. 30 at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 73 and lived in Somerset, N.J.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Dorothy.


People
*
Jay Taub was named to the new position of executive vice president at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS, New York.
He was previously a senior vice president and creative director at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, New York, working as a copywriter on accounts like United Parcel Service. *
Aurelio Saiz was named to the new position of senior vice president and executive creative director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Direct, Chicago.
He was previously a senior vice president at Grey Direct, New York.


New Hazard in Fire Zones: Houses of Urban Refugees
A summer of smoke, military helicopters and bombers heavy with fire retardant has yet to recede in the West, where an army of yellow-shirted warriors is battling in one of the worst wildfire seasons in recent years.
For firefighters, it is the most lethal year since 1933.
Some experts attribute the high mortality rate to something other than nature or simple bad luck.
Firefighting, they say, has gone from a war against flame-consumed brush and timber to a more dangerous and more costly battle to save the rising number of houses built in fire zones.


CHRONICLE
So how does MATILDA RAFFA CUOMO plan to celebrate her birthday today?
"She's having lunch in New York City with her three daughters, Margaret, Maria and Madeline," said SUSAN MURANTE, Mrs.
Cuomo's press secretary.
"Then she's going to visit her mother, and Friday evening, she'll attend the Coalition for Italo-American Associations' awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria."


COMPANY BRIEFS
CRSS INC., Houston, and a unit of Phillips Petroleum Co., Bartlesville, Okla., will jointly develop a lignite-fired independent power operation, valued at about $600 million, in northeast Mississippi.
DAIN BOSWORTH INC., Minneapolis, a securities broker-dealer, said it planned to acquire Clayton Brown Holding Co., Chicago, for about $25 million in cash.


Marcus Corp.(MCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 18


Eagle-Picher Industries(EPIH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Olczyk Looks Forward to a Bigger Role
A former United States Olympian, a former first-round draft choice and a scoring star with three of his former National Hockey League teams, Ed Olczyk had a well-established name last season when Mike Keenan took over as coach of the Rangers.
Not impressed, Keenan put Olczyk in virtual exile, using him sparingly in only 37 games.
During a season of team success, Olczyk scored only 3 goals; in the previous nine seasons, he had scored 260.


Sports of The Times; This October, Hockey Has The Stage
NOW that the generals conducting baseball's money war have destroyed their village in order to save it, they've left a gaping gash in the sports landscape and a profound opportunity for those seeking to build.
What will fill the void, at least in the short term?
Perhaps it will be the National Hockey League, which has surged in the 1990's and begins its season in October with no competition from the World Series.


Righting Wrongs In Two Centuries
IN the year 2004, according to the sci-fi thriller "Timecop," it will be possible for a law-enforcement officer like Walker (Jean-Claude Van Damme) to go back into the past and correct injustices.
And changes made in the past will alter the future.
In other words, someone whose life is shaped by disappointments can have a different, happier fate once those letdowns have been revisited and set right.
By those rules, there might even be a time warp or parallel dimension in which Mr.
Van Damme is a major movie star.
If he'd had better luck with any of his hard-working, flat-footed martial-arts films (among them "Bloodsport," "Kickboxer" and "Universal Soldier"), he could be well over the top by now.
As it is, he has languished as an also-ran, with a barrier between him and those surer-fire action stars whose names begins with S: Schwarzenegger, Seagal and Stallone.
This time, through sheer force of willpower, he may just kick that barrier down.


Another Strike Against Gooden in Drug Violations
Dwight Gooden wanted to turn 1994 into the season of his rebirth, a time to prove that his career hadn't peaked nearly a decade earlier and gone downhill ever since.
He wanted to put himself in position to demand a healthy new contract from the Mets before he reached free-agent status in the fall.
And, mostly, he wanted to prove to himself that he still has what it takes to be a successful major league starting pitcher.
He failed miserably at all three.


Sounds Around Town
Shear and Cole
Jules Shear and Paula Cole, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Jules Shear, who sounds like a cross between Jackson Browne and Elvis Costello, is a witty, intelligent songwriter whose newest album, "Healing Bones" (Island) discusses everything from "heathen poets" to a lover who signs her letters "carnally yours." Paula Cole, whose recent album, "Harbinger" (Imago), is one of the year's most impressive debuts, writes devastating songs about the suffocating boredom of small-town life.
Shows are tonight at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Romance at Rainbow
Ann Hampton Callaway, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, (212) 632-5000.
Few cabaret singers deliver romantic ballads with more wrenching sweetness than Ms.
Callaway, who has returned to the club with her most entertaining, well-balanced show.
High points in the set are a lovely "Close as Pages in a Book" and a dramatic medley of "Killing Time" and "Not a Day Goes By." The pianist Richard Rodney Bennett, leading a trio, steers the singer comfortably through some light Brazilian-flavored pop-jazz and comic numbers.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 8:30 and 11.
Dinner and a $35 cover charge apply to the 8:30 shows; there is only a $35 cover, with no minimum charge, for the late shows.
S.
H.


Learning to Lose the Self in a Cause
None to Accompany Me
By Nadine Gordimer
324 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
In the course of an impressive four-decade-long career, the Nobel laureate Nadine Gordimer has mapped and remapped the spiritual and psychological landscape of South Africa, tracing the consequences that apartheid has had in the lives of individual men and women.
In novel after novel, she has trained her eye on that shadowy area where the public and the private intersect, that anomalous emotional territory where purely personal passions overlap with ideological ideals, where the hopes and yearnings of individuals run up against the unyielding wall of political realities.


Advice for the Lovelorn: Take Revenge in Work
As a humorous, lighthearted German film about two wisecracking modern heroines, Katja von Garnier's "Making Up!" has obvious novelty value that was much admired in its native land.
A sleeper hit in Germany, this wry, energetic first feature also travels well, bristling with a funny insouciance that makes sense anywhere.
The awkwardly titled "Making Up!" (originally titled "Abge schminkt!") is actually a short, sweet vignette about courtship rituals, with an emphasis on the heroines' Cosmo-girl wiliness about men.
Mingling love and work, it begins with a creative crisis for Frenzy (Katja Riemann), a cartoonist who is short on material for her popular character, a foxy little feminine insect.
"You try coming up with funny things from your everyday life," she complains.
So for inspiration, she borrows the exploits of Maischa (Nina Kronjager), her best friend, who is a flirty nurse.
Maischa is the foxier and more predatory of the two, but Frenzy turns out to be the one who finds romantic adventure.
The plot is slender, consisting of little more than Maischa's efforts to land a handsome stranger while foisting one of his friends upon a reluctant Frenzy.
But onto this sketchy structure, Ms. von Garnier loads plenty of rueful observations about the dating game.
Even though Maischa's boy-crazy outlook, plus some emphasis on cold cream and eyelash curlers, threatens to make the film feel retrograde, the director's attitudes remain enjoyably fresh.
Her outlook is also sharply feminine, as when it comes to depicting miserable sex or the maneuvers that go with waiting for the phone to ring.
In a film that runs just under an hour, Ms. von Garnier shows a sure command of her subject matter and a bright comic style.
Her film has commercial polish, and it also has two likable performances from its stars.
Ms.
Kronjager is a particularly promising comic actress, with a game, savvy manner that makes her no man's plaything.
Her character's tireless self-involvement is also amusing, as when she studies her handsome dinner companion and muses (in voice-over): "Those eyelashes! Two tons of mascara and I can't get mine to look like that."
As the story progresses, it yields a little surprise as Frenzy, not Maischa, winds up lovelorn.
And Maischa tries to reassure her.
"Think of all the work you got done," Maischa says.
"Feeling bad must be good for you."
"You're saying men who aren't around make you creative?" Frenzy asks.
Not even Maischa is saying that, but "Making Up!" does have some legitimate wisdom to pass along.
On the same bill is "The Coriolis Effect," a 25-minute short about two male friends, which was previously reviewed as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series.
At that time, Caryn James, writing in The New York Times, called it "a fresh, self-assured film about sexual jealousy, dangerous living and the afterlife, with a nod to 'The Wizard of Oz.' " MAKING UP!
Directed and edited by Katja von Garnier; written by Ms. von Garnier, Benjamin Taylor and Hannes Jaenicke; director of photography, Torsten Breuer; music by Peter Wenke and Tillmann Hohn; production design, Irene Edenhofer and Nikolai Ritter; produced by Ewa Karlstrom; released by Seventh Art Releasing.
Running time: 90 minutes.
This film is not rated.
WITH: Katya Riemann (Frenzy), Nina Kronjager (Maischa), Gedeon Burkhard (Rene), Daniela Lunkewitz (Susa) and Max Tidof (Mark)


No Headline
"I am a realist. I know when to hold them and when to fold them." L. DOUGLAS WILDER, dropping out of the Senate race in Virginia.  [ A19:1. ]


To Our Readers
The New York Times has increased the size and spacing of the type used in news articles, in letters to the editor and on the Op-Ed page.
The goal of the change is ease of reading.
The change is most noticeable on news pages inside The Times, where white space has been added between lines of body type.
Previously, extra spacing was largely confined to the front page and the editorials.
In the next few weeks, the change will be extended to Sunday sections; article typography will then be consistent on all standard-size pages.


Mountain Climber Cruises Into the Final Round
James Anthony Martinez, a 29-year-old oarsman from Sante Fe, N.M., who likes to run up and down mountains, bucked rough water conditions and some history with success today at the world rowing championships on the Eagle Creek reservoir.
Martinez managed a second place in a semifinal race among the lightweight single scullers.
That made him one of the six finalists for Sunday's championship in an event in which Americans rarely win medals.


Kidder Expected to Deny Jett Money for His Defense
Kidder, Peabody is about to turn down a request by Joseph Jett, the bond trader who reportedly created $350 million in phantom profits, to advance him money with which to pay his lawyers, officials at the firm said yesterday.
Its board, which consists mostly of executives of the General Electric Company, is expected to deny the request formally in coming days -- even though Kidder has a bylaw that obligates it to pay the legal bills of directors, officers or employees who get into trouble related to their job performance.


Bad Knee Forces Miami's Medearis to Quit
Citing pain from a knee injury sustained in a game Sept. 26, 1992, defensive end RUSTY MEDEARIS said yesterday that his playing days with the Miami Hurricanes were over.
Medearis, who came back after countless hours of rehabilitating his damaged right knee, started in the Hurricanes' first two games this season.


With a Letter, Vacco Tries to Neutralize Abortion Issue
Dennis C. Vacco, the Republican candidate for state attorney general, sought today to neutralize an issue that his Democratic opponent sees as potentially devastating: whether his personal opposition to abortion affected his prosecution of major anti-abortion protests in Buffalo two years ago.
In June 1992, Mr.
Vacco, then United States Attorney for the Western District of New York, was harshly criticized by a Federal judge for failing to pursue contempt charges against two of five suspected leaders of the protests, in which 700 people were arrested.
The judge, Richard J. Arcara, removed Mr.
Vacco from the case, appointing special prosecutors as he complained in a written opinion that Mr.
Vacco's failure to act risked "undermining the public's confidence in the justice system."


Police in Counseling Give Up Privacy Rights; Guns and Suicide Rate
To the Editor:
If the rate of suicide among New York police officers is four times that of the general population, isn't it logical to assume that police officers are victims of the ready availability of a gun in a moment of despair?
Fortunately, most people do not have access to a gun at such times.
This could account for most of the difference in suicide rates.
RICHARD DRESSELHUYS  New York, Sept. 9, 1994


Hotel Workers Threatening To Strike in Atlantic City
With a quarter of this city's hotel workers threatening to go on strike Friday night, the big worry on the minds of many hotel guests here today is not about having enough maids to make beds or waiters to serve meals.
What really concerns many visitors now, say hotel staff, is that a strike would force the cancellation of the annual boardwalk parade of 50 hopefuls of the Miss America pageant, a highlight of the event being held this weekend.
"Guests are more interested in the parade than having their beds made," said Marvella Spencer, a guest-services representative in the lobby of the Trump Plaza Hotel.
She estimated that 150 guests had inquired about the fate of the parade today alone.


Japan's Avant-Garde Makes Its Own Points
"Keep changing, connect with everything, continue forever." That's one young Japanese artist's recipe for a creative life, and his words would make an apt epigram for "Scream Against the Sky: Japanese Art After 1945" at the Guggenheim Museum's SoHo branch.
This is the largest gathering of Japanese avant-garde work ever assembled in America, and with riveting things to look at and plenty to think about, it gets the fall art season off to a challenging start.
In a sense, the show's major achievement is to shatter cliches.
Anyone who regards contemporary Japanese art as a watered-down version of Western modernism has a surprise in store.
Many of the artists included here have been pioneers in styles -- Conceptualism, performance art, body art -- that America and Europe tend to claim as their own; and Japan's adaptation of such movements as Abstract Expressionism and Minimalism is not only done with a highly selective eye that gives their models new meanings.


Assault Weapons Ban Just Won't Work
To the Editor:
President Clinton has now signed the crime bill (front page, Sept. 14).
It is worth noting that one critical element of the law -- the so-called assault weapons ban -- contains a loophole that renders the law almost powerless by assuring there will be no successful Federal prosecutions for assault weapon possession.


Mixed-Race South Africans Riot Over 'Favoritism' for Blacks
The riotous scenes were reminiscent of Soweto in the days of anti-apartheid fervor: barricades of burning tires, rocks flying, buildings in flames, white police firing stun grenades and rubber bullets, and a smoldering racial resentment.
But the target of the uprising today, in this and several other customarily sleepy townships just west of Johannesburg, was Nelson Mandela's Government, and the protesters were the country's often invisible mixed-race minority, who call themselves "coloreds."


Autry Family May Sell Part of the Angels
A day after baseball's owners called off the season, JACKIE and GENE AUTRY said they are considering selling a minority interest of the California Angels, whom Gene Autry has owned since the franchise was founded in 1961.
"I've talked with four groups and I have one or two more to go," Jackie Autry said yesterday from her home in Studio City.
"We're just exploring at this point who the individuals are, who they represent and why they're interested in becoming minority owners of a baseball team."


Auto's Victim Gives Birth But Soon Dies
Hours after her son was delivered by Caesarean section, a woman struck by a hit-and-run driver died yesterday at Brookdale Medical Center in Brooklyn.
Surgeons were able to save the 4-pound, 14-ounce boy, but not his mother, Ava Hope Jones.
Ms.
Jones, 25, was fatally injured by a speeding car as she crossed Linden Boulevard at Milford Street in the East New York section of Brooklyn on Wednesday night.


CHRONICLE
MARGARET TRUMAN DANIEL returned yesterday to one of her father's old Washington haunts, the National Press Club, to announce plans for a nationwide commemoration next year of the 50th anniversary of the start of the Truman Presidency.
Three anniversay dinners, each marking a different theme of his Presidency, will be held on April 12, 1995, one each in Los Angeles, Chicago and Washington.
Celebrations are also planned for later in the year, one in New York to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the United Nations Charter, and another in Kansas City, Mo.


Jets Are Cranking Up Their Ground Game to Try to Thwart the Marino-Led Dolphins
No matter what kind of complicated defensive schemes coaches try to concoct to counteract the passing threat of Dan Marino, the best way to stifle the Miami Dolphins quarterback is to keep the ball out of his hands.
And the best way to do that is to mount a time-consuming ground game, which was part of the reason the Jets were resting their running backs, Johnny Johnson and Brad Baxter, at practice today.
The other part is that both are suffering from turf toe.


Drug Emporium Inc.(DEMP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Philip Bosakowski, Playwright, 47
Philip Bosakowski, a playwright, died on Sunday at Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 47 and lived in Portland, Conn.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for Wesleyan University in Middletown, where Mr.
Bosakowski was a visiting playwright at one time.


An Uneasy Alliance Straddles Many Lines
"Crime Broker" has the dubious distinction of having some of the most uncomfortable love scenes to be found in a recent film.
This Australian thriller, directed by Ian Barry, teams Jacqueline Bisset, an icon of mature sensuality, with Masaya Kato, a handsome young Japanese actor and model.
They make a striking pair, but the moment they touch, their mutual discomfort, magnified in close-up, douses any hope of sparks.
There is an awkward sense of both actors gritting their teeth as they paw each other, and when kissing they can barely bring their lips to connect.
It doesn't help that Mr.
Kato mutters his endearments in the same robotic monotone with which he delivers all his lines, many of which are unintelligible.
Ms.
Bisset, for her part, never sheds her aura of chilly aristocratic reserve.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.88
4.78
3.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.56
4.56
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.93
4.93
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.33
7.39
5.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.63
7.67
6.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.50
7.01
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.44
6.45
5.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Little Guy as Hero: The Death of Chico Mendes
Unlike most Hollywood films and the general run of television movies, HBO Pictures has developed an admirably feisty reputation for zapping powerful entities.
These include corporate nabobs in "Barbarians at the Gate" and the Reagan Administration in "And the Band Played On." In "The Burning Season," tomorrow at 8 P.M., the target is nothing less than the corrupt politicians and ruthless land barons of Brazil.
The eternal spectacle of little guys upsetting big guys can still pack a wallop.
Based in large part on Andrew Revkin's book "The Burning Season," this is the story of Chico Mendes, played searingly by a startlingly gaunt Raul Julia.
Mendes, a socialist union leader who fought to protect the homes of his people in the Amazon rain forest, was murdered in 1990 by the son of an enraged local rancher who wanted the forest cleared for grazing.
Eventually identified, the rancher and his son were sentenced to 19 years in prison.
They escaped after only three years and have yet to be found.


Provigo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 13


Miscellany
*
Donna Karan Co., New York, has purchased all the advertising space on two New York City subway trains, on the Lexington Avenue line and the Times Square shuttle, from Gannett Outdoor New York, to promote the opening of a DKNY Supershop at the flagship Bloomingdale's store in Manhattan. *
Patrick Media Group, Chicago, acquired the advertising displays in Chicago's downtown train stations from Transportation Media Inc.
The terms were not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
PIZZA PARLOR CALLED DRUG HEADQUARTERS
It looked like an ordinary New York pizza parlor, its Formica tables crowded at lunch.
But Federal authorities said that the Original Ray's Pizza on Third Avenue, near 43d Street, was actually the headquarters for a major drug ring.
In a new variation for the ever-changing international drug trade, the authorities said, the pizzeria gang didn't just import cocaine from Colombia to feed New York City's big appetite for drugs.
It also used New York as a transit point to deliver drugs to three longstanding organized crime groups in Italy for distribution there.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Exiles Favor Invasion but Fear for the Future
At the Tap Tap restaurant here in South Beach, a group of Haitians stood transfixed as President Clinton told the nation why the United States would send an intervention force if Haiti's military dictators did not leave their country.
Moments before, the group had been singing a lively song about the good looks of Gede, Lord of the Cemetery.
But as Mr.
Clinton detailed the rapes, murders and other terrors visited on their homeland, the group grew more serious.
Death was no longer a friendly character in a song but a reality.
"At last something is going to be done," said Jessie Mercier-Posteraro when Mr.
Clinton finished.
For the 200,000 Haitians living in South Miami today, Mr.
Clinton's move toward military intervention elicited emotions ranging from hope and enthusiasm to anxiety and fear.


Franz Bader, 90; Sold Art and Books
Franz Bader, a prominent retired art dealer and bookseller, died on Wednesday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington, where he lived.
He was 90.
The cause was a pulmonary embolism, said his wife, Virginia.


Art in Review
Andrew Lord
Gagosian Gallery  980 Madison Avenue (at 77th Street)  Through Oct. 29
Andrew Lord, whose glazed, process-oriented vases, pitchers and teapots have argued convincingly for ceramics as art, is now casting these large-scale vessels in bronze.
His show of new work swerves back and forth between the promising and the problematic; so far, the shift only partly succeeds.


Few Opinions, Pro or Con, Seem to Change in Congress
President Clinton's speech tonight left many in Congress unconvinced that a military invasion of Haiti was necessary, and even appeared to strengthen the resolve on Capitol Hill not to approve any such action.
Democrats were as adamant as Republicans that Mr. Clinton had simply not made his case.


Sounds Around Town
Berry at Tramps
Chuck Berry, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
It's that Chuck Berrry, the one who figured out how to make rock-and-roll.
No new songs, no new record, no new scandal, just his working band and him, and all those songs that turned adolescence into something worth writing and singing about.
Go now; tell the grandchildren.
Marcia Ball, a talented singer, songwriter and pianist in a New Orleans and blues style, will be there, featuring her new album, "Blue House" (Rounder), as well.
The Chuck Berry show is tomorrow night at 11; Ms.
Ball starts at 9 and plays a second set at 12:30.
Tickets are $27.50.
PETER WATROUS Rockers From Mexico
Cafe Tacuba, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
Playing Mexican music and American music and Jamaican music, Cafe Tacuba is considered one of the best rock bands in Mexico.
It's of its time, the product of an international, searching sensiblity, and wild, too.
Like the best of the Rock in Espanol movement, it has a sense of humor, and no translation is necessary.
It's a fine way into the medium-sized explosion of vanguard activity in Mexico.
The show is tomorrow night at 8; tickets are $18.
P.
W.
Saxophone From the 60's
David Ware, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
For those tired of the impressionistic sounds of the 1960's, here are the expressionistic sounds of the 1960's.
Ware is a brutal saxophonist with a huge sound; William Parker, his bassist, has a great big wooden tone and a malleable sense of pitch.
It's rough, hard music, the kind that's rarely played anymore.
Shows are tonight at 9 and 11; there is a $10 cover.
P.
W.


Moynihan Assails Efforts On Health Compromise
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the Finance Committee, today assailed efforts to develop compromise health insurance legislation as a misguided last-minute effort that "raises more questions than it answers."
In a statement published in the Congressional Record, Mr.
Moynihan complained that the proposal of the self-styled "mainstream coalition," a bipartisan group of about 20 senators, suffered from uncertain financing and promised subsidies to the poor that it might be unable to deliver.


Three Days of Events Celebrate New York Is Book Country
A cornucopia of New York Is Book Country events is planned throughout New York City today through Sunday to coincide with the New York Is Book Country fair, which takes place Sunday on Fifth Avenue.
Unless otherwise noted, events are free; programs are subject to change.
Here is a sampling of events.
Today  "PUTTING ASIAN-AMERICAN LITERATURE ON THE MAP," Chinatown History Museum, 70 Mulberry Street.
A reading and discussion with Luis Francia, author of "The Arctic Archipelago," Kimiko Hahn, author of "The Unbearable Heart," and the editors Soo Mee Kwan and Julie Koo. 7 P.M.
Suggested donation: $5.
Information: (212) 619-4785.
GALLERY TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 90 Orchard Street, 6 to 7 P.M.
Also, "Thriving and Surviving in a Village Called New York," a presentation of stories, oral histories and personal experiences by Roslyn Bresnick-Perry, 7 to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
"SMALL PRESSES COME OF AGE: ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING," Small Press Center, 20 West 44th Street.
A seminar with Paul Peacock, publisher of Floppyback Publishing International; Robert Kendall, a writer of interactive poetry, and David O'Shea, of Dataware Technologies. 6 to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 764-7021.
"BREAKING INTO PRINT IN SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY," Science Fiction, Mysteries and More!, 140 Chambers Street, at West Broadway, lower Manhattan.
Constance Ash, author of "Stallion Queen," and Neil Feigeles, publisher of Off World Magazine. 5:30 to 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 385-8798.
JEHAN CLEMENTS, the Central Park Dairy, at 64th Street.
Storytelling.
Noon to 3 P.M.
Information: (914) 631-1990.
WALTER MOSLEY, Macy's, book department, eighth floor, Herald Square.
Book signings by the author of "Black Betty." 12:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 494-3827.
Tomorrow  "READING AND CONVERSATION WITH JACK AGUEROS," Baychester Branch Library, 2049 Asch Loop North, Co-op City, the Bronx.
The author of "Dominoes and Other Stories of the Puerto Rican." 2:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Information: (718) 379-6700.
MEET THE AUTHOR, Clasons Point Library, 1215 Morrison Avenue, at Westchester Avenue, South Bronx.
Rita Williams-Garcia, author of "Blue Tights." 2 to 3 P.M.
Information: (718) 842-1235.
POETRY READING, Hunts Point Library, 877 Southern Boulevard, at Tiffany Street, Longwood, the Bronx.
Julio Marzen, author of "Translations." 2:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Information: (718) 617-0338.
READING, Park Slope Library, 431 Sixth Avenue, at Ninth Street, Brooklyn.
Peter Hamill, author of "A Drinking Life." 1 P.M.
Information: (718) 768-0593.
READING, Brooklyn Public Library Business Library, 280 Cadman Plaza West, at Tillary Street, Downtown Brooklyn.
James Grant, author of "Minding Mr. Market." 3 P.M.
Information: (718) 722-3333.
BOOK SIGNING AND 'ARTYFACTS' WORKSHOP, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Book signing by Ewa Zadrzynska, author of "The Peaceable Kingdom," and readings from the book by the artist Maria Tucci.
Also, workshop for children 4 to 7 and accompanying adult; 11 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Suggested museum contribution: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly; free for those under 12.
Information: (718) 638-5000, Extension 487.
STORYTELLING, Brooklyn Children's Museum, 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St.
Mark's Avenue, Crown Heights.
Juliet Gray-Moliere, a storyteller. 2 P.M.
Suggested donation: $3.
Information: (718) 735-4400.
STORYTELLING AND ART WORKSHOP, Lefferts Homestead Children's Museum, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue and Empire Boulevard, Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Storytelling by Cooper-Moore, 1 and 2 P.M.
Illustration workshops, 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Book signing with Susan Greenstein, author of "Wash Day," and Melanie Hope Greenberg, author of "My Father's Luncheonette," 2 to 5 P.M.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
LITERARY WALKING TOUR, Green-Wood Cemetery, Fifth Avenue and 25th Street, Main Entrance, Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
Walking tour past graves of authors, publishers and people mentioned in books, 10 A.M. to noon.
Fee: $5.
Information: (718) 469-5277.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a picture caption in The Home Section yesterday with an article about shopping on East Ninth Street in Manhattan gave an incorrect price in some editions for an Art Deco chair at the shop called Chartreuse.
It was $150.


Market Place
THE controversy over whether Body Shop International P.L.C. is as socially enlightened as it maintains has tarnished the image of socially responsible investing.
While the blot is not likely to irreparably discredit the entire socially responsible investing movement, it does disclose a weakness: the vulnerability of a socially responsible company to attack.
Body Shop's stock dropped sharply just on reports that Business Ethics, a Minneapolis journal, was going to publish an article this month charging that the company, a cosmetics and toiletries chain and darling of the industry, was not living up to its reputation as a socially conscious business leader.
Body Shop strongly denied the allegations before and after the article was published.


3 Killed and 1 Wounded In Apparent Drug Dispute
Three people were found slain and a fourth critically wounded yesterday in a Queens apartment building after an apparent drug dispute, the police said.
Police investigators found the victims, who had been shot or stabbed, in two rooms in a third-floor apartment at 65-39 108th Street in Forest Hills.
The police had responded to a call from the building's superintendent, who had entered the apartment after neighbors complained of odor and the sound of a loud television coming from the unit, said Detective Kim Royster, a spokeswoman for the New York City Police Department.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart in some editions on Tuesday listing primary election results misstated the tally for a Brooklyn race for New York State Senate in the 23d District, and a correction in this space yesterday misstated the contenders' party.
They were Republicans; the incumbent, Robert J. DiCarlo, won with 3,739 votes.


On Stage, and Off
Trying the Sound of Nonmusic
An interesting test for Off Broadway is shaping up this season as its two largest houses, each with 499 seats, have scheduled nonmusical dramas.
The Variety Arts, in the East Village, on Second Avenue near 14th Street, has booked an evening of three new one-act plays by David Mamet, Woody Allen and Elaine May, to be directed by Michael Blakemore and tentatively to begin performances in January.
And "Vita and Virginia," Eileen Atkins's adaptation of the letters of Virginia Woolf and Vita Sackville-West, is to be the first production in the newly refurbished Union Square Theater on East 15th Street.
After a two-week stay at the Rich Forum in Stamford, Conn., the play, which is directed by Zoe Caldwell and stars Ms.
Atkins (as Virginia Woolf) and Vanessa Redgrave, begins performances in New York on Nov. 16.


Brooklyn Classes and Strike Continue at L.I.U.
Efforts to resolve a strike by the faculty on the Brooklyn campus of Long Island University remained stalled yesterday, but school officials said classes would be held today, even though most professors are expected to be absent.
The faculty, which voted 122 to 15 on Monday not to return to work without a new contract, did not show up on the campus on Tuesday when classes for the new semester were scheduled to begin for most of the school's 8,000 enrolled students.
Some classes were held on Tuesday and Wednesday, using adjuncts and professors who did not support the strike.
No classes were scheduled yesterday because of the observance of Yom Kippur.


Sandberg's Wife Files for a Divorce
A week after RYNE SANDBERG retired from the Chicago Cubs to spend more time with his wife and children, his wife filed for divorce.
CYNTHIA DIANE SANDBERG filed for divorce June 20 in Scottsdale, Ariz., where the couple lives.
Ryne Sandberg filed a reply July 1.
Sandberg said he retired because he lost his competitive edge and wanted more family time. (AP)


STATES AGAIN TRY HEALTH CHANGES AS CONGRESS FAILS
Efforts by the states to provide health care and health insurance for their residents have taken on new importance now that the most ambitious Federal plans to remake the nation's health care system have fizzled.
The states have been a source of innovation in health policy for nearly a decade.
While their interest in the issue never waned, some held back this year, waiting for Congress to define a standard package of health benefits that would be guaranteed to all Americans under Federal law.


Courts Have Protected Baseball Since 1922
When serious objections are made to the protected business practices of Major League Baseball, the response is often the same: strip away its antitrust exemption.
The refrain has been sung with great ardor in recent years by the players' union; fans; Congress; law professors, and the father of Dodgers catcher Mike Piazza, whose bid to buy the San Francisco Giants was rebuffed by baseball's club owners.


CHRONICLE
GUIDO CALABRESI, a former dean of the Yale Law School, had planned to attend the coalition's dinner tonight to receive its award for leadership in justice.
But Mr.
Calabresi will be sworn in today at 4 P.M. as a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New Haven.
The swearing-in ceremony, to be held in the Levinson Auditorium at the law school, are sure to represent a poignant moment in family history for Mr.
Calabresi.
It was 55 years ago today that his family arrived at Ellis Island from Milan, Italy, said STEPHEN MANGIONE, a spokesman for the coalition.


Dow Level Is Highest In 7 Months
Heartened by another round of encouraging data on inflation, stock traders bid up prices in a powerful rally yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average surged 58.55 points, to 3,953.88, its highest level since Feb. 3, the day before the Federal Reserve Board raised interest rates for the first time this year.
Yesterday's trading brings the best-known measure of stock market performance within hailing distance of the psychologically important level of 4,000, where many investors and stock pundits are sure to proclaim the coming of a new bull market.
And it is just some 24 points away from the Dow's all-time high of 3,978.36 reached Jan. 31.


Abroad at Home; Crime And Politics
In apartheid South Africa, at times when political prisoners were subjected to harsh treatment, they were still allowed to earn university degrees by correspondence.
For the United States Congress in 1994, that idea is too enlightened.
One section of the omnibus crime bill just signed by President Clinton forbids the awarding of Pell grants for higher education to anyone in prison.
That will just about end the possibility of prisoners, who are mostly poor, earning college credits.





For a Consultant Nipping at AT&amp;T, It's a Living
Depending on one's perspective, Norman Cohen is either an avenging angel who has rescued hapless companies from disaster-plagued computers or he is a high-technology ambulance chaser.
What is not disputed is that Mr.
Cohen, 49, a computer consultant who works out of a spacious farm home near Atlanta, has become a recurring nightmare for the AT&amp;T Corporation's computer subsidiary, the former NCR Corporation.
Partly as a result of his efforts, NCR and AT&amp;T have paid millions of dollars in customer claims in the last decade, and new cases are still piling up.


French Team Develops Plastic Transistor
French researchers have developed a paper-thin plastic transistor that contains no metal parts, a development they say may lead to flexible electronics like computer screens that roll up like window shades.
The scientists, in a report to be published on Friday in the journal Science, said they had used paper-printing techniques to assemble thin layers of materials into semiconductors that channel electrical charges.


Police in Counseling Give Up Privacy Rights
To the Editor:
The deaths by suicide of two New York City police officers leave many in shock, sadness and frustration (news article, Sept. 8).
Commissioner William J. Bratton wisely commented in his news conference on the need for officers to seek outside, independent counseling when their privacy concerns discourage them from going to the Police Department's Psychological Services Unit.


Justice Department Withdraws Brief in Tithing Case
At President Clinton's request, the Justice Department today dropped its support for a court decision that critics said threatened to weaken a new law that protects religious groups from government interference.
The case involves a Minnesota couple, Bruce and Nancy Young, who declared bankruptcy in 1992.
Because the Youngs had given $13,450 to the Crystal Evangelical Free Church in New Hope, Minn., in the year before they declared bankruptcy, their creditors sued in Federal District Court in Minneapolis, asking that the court force the church to return the money.


Suns Waive Mustaf; Is Tisdale Knocking?
The Phoenix Suns waived forward JERROD MUSTAF yesterday, apparently clearing the way for them to sign WAYMAN TISDALE, an unrestricted free agent.
The Suns also announced that a rookie forward, ANTONIO LANG, has signed a three-year contract.


INSIDE
Stock Market Rallies
The Dow Jones average surged 58.55 points to 3,953.88 on encouraging inflation news, but traders were unsure if it could pass 4,000.
Page D1.
Campaign Counterpunch
As George E. Pataki swung across the state campaigning for governor, Cuomo "truth squads" challenged him at every turn.
Page B1.
New Drug Breach by Gooden
Mets pitcher Dwight Gooden, already on suspension for violating his drug aftercare program, has violated it again, the team said.
Page B9.


Is the Exotic Princess a Fake? The Butler Thinks So
In 1817, a time when English law allows for vagrants and beggars to be hanged, a mysterious and penniless young woman appears on the streets of Bristol.
Caraboo (Phoebe Cates) wears a turban and speaks a language no one can identify, but manages to convey that her father is a king and will not be amused if she is tossed into prison.
Befriended by a grand family, the kind with fine manners and "Masterpiece Theater" set decoration, she is clothed and given a place at their table, where their pompous Greek butler, Frixos (Kevin Kline), leans over while serving her.
In a clipped and funny accent, he whispers, "I know you are an impostor and I spit in your soup." She doesn't blink, which means nothing except that she doesn't blink.
"Princess Caraboo" is a gentle, charming family comedy, a romp whose strength is in its enchanting cast.
While the entire town tries to decide whether Caraboo is a kidnapped princess or England's cleverest impostor, the film surrounds her with a group of hilarious, warm-blooded minor characters.


Diner's Journal
Serene and Spacious
The most serene restaurant I have been in lately is Otabe, an oasis of calm in the midst of midtown.
Japanese music plays softly in the background as waiters pad quietly through a vast, luxurious space.
It is the last place you would expect to find a shrimp tempura sandwich flanked by New York sushi rolls.
The sandwich is a few flat pieces of fried shrimp between two flat squares of white bread.
The sushi, variations on the California roll theme, have pastrami, coleslaw or lox rolled into rice-covered seaweed.
Which is more horrible?
It's a tossup.


Jockeying in Haitian Army
Struggling to avert an invasion that could dismantle their army, officials in Port-au-Prince dickered over who should succeed the junta's commander.
Page A11.


Gators' Dean Completes Passage From Obscurity
He never felt so disposable.
Terry Dean understood how the football industry worked when he was a highly-recruited quarterback, and a valedictorian, and the first player to commit to the University of Florida once Steve Spurrier became its coach.
He saw the bodies come and go after they were beaten out of starting positions, or just beaten.
Dean did not think he would become such a casualty.
His skills and his intense competitiveness would make a difference.
They always had, until this time a year ago, when everything he worked for seemed gone.
After waiting three seasons for his chance, Dean was benched following a four-interception game against Kentucky.
Spurrier's decision created what became known as Florida's "two-headed quarterback." Danny Wuerffel, a second-year freshman at the time, was made the starter, and Dean's head was somewhere else.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Sluman Shoots 63 to Take B.C.
Lead  Jeff Sluman, shrugging off a cold, ran off five straight birdies in shooting an eight-under-par 63 yesterday for a one-stroke lead after the first round of the B.C.
Open in Endicott, N.Y.
Glen Day, John Flannery and Joel Edwards each shot 64's.
Sluman, who hasn't won on the tour since capturing the 1988 P.G.A.
Championship, came within one stroke of the course record on the par-71 En-Joie Golf Club course. (AP) Rookie Leads L.P.G.A.: Annika Sorenstam, a rookie who had to win a qualifying tournament to join the field, shot a five-under-par 67 for the first-round lead in the $500,000 L.P.G.A.
Safeco Classic in Kent, Wash.
She holds a one-stroke lead over Michelle Estill, Chris Johnson and Sally Little. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  When Victories and Losses Feel the Same  Sergei Bubka and Mike Powell, two world record-holders, ended their outdoor seasons with different results but the same emotions at the Toto meet yesterday in Tokyo.
Bubka won the pole vault at 19 feet 4 1/2 inches, but the Ukrainian was upset about not breaking his world record of 20-2 and criticized officials after one of his poles broke after he had cleared a vault.
Pat Manson of the United States was second after clearing 19-2 1/2, his personal best.
Powell lost the long jump to Huang Geng of China and then lost a 20-minute argument with officials, who ruled he had fouled on his longest jump, 27-3 1/4.
Powell, who set the world record of 29-4 1/2 at the 1991 world championships in Tokyo, and Huang each jumped 25-11, but Powell lost because he fouled on his other jumps.
Colin Jackson won the 110-meter hurdles with the world's fastest time this year, 12.98 seconds.
Linford Christie beat Dennis Mitchell in the men's 100 in 10.02 seconds. (AP)


Critic's Choice/Film; To Discover Renoir or Savor Him Again
Sometimes the most familiar directors are the most surprising; "100 Years of Cinema and . . . Jean Renoir" is a glorious retrospective of Renoir's work that begins today and runs for five weeks at Film Forum.
All his masterpieces are there: "The Rules of the Game," "The Golden Coach" and "Grand Illusion," which opens the series.
"Grand Illusion" is the ultimate and most humane among prisoner-of-war movies, with Jean Gabin as the French prisoner in a World War I camp run by Erich von Stroheim.
These films carry the thrill of discovery for anyone catching them for the first time; from then on, they can never be seen too often.
But perhaps even more tantalizing are the lesser-known, equally rich films in this series, which celebrates the 100th year of Renoir's birth.
Among the best early films is "La Chienne" ("The Bitch"), a 1931 work that Fritz Lang remade in Hollywood as "Scarlet Street." Michel Simon, best known as the hero of Renoir's "Boudu Saved From Drowning," is a sometime painter (later the Edward G. Robinson role) who makes a tragic fool of himself over a tawdry, unscrupulous young woman.
With its mesmerizing love triangle and the graceful storytelling that was Renoir's signature, "La Chienne" is even better than the remake.


It's Official: 49ers Will Be in Prime Time
They were joking today in the 49ers' locker room.
"Dream Team III," the players howled, knowing that the rest of the National Football League was not laughing.
Deion Sanders officially ended his free-agent national tour when he signed a one-year, $1.335 million contract.
Carmen Policy, the 49ers' owner, said Sanders could earn another $750,000 if the team reaches the Super Bowl.


CNN Head Says He Did Not Purposely Defy Judge in Noriega Case
The president of CNN said today that although he personally made the decision in 1990 to broadcast a recording of a prison telephone call by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, he did so on the advice of his lawyers without having seen a copy of a Federal judge's warning to the network not to make the recording public.
In a criminal contempt proceeding against the network, CNN's president, Tom Johnson, testified that he did not intentionally defy the order by Judge William M. Hoeveler.


Barbie (and Ken) Raised My Consciousness
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's Sept. 10 column on Barbie's 35th birthday blames Barbie for young girls' poor self-image, anorexia and the popularity of silicone breast implants.
As one who consumed Barbie in large doses during my "formative" years, let me come to the doll's defense.


The Way It Was: Images by Capa
EVEN considered simply as a respectful tribute to a beloved leader, "Cornell Capa: Photographer," the marvelous retrospective now at the uptown branch of the International Center of Photography, is a noteworthy event.
Mr.
Capa, now 76, founded the center . in 1974, and through his deft maneuverings and considerable charm as its director, built it into one of the world's leading venues for photography.
But Mr.
Capa, who retired from his post in June, brought to his job more than a twinkling eye and a rare ability to navigate the treacherous waters of the New York art world.
Before setting up the center, he had a distinguished career as a photographer himself; while a scattering of his pictures have been included in group shows at the center he founded, this is the first full-blown recognition given to a chapter of his life that he put aside when he became director.


The French Now Fear Corruption Has Become a Fact of Life
The Mayors of Lyons and Grenoble are under investigation for possible corruption.
The former Mayor of Toulon is in jail, awaiting trial on charges of taking kickbacks.
The former Mayor of Nice is expected to be extradited from Uruguay soon to face embezzlement charges here.
In private business, the list of top executives accused of illegal acts is no less impressive.
On Sept. 7, Jean-Louis Beffa, the chairman of Saint-Gobain, a giant glass and building-materials group, became the latest big name to be indicted on bribery charges.


Too Bad Yanks Can't Frame Roster
When the Yankees assemble for their 1995 team picture, if there is a 1995 season, there will definitely be some fresh faces before the camera.
Say goodbye to the 1994 Yankees, the best team in the American League.
Say hello to an uncertain future.
While the Yankees lamented the possible World Series opportunity lost by the cancellation of the season on Wednesday, the savvy players, employees and fans also lamented the loss of a tight and talented team.


The Baseball Season Dies . . .; Oh, No!
"Pain" is not the right word to describe my reaction to the news that baseball is dead for the year; 34 days of empty negotiations had already provided a powerful anesthetic.
But I did feel a sense of loss and disgust, directed mainly at the millionaire players and owners who could not come up with a single creative way to divide an immense amount of money.
The World Series had been played for 89 straight years despite the Kaiser, the Great Depression, Hitler and the California earthquake -- only to be vaporized now by greed.
But the tidy universe of baseball, the symmetry and style about which former Baseball Commissioner A. Bartlett Giamatti rhapsodized, will survive.


Facing Loss, Wilder Ends Bid for Senate
Deciding he would rather quit than lose, former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder today withdrew from Virginia's raucous four-way race for the United States Senate.
The announcement by Mr.
Wilder, who three weeks ago vowed he would end his independent bid only if he were made President of the United States, preserved his boast of never having lost an election.
But it also gave a boost to the candidacy of his bitter rival within the state Democratic Party, Senator Charles S. Robb.


On My Mind; The Fear Of Refugees
Three years after World War II, most governments of the world had realized that the issues of refugees and asylum were critical to the safety of nations, the purposes of the war and to what had come to be called human rights.
In Europe were camps still filled with persons "displaced" by German devastation or fear of falling into the hands of the Soviet Army.
In Asia millions of Hindus and Muslims were killing and being killed crossing through India and Pakistan, sliced apart by partition.


For Simpson, a Multiracial Jury Insures Justice; Racist Death Penalty
To the Editor:
"In Any Case, Unfair Punishment" (editorial, Sept. 7) argues that the three-month delay by the prosecution in deciding whether or not to seek the death penalty against O. J. Simpson is an indictment of capital punishment.
Race determines who will die, more often than aggravating factors.
Since 1976 only three whites have been executed for the death of a nonwhite, while at least 86 minority prisoners have been executed for murdering whites.


Persistent E-Mail: Electronic Stalking or Innocent Courtship?
One of the nation's broadest stalking laws will be challenged this year when Andrew C. Archambeau stands trial in Michigan for pursuing a woman by electronic mail and on her telephone answering machine after she told him to stop bothering her.
Mr.
Archambeau, a 32-year-old sign maker from the Detroit suburb of Dearborn Heights, acknowledges using electronic mail to court a school teacher he had met through a video dating service, but says he meant no harm.
With the exception of an initial meeting at a social gathering sponsored by the dating service, and a casual date a few days later, the relationship apparently ran its course from infatuation to anger to criminal charges largely in the electronic realm known as cyberspace.


Spotlight at Its Brightest In International Play
It is medieval jousting without the lances, boxing without the blood and brain damage.
It is a duel at 20 paces with golf balls instead of bullets.
It is match play, that taxing, wrenching exercise of golf in which each separate hole can unfold like a novel, and where a player's spirit can be either lifted or broken by what his opponent does or doesn't do.
When the inaugural Presidents Cup matches get under way at 7:50 A.M.
Friday at the Robert Trent Jones Golf Club -- with the international team of Steve Elkington and Vijay Singh taking on the United States team of Corey Pavin and Jeff Maggert in the first of five morning four-ball matches -- the nature of match play and its spectator appeal will become apparent.


At J. P. Morgan, Orderly Change at the Top
While J. P. Morgan &amp; Company has significantly transformed itself in the last 10 years into an investment banking and trading company from a commercial bank lender, it has avoided any equally drastic changes in management.
J.
P.
Morgan's pattern of orderly change continued yesterday when it announced that Douglas A. Warner 3d would become chairman at the end of the year, replacing Dennis Weatherstone, who will retire at 64.


Thurmond Plans to Run
To the Editor:
William Safire states in "Imagine a G.O.P. Senate" (column, Sept. 8) that I will retire at the end of my term.
I am pleased to report that I have every intention of running for re-election in 1996 and seeking my eighth term in the Senate.


Japanese Boy's Kin Win Suit Over Death
A judge in Baton Rouge, La., awarded more than $650,000 in damages and funeral costs to the parents of a Japanese exchange student, saying "there was no justification whatsoever" for a suburban homeowner's killing of the 16-year-old boy when the boy came to his door in a Halloween costume almost two years ago.
The ruling differed sharply from the verdict of a jury that last year acquitted the homeowner of manslaughter in the same shooting.
Article, page A12.


Trumpeting, Sort of, Summer's Last Hurrah


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Douglas A. Warner 3d will become chairman of J. P. Morgan, replacing Dennis Weatherstone, who will retire.
The succession shows Morgan's pattern of orderly change in management, in contrast with some other Wall Street firms.
Mr.
Warner, 48, has been the heir apparent at Morgan since 1990.  [ Page D1. ]
United Airlines will take on Southwest Airlines at its own game, offering no-frills, low-fare service in California and other centers in the Far West.
The battle between the new Shuttle by United and Southwest, a smaller but influential carrier, will help shape the future of each company and of the domestic airline industry.  [ D1. ]


Mattingly Blames Both Sides
Don Mattingly, whose extinguished chance of reaching the post-season for the first time has made him one of the more poignant symbols of baseball's cancellation, has declined to answer questions about his frustration.
Instead, the Yankee first baseman issued a five-paragraph statement through his agent yesterday that blamed both sides for the shutdown and called the experience "very difficult for me to accept," while acknowledging that he understood "it just wasn't meant to be this year."
"It in many ways is embarrassing to me that the owners and players are responsible for shutting down an industry that even the act of World War I and World War II couldn't do," said the 33-year-old Mattingly, who has stated that he would consider retiring if the impasse carries into next summer.


Now at Risk Is Owners' Security Blanket: Antitrust Exemption
Wanna see the baseball club owners really squirm?
Repeal their exemption from the antitrust laws.
Major League Baseball's privileged place in the legal sun, granted by the United States Supreme Court in 1922, has long been questioned by antitrust hawks.
And repeal is sure to be on the agenda of frustrated fans and their representatives next week when the House Judiciary subcommittee holds a hearing on the collapse of the 1994 season.


Restaurants
"Oh, no! They're taking us upstairs!" squeals a woman in a tight black dress and dangerously high heels.
She looks at the ceiling and pouts.
"Why can't we sit down here?" she asks, pointing to the raised dining area in front of the glassed-in kitchen.
She takes in the room, painted in muted tones of terra cotta, mustard and green, the low banquettes, the inverted pillars, and looks momentarily forlorn.
With one backward glance at the tables that flank the bar area (they are all occupied), she reluctantly climbs toward Siberia.
Many people feel it is a punishment to be seated upstairs at C. T. Restaurant.
Even though the dining room up there is comfortable and quiet, just walking the stairs can feel like failure.
At least until the arrival of the first dish.


Food: Subject, Symbol, Metaphor
Those who consider art and food equally essential forms of sustenance will find the new fall exhibition at the New York Public Library especially satisfying.
Anyone intrigued by the rich holdings of the library but not too familiar with them should be pretty happy, too.
"The Raw and the Cooked: Images of Food in Prints, Drawings and Photographs From the Renaissance to the Present," a gathering of more than 160 items, including some illustrated books, organized by three of the library's curators, is a peripatetic tour through several centuries of art, style, history, politics and social ritual.
Accompanied by a not entirely successful checklist, whose categories echo those of a delicatessen menu, this exhibition also provides a highly focused overview of the diverse visual materials in the library.
The small scale of most of the works on view is an advantage; a display of this size and scope in which the dominant medium was painting might be indigestible.


Semak Aims to Get Out of No Man's Land
Aleksandr Semak has had success in Russia and in his three seasons in the National Hockey League with the Devils.
But he is approaching this preseason like a rookie hoping to make the team.
That is because Semak fell into virtual oblivion last season, just a year after he was second in team scoring with 79 points -- 2 behind Claude Lemieux -- and was voted the team's most valuable player.


Sunday's Book Fair
The three-day New York Is Book Country festival opening today includes an array of literary events throughout the city, from readings to book sales to literary tours.
Today, Tom Peters, author of "The Tom Peters Seminar: Crazy Times Call for Crazy Organizations," and Stratford Sherman, author of "Control Your Destiny or Someone Else Will," speak at a Business Books Breakfast, sponsored by Crain's New York Business along with New York Is Book Country.
The breakfast is at the McGraw-Hill Building Reading Room, 50th floor, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 48th Street, from 8 to 10 A.M.
Admission: $25.
Reservations: (212) 210-0739.


CLINTON ADDRESSES NATION ON THREAT TO INVADE HAITI; TELLS DICTATORS TO GET OUT
Appearing on national television to prepare the country for an invasion of Haiti, President Clinton said tonight that he had exhausted diplomacy and was ready to send in ground troops to force out a military leadership that he blamed for a series of atrocities.
"The message of the United States to the Haitian dictators is clear," Mr.
Clinton declared in the 9 P.M. address from the Oval Office.
"Your time is up. Leave now or we will force you from power."  [ Transcript, page A10. ]


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


USAir Crash Investigators Rule Out More Causes
Adding further mystery to what caused the crash of USAir Flight 427 last week, investigators today ruled out more possible causes, saying the flaps and spoilers on the wings were in normal position and aligned when the Boeing 737 hit the ground.
They also concluded that both engines of the Boeing 737 were running when it crashed last Thursday, killing 132 people.


Edith Markson, 81, Promoter of Theater
Edith Sherin Markson, a promoter of regional theater in the United States and the founder of an exchange program for American and Eastern European theater artists, died on Saturday during a visit to Santa Fe, N.M.
She was 81 and lived in New York City.
The cause was heart failure after a stroke, said her daughter, Mary Markson Dawe.


A Retrospective for a Doyenne of Paris Fashion
Fame in fashion is fleeting.
If an actor is as successful as his last role, a designer is as good as his or her last collection.
Skip a few collections, and the designer becomes history.
So it is altogether fitting and proper that the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art dedicate its current exhibition to the work of Alix Gres, known to her workers as Mademoiselle and to the rest of the world as Madame.
A nonagenarian, she is one of the great female designers who dominated haute couture in Paris until after World War II, when the men took over.
She ranks with Madeleine Vionnet, the inventor of the bias cut; Elsa Schiaparelli, who forged links with avant-garde artists like Jean Cocteau, and Gabrielle Chanel, whose style endures under the aegis of Karl Lagerfeld.


COMPANY NEWS: Food From Cyberspace; For Ameritech, On-Line Food Shopping
There's one way to top dialing for dinner: shop the aisles of the cyberspace supermarket.
That is the aim of the Ameritech Corporation.
The regional Bell telephone company in Chicago said yesterday that it had acquired a minority interest in Peapod, an interactive service that enables computer users to shop for groceries from home.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  CLINTON PLEADS CASE ON HAITI  In a nationally televised address, President Clinton said he had exhausted diplomacy and was ready to send ground troops into Haiti to force out its military leadership.
He blamed the junta for a series of gruesome atrocities.
A1  A TOUGH ARGUMENT  News analysis: After months of threats, some wonder whether President Clinton is calling for an invasion so he can preserve his credibility.
There appears to be a certain grim spirit within the Administration, as if it has set itself upon a course that it does not know how to abandon, however perilous the waters ahead look.
A1


A Cloudy Future for the Military Leaders
Hoping to avert an American invasion they fear will dismantle the Haitian armed forces, civilian and military officials in the army-dominated Government are making a final attempt to persuade Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and two other leaders of the junta to resign, according to Haitian officials and foreign diplomats here.
The effort has run into difficulties, however, in part because of differences within the military as to who should succeed General Cedras as commander in chief.


Early Lennon Tape Is Sold
The earliest known recording of John Lennon in performance was sold yesterday at Sotheby's in London for $122,770, the highest price paid at auction for any recording.
The recording, of Lennon's first band, the Quarry Men Skiffle Group, on a three-inch reel of tape, was bought by David Hughes, a vice president of Thorn EMI of London.
"This was a unique opportunity to acquire a recording from the day the Beatles were first thought about," Mr.
Hughes said.
"Paul McCartney turned up that day at the concert, where he met Lennon and tuned his guitar. To us, it's a unique landmark in the history of British music."


ITT Move to Sell Financial Unit Reported
The ITT Corporation is putting its financial services unit, which includes consumer and commercial lending and a small reinsurance operation, up for sale to raise funds for other acquisitions, a person familiar with the company's plans said yesterday.
The unit to be sold, called the ITT Financial Corporation, had an operating income last year of $271 million on revenues of $1.44 billion.
It does not include the company's giant Hartford group of insurance companies.


Art in Review
Eric Fischl
Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 22
This show signals another change in Eric Fischl's work.
His last show had big paintings of bizarre images with many figures that included the sort of collage elements and abrupt shifts of pictorial scale one associates with an artist like David Salle.
There were sculptures, too, a la Rodin.
The show before that one featured multi-figure paintings inspired by India, also mostly very large, strange and ambitious.


Nexgen Begins Shipping a Chip Comparable to Pentium
With a little help from I.B.M., tiny Nexgen Inc. was first out of the gate today with chips that offer performance comparable to the Intel Corporation's Pentium microprocessor.
Nexgen, a privately held company in Milpitas, Calif., said it had begun shipping four Pentium-class microprocessors, priced from $404 to $777, depending on their internal processing speed; Intel's Pentiums range from $525 to $900.
However, the Nexgen chips do not include a math co-processor, so the price comparisons are not completely valid.


Art in Review
Bill Brandt
Houk Friedman Gallery  851 Madison Avenue (at 70th Street)  Through Oct. 29
It turns out that the air of mystery in Bill Brandt's work has parallels in his life.
In recent years, historians have pointed out that this quintessentially English photographer was actually German, from a wealthy Hamburg family, and that many of his seemingly candid shots of English life in the 1930's were posed.


In the Words of the President: The Reasons Why the U.S. May Invade Haiti
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's address to the nation last night on Haiti, as recorded by The New York Times:
My fellow Americans:


The Baseball Season Dies . . .; O.K.
The season over?
Baseball itself dying?
The very soul of the nation in jeopardy as the National Pastime withers?
Nonsense.
Baseball died years ago.
The latest wake merely confirms the game's loss of magic.


To the Shores of Port-au-Prince
President Clinton is readying American troops for an invasion of Haiti aimed, he said last night, at ending human rights abuses, securing U.S. borders and upholding Washington's credibility.
The address from the Oval Office was meant to convince Americans that the nation has a legitimate national security interest in Haiti worth the risking of American lives.
Indeed, Haiti does raise troubling concerns.
But concerns and security interests are not the same thing, no matter how hard a President argues.
The fact remains that a Haiti invasion is a mission the country does not believe in, Congress has not approved and Mr.
Clinton himself tried to avoid.
Even now he is considering the dispatch of a special envoy to deliver one last warning.
Perhaps Haiti's dictators will leave and allow the President to end his invasion plans without embarrassment.
If not, it falls to Congress to somehow deter him from moving ahead despite so much dissent and sound counsel.


The Unseen Characters Emerge by Invention
"Don't become a regular who gets a crush on everyone here," says the waitress in Linda Mancini's "Tip or Die." But a following has grown up around Ms.
Mancini in recent years, and it is likely there will be many regulars returning to this wise, funny and sometimes wildly perverse one-woman show running at Here in SoHo Thursdays through Sundays through Sept. 25.
On an ingenious set by Brad Stokes that creates an entire restaurant, from bar to tables to kitchen, Ms.
Mancini brings to life so many diner denizens on a busy evening that one can almost hear the clatter and smell the food.
She actually steps into a few of these roles.
But the measure of her skill as a writer and actor is that most of the other characters are silent, seen only through the eyes of her waitress; yet the viewer soon knows them through and through.
The unseen, unheard cook and busboy are triumphs of theatrical invention.


15 Immigrants Held In Illegal Gambling
Fifteen Russian immigrants have been arrested in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn for operating illegal gambling machines, the police said yesterday.
Seven of the suspects were also charged with gambling.
The immigrants had been operating illegal electronic slot machines at nine Brighton Beach businesses, including a video rental store, laundry stores, grocery stores and a car service, the police said.


So What's Next for Business of Baseball? Time Will Tell
When Bud Selig canceled the remainder of the 1994 baseball season and the World Series on Wednesday, club owners and striking players mourned what they had all known for days was inevitable.
Then Selig declared that with the pressures of resuming the season now gone, both sides would be better served by taking some time to reflect and rejuvenate.
Many of the combatants in baseball's labor war, including Selig and the players' union chief Donald Fehr, did just that yesterday, taking time to observe the Jewish holiday Yom Kippur.


Accounts
*
No Fear Inc., San Diego, to Amster Yard, New York, as the first agency to handle the sports apparel company's national creative account.
Billings were not disclosed.
Susan Irwin, a spokeswoman for Amster Yard's parent, McCann-Erickson Worldwide, confirmed a report of the appointment this week in Adweek. *
Golden Corral Corp., Raleigh, N.C., to Earle Palmer Brown, Richmond, to handle the creative and planning portions of the family-style restaurant chain's account, previously handled by various agencies.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Theodore Conrad Service
A memorial service for Theodore Conrad, an architectural model maker and preservationist, will be held at 7 P.M. on Tuesday at the Hudson County Justice William J. Brennan Jr.
Courthouse, Newark and Baldwin Avenues, in Jersey City.
Mr.
Conrad died Aug. 19.


Home Video
Old Movies, New Media
The new video season finds the usual run of big titles and commemorative tie-ins crouched at the starting line.
This year, though, there are some interesting upstarts.
Take, for example, the aspiring major motion picture that is to open in video stores and skip movie theaters altogether.
And then there's the CD-ROM with Shakespeare karaoke.


Chavez Isn't Fighting Trim
Julio Cesar Chavez's workout was closed, the better to concentrate on losing those few precious pounds he is said to be carrying over the 140-pound limit.
Meldrick Taylor went through his final workout in his hotel room, his head clean shaven, appearing trim and relaxed while going over strategy with his management team.
Two of the largest names in the junior welterweight division over the past decade readied today for their rematch Saturday at the M-G-M Grand Hotel.


Schools' Security Is No Match For Students With Weapons
A 16-year-old boy who sneaked a handgun into a Brooklyn high school and critically wounded a fellow student, told authorities his school's weapon screening system was so lax that he had believed he could smuggle in his gun if he arrived late enough in the day, officials said yesterday.
Indeed, at Sheepshead Bay High School, safety officers with handheld scanners stopped random searches of students for weapons at 1:30 p.m.
Wednesday -- 10 minutes before Maurice Ferguson, 15, was shot with a .32-caliber handgun while he and the suspect, David Estrada, stood in a school stairwell.
The police believe Mr.
Estrada was showing Mr.
Ferguson the gun when it accidentally fired, hitting the victim in the left side of his neck.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball USA BASEBALL -- Named Skip Bertman, Louisiana State coach, coach of the 1995 and 1996 USA Baseball Teams.


The Spoken Word
GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO, 92d Street Y, Lexington Avenue at 92d Street.
Charlie Rose will interview the Governor in the first of a "Conversations with Charlie Rose" series.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Admission: $16.
Information: (212) 996-110.
"THE SCREWTAPE LETTERS," Church of the Advent Hope, 111 East 87th Street, Manhattan.
The last in a series of readings of C. S. Lewis works, with music by Benjamin Britten and others.
Tonight at 7.
Free.
Information: (212) 534-8245.


Man Befriend Tourists, Then Robs Them
A man ingratiated himself to two tourists at Newark International Airport yesterday, then robbed them of their belongings and their rental car, officials said.
The tourists, an elderly couple from California whose names were not released, had just rented a car from the Avis counter at the airport when the man struck up a conversation, said Bill Cahill, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the airport.
The couple were unsure about local roads, he said, and the man offered to help them.


Preaching to Skeptics
President Clinton spoke tonight into the teeth of a howling political gale.
As the Pentagon mobilized reserve units and American warships steamed toward Haiti, the President belatedly set his full rationale for an invasion before the nation in a televised attempt to rally public support for imminent military action.
But he addressed a nation of skeptics.


Rock Bands Flex Amps in Storage; To Avoid Wary Landlords, Corrugated Space for Rehearsals
The rock-and-roll that roars out from self-storage unit No. 24 at Storage U.S.A., just off Route 4, bears reasonable comparison to a jet engine: compressed and distorted by the corrugated metal walls inside the 10-by-30-foot chamber, the music blasts into the night through the single open door in a compact, deafening aural punch.
The room has no windows, no heat, no ventilation, no adornment but for a strip of green carpet attached to one wall to try and tame the mind-jarring bounce of the acoustics, and only two electrical sockets to make it all work.


An Age of Wisdom, or Is It Foolishness?
One day, out of the blue, Peter Witner (Peter Weller) decides to live dangerously.
Tired of his job at an ad agency, he announces that it's time for a change.
"I welcome what my next step in my journey is going to be, and so I quit," he announces serenely at a business meeting.
Meanwhile, Peter's wife, Katherine (Judy Davis), is experiencing her own business difficulties, in response to which she goes shopping.
Meeting at home that evening, after an arduous day that Katherine has spent wasting money and Peter has spent in bed with his mistress, they make love stimulated by the fantasy that they are somewhere else.
"It's not real," Katherine acknowledges afterward, vaguely troubled.
"I don't think you're really here."


79 Seized in New York and Italy Echoing Pizza Connection Case
It looked like an ordinary New York pizza parlor, its Formica tables crowded at lunch yesterday with midtown office workers and a long line of customers snaking along a counter in front of the ovens.
But Federal authorities said that the Famous Original Ray's Pizza on Third Avenue near 43d Street was actually the headquarters for a major drug ring.
An d in a new variation for the ever-changing international drug trade, the authorities said, the pizzeria gang didn't just import cocaine from Colombia to feed New York City's big appetite for drugs.
It also used New York as a transit point to deliver drugs to three longstanding organized crime groups in Italy, where cocaine sells for three times what it costs in New York.


Metrocard Flunks Computer Design Test
To the Editor:
The debate over the New York City subway's Metrocard being conducted on your letters page has ignored the question of system design.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A couple of auto makers set out to buff up some rusty brand names.
WITH sales rising and a slew of new models pending, the Big Three auto makers are turning their attention to restoring the images of older brands that have lost their luster, or their way, in recent years.
Besides ephemeral advertising heralding 1995 models, the brand-building campaign is taking more tangible, and probably durable, forms: At Ford's Lincoln-Mercury division, it means a less-confusing sign at its dealerships, while at General Motors' Oldsmobile division, it means classier theme music.


Florida State Players Are Ruled Eligible
The National Collegiate Athletic Association restored the eligibility of five suspended Florida State football players yesterday, freeing the all-America linebacker DERRICK BROOKS and a reserve, MARCUS LONG, to play against Wake Forest tomorrow.
The N.C.A.A., however, added a third game to tailback TIGER McMILLON's suspension, making it as long as PATRICK McNEIL's ban.


For Simpson, a Multiracial Jury Insures Justice; No Sentencing Bias
To the Editor:
Re "In Any Case, Unfair Punishment" (editorial, Sept. 7): As the National Research Council noted some years ago, the most careful studies do not support the argument that, overall, black Americans are discriminated against in criminal sentencing.


Drought Cuts Hydropower In Ghana
All summer long, Ghanaian newspaper readers have skipped past the political spats and splashy sex scandals that usually fill the lively press here, turning instead to an unlikely attraction: daily bulletins indicating water levels in the country's main hydroelectric dam.
After two consecutive years of poor rains in the north, the Akosombo Dam, a huge power plant that sits astride the Volta River and supplies most of Ghana's electricity, is no longer able to satisfy national demand.


For Simpson, a Multiracial Jury Insures Justice
To the Editor:
In "When Lawyers Play the Race Card" (Op-Ed, Sept. 9), Jeffrey Abramson views the efforts of defense lawyers to gain a multiracial jury in O. J. Simpson's trial as injecting race in a case not about race.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "PRIDE EQUALS POWER," Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Photographs chronicling the evolution of the New York Gay Pride March from 1970 to 1993.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for children; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.


Dublin Journal; Gaelic Now Trips Off Ireland's Silver Tongues
The Irish, who did so well mastering the tongue of their colonial English rulers, have begun to rediscover their own language, Gaelic -- or, as it is called here, Irish.
It is a development that has not come overnight.
"It is fashionable now to speak Irish," said Dierdre Davitt, the deputy chief executive of Bord na Gaelige, the Government agency that is fostering the revival.
"It's very far from a dying language."


Brown Losing Skin But He's Poised Under Pressure
The locker room was nearly empty in the bowels of Sun Devil Stadium and quarterback Dave Brown, along with his Giants teammates, had just beaten the Cardinals.
He was happy, but his body had paid the price.
When he took off his shirt, there were pieces of skin that were ripped off his body.
Someone asked what had happened.
"What do you think happened?" Brown said.
He smiled as if to say didn't you watch the game?
Didn't you see what was being thrown at me?
The Cardinals were sending eight men after Brown, blitzing almost every play.


Indonesia's Way With Dissenters
A few months ago, Indonesia prevailed on the Philippines to censor a human rights conference that was to discuss East Timor -- the former Portuguese colony that Jakarta lawlessly grabbed in 1975.
More recently, Indonesia urged Australia's Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, to crack down on activists who demonstrate in front of the Indonesian consulate in Darwin, the northern Australian city closest to East Timor.
Mr.
Evans said that he understood Indonesia's concern but that his Government was unable to stop protests over East Timor.
That might well have been read in Jakarta as weakness, but at least Mr.
Evans broke his country's silence about human rights in Indonesia, Australia's close and powerful neighbor that generates trade worth about $2 billion a year.
That silence has been widely criticized at home, notably by Edward Cardinal Clancy, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Sydney.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 1 about Pizza Hut's plan to open a restaurant in Parma, Italy, misidentified the Duchess of Parma who was married to Napoleon.
She was Marie-Louise of Hapsburg-Lorraine, who was Duchess of Parma and Piacenza from 1815 to 1847. (Maria-Luisa of Bourbon-Parma was Duchess of Parma and Piacenza from 1854 to 1859.)


Johnny Cash, Austerely Direct From Deep Within
Johnny Cash knows that dignity makes the icon.
Through a recording career that stretches back to 1955, his bass-baritone voice has gone from gravelly to grave; his demeanor has grown ever more somber and humble.
But even in the 1950's, he was perfectly believable singing a line like "I taught the weeping willow how to cry." At Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night, he sang with stoic calm about death, loneliness, love and Christian faith.
Mr.
Cash has grown increasingly distant from the country-music business, which likes its singers young, optimistic and aw-shucks sexy.
Mr.
Cash's songs don't provide the cozy consolation of most country hits; they are more likely to tell stories of hardship and irrevocable loss.
In "Oh Bury Me Not," the narrator recites a prayer that he will live up to the virtues of the wide-open country.
The music then segues into the old song in which a dying young cowboy begs not to be buried on "the lone prairie," but he is buried there anyway.


United's Bid to Rule Western Skies
In a high-stakes confrontation not seen in years between two air carriers, United Airlines is about to battle Southwest Airlines for the skies of the West, a face-off that will help shape the future of each company and of the domestic airline industry.
While other carriers like America West and Alaska Airlines will be caught up in the battle, it is the contest starting on Oct. 1 between the new Shuttle by United, run by the nation's largest airline, and Southwest, a smaller but perennially profitable and influential carrier, that will be watched by other airlines and travel-industry experts nationwide.


Like Shortened Season, Dawson Feels Incomplete
The way Andre Dawson had it figured, the end of this baseball season would coincide with his retirement.
Or so the Boston Red Sox designated hitter thought.
The strike-killed season, which officially ended Wednesday because of a negotiating impasse between the owners and players, makes him feel different.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday, with an article about the credit markets, included incorrect figures supplied by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, for the average weekly yields on participation certificates.
The yield for the 15-year certificate is 7.83 percent, not 8.18 percent, and the yield for the 30-year certificate is 8.31 percent, not 8.66 percent.


Matthew Gordon, News Executive, 84
Matthew Gordon, a news executive who established the press operations of the United Nations in 1946 and ran its Office of Public Information for the next 15 years, died on Wednesday at Sibley Memorial Hospital here.
He was 84.
The cause of death was a heart ailment, said his companion, Margaret Croke.


Art in Review
Jeanne Silverthorne
David McKee Gallery  745 Fifth Avenue, at 58th Street  Through Oct. 1
For years now Jeanne Silverthorne has been placing mute, dense little sculptures in group shows and quietly stealing attention away from larger, louder work.
In her first show at David McKee, she expands her scale, but the sense of concentration and mystery remains.
She has basically turned the gallery into a vast studio in which every object -- from stretched canvases leaning against the wall to a table of tools -- has been cast in solid, ash-gray rubber.


Pataki Jabs As Democrats Counterpunch
As State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, swung across the state today carrying a message of change, Democrats allied with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo dogged him at every turn, questioning his legislative record and his claim that he is a reformer.
In Buffalo, Rochester and Binghamton, Mr.
Pataki met with reporters to discuss his support for term limits, citizen initiatives and proposals to make government more open.
But he encountered loosely coordinated groups of Cuomo supporters who were calling themselves "truth squads" and who had already conducted news conferences attacking his voting record on ethics issues.


The Mystery of Flight 427
The remarkable safety record of America's airlines is marred once again by the horror of U.S.
Air Flight 427's plunge into the woods near Pittsburgh last week, killing all 132 passengers and crew.
It was the most devastating toll for any U.S. carrier in seven years, and its cause is still a mystery.
The chief of the Federal investigators on the scene offers the most sensible comment so far: Don't jump to conclusions about what went wrong.
It was U.S.
Air's fifth fatal crash in as many years -- none similar to the others -- and its second in just three months.
Given the airline's string of financial losses, there has been speculation it might have cut back on aircraft maintenance.
That can happen when an airline is strapped for cash.
But a reputation for safety is key to financial recovery, and U.S.
Air insists there have been no cutbacks.
Moreover, the Federal Aviation Administration stepped up its surveillance of U.S.
Air operations after the earlier crashes, and has pronounced those operations satisfactory.


Holly Bull Is Favored Out of the No. 5 Post
Holy Bull neared the end of the countdown to his 10th, final and most critical race of the year yesterday, the $500,000 Woodward Stakes.
It will be run tomorrow at Belmont Park, and it will determine whether he ends his season of runaway success as the 3-year-old champion and Horse of the Year.
The imposing gray colt drew the No. 5 post position in the middle of a field of eight when entries were filed yesterday for 48 horses in the six Grade One stakes that will make Belmont a milestone on the road to the Breeders' Cup.


Taco Cabana
Class A shares of Taco Cabana, a chain of Mexican restaurants based in San Antonio, dropped sharply yesterday in Nasdaq trading after the company said that its earnings for the third quarter were likely to be lower than expected.


Art in Review
Claes Oldenburg  'Books and Ephemera, 1960-1994'
Printed Matter  77 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 15
It is great to see this exhibition, which stresses the intimate, egalitarian side of Claes Oldenburg's abundant graphic talent, crowded into some 20 vitrines in the middle of Printed Matter, a bookstore-cum-exhibition space devoted to artists' books, magazines and zines.


Richard Herrnstein, 64, Dies; Backed Nature Over Nurture
Richard J. Herrnstein, a Harvard University psychologist whose theory that intelligence was largely inherited made him a focus for debate, died at his home in Belmont, Mass., on Tuesday.
He was 64.
The cause was lung cancer, said the Reardon Funeral Home in Belmont.


In Decorous Virginia, a Rowdy Senate Race
Decorous old Virginia has not been so atwitter since Elizabeth Taylor prowled the 1978 state convention wearing a tiger-striped pants suit, wooing delegates for John Warner, her sixth husband (if you don't count Richard Burton twice).
This seat of American democracy has long had a reputation as a state where the dullest candidate was assured victory.


Judge Awards Damages In Japanese Youth's Death
A judge today awarded more than $650,000 in damages and funeral costs to the parents of a Japanese exchange student, saying there was "no justification whatsoever" for the killing of the 16-year-old boy who approached a suburban homeowner's door in a Halloween costume almost two years ago.
The judge's ruling in a case that crystallized major cultural differences between Japan and America contrasted with a criminal court jury's verdict last year, when the homeowner, Rodney Peairs, was acquitted of manslaughter.
Judge Bill Brown, who heard the civil case without a jury, condemned the shooting, which had provoked outrage in Japan, where gun ownership is rare.


Yom Kippur Observed


No Headline


Project Mixes Working Class and Ex-Homeless in Bronx
In a tidy group of buildings that stand out from the others on Townsend Avenue in the Bronx, a woman, once homeless, now helps a neighbor by baby-sitting for her during working hours.
In the building next door, a successful local businessman has moved in to be closer to the banquet hall he owns.
Down the street, a family struggles to put their lives back in order after a short stay in a shelter.
Confident the family will be living in their new home for the long haul, the mother is now working at a part-time job, and her two boys are getting ready for school


George Bardyguine; Stage Artist Was 7
George Bardyguine, a technical director and stage manager for dance and theater, died on Sept. 11 in Leader, Bethel Park, a nursing home in Pittsburgh, where he lived.
He was 74.
The cause was vascular disease, said a spokeswoman for the Pittsburgh Ballet Theater, which is directed by Mr.
Bardyguine's wife, the former ballerina Patricia Wilde.


An Army Family as Strong as Its Weakest Link
"Tom Jones" will always be the first film that comes to mind at the mention of Tony Richardson's name.
The director's career was uneven after that 1963 high point.
But "Blue Sky," the film he completed shortly before he died of AIDS three years ago, turns out to be a wonderful posthumous triumph.
Put on the shelf after Orion Pictures' bankruptcy, "Blue Sky" is among Richardson's finest work, a film as strong and as flawed as its heroine.
Set in 1962, it is a powerful portrait of a family imploding.
Jessica Lange is the manic-depressive Carly Marshall, an Army officer's wife who can hardly tell her own life from Brigitte Bardot's.
Tommy Lee Jones is her husband, Hank, an engineer who studies the lethal effects of nuclear testing.


Mel Torme's Marathon: A Medley of 18 Songs, With Several Changes of Pace
Mel Torme is a singer who never tires of stringing songs into extended medleys.
The centerpiece of his new show at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street, Manhattan), where he opened a four-week engagement on Tuesday, is a tribute to the song lyrics of Johnny Mercer and one of the longest marathons he has yet concocted.
Beginning with a lightly swinging "Jeepers Creepers," the 18-song medley changes pace several times.
It accelerates for "Autumn Leaves" and "Day In, Day Out," turns dreamy for a five-song stretch that begins with "Moon River" and ends with "Early Autumn," and turns upbeat again for a finale that joins "Out of This World" to "That Old Black Magic."


For Children
'Africa: The Serengeti' and 'Yellowstone'
American Museum of Natural History  Central Park West at 77th Street  (212) 769-5650  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Through June 1995
Never stand in the way of a hippopotamus and its watering hole.
A lioness may hunt for prey but a lion is the first to eat it (the female has to wait until he's done).
A mother elephant and her daughter can remain close for up to 50 years (sign them up, Oprah).


Children's Drawings Tell Horror Of Rwanda in Colors of Crayons
In the back yard of the small red brick church, a large mound of earth and a few crosses mark the mass grave of more than 600 men, women and children, hacked and shot to death in the church in April.
The graveyard is the playground for 12-year-old Mutaganzwa, a thin, shy boy, and hundreds of other orphans.
He bears his own wound, a right hand left lifeless by a machete, and he speaks in clipped sentences of the massacre that he witnessed.


New Jersey Veterans Honor Missing Comrades


Players Map Strategy, Expecting to See a Cap
With the season over and the World Series gone until at least 1995, negotiators and lawyers for the striking players and owners yesterday began considering their strategies for the next phase of their dispute.
Neither side was prepared to telegraph its plans, but the major decision for the owners will be whether or not to declare an impasse in the bargaining and implement their salary cap proposal, while the players will decide if and when to file unfair labor practice charges against the clubs.


Understanding the Pope's Visit to Croatia
To the Editor:
The Serbian Orthodox Church's opposition to the Pope's visit to Belgrade and Sarajevo cannot be discussed without taking into account historical territorial pretensions by that church's leadership.
Omission of this evidence is surprising since you reported Sept. 6 that the leadership of the church strongly opposes the move of President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia to break relations with the Bosnian Serb leadership.


Game Aims at a Hasbro Monopoly
What do a tie, a nervous stomach and a piece of lumber have in common?
How about a duck, a debtor and Congress?
Or a turkey, a basketball and a Christmas stocking?
Now, what do those three questions have in common?


Far Away From Home, But Not Far From CNN
Some images linger from a recent vacation in Berlin:
Sad faces of children, often crying, fleeing places like Rwanda and Bosnia.
Commercials for contour pillows and shiatsu-massage devices.
Weather reports covering the globe in 150 seconds or less.
Larry King tenaciously pursuing every new tidbit in the O. J. Simpson case and badgering guests for assurances that this is really one helluva story.


To Battle Inequality Isn't 'Bad Manners'
To the Editor:
I applaud Sima Rabinovicz's decision to refuse the sexist demands of the Hasidic men who wanted her to give up her bus seat so that they could pray (news article, Sept. 9).


No Headline
We want to make prisons a place you don't want to go to.
It used to be you'd pick cotton, and people weren't too crazy about going to prison.
Nowadays, if you want to lead a life of luxury, sit around and watch TV, you can go to prison. -- CHARLES SMITH, Mississippi legislator.  [ 11:2. ] If inmates aren't kept busy when you take away all those activities, they will find something to do with their time, and it probably will not be in the best interest of staff trying to monitor their activities. -- MIKE QUINLAN, former head of the Federal Bureau of Prisons.  [ 1:1. ]


Bracing for Invasion As Troops Prepare
With a final diplomatic effort under way to remove the military leaders in Haiti and with the American military moving troops into place, Haitians began preparing for an invasion.
In the Haitian capital, Port-au-Prince, tension rose through the day.
By early evening, many civilians began to hear about the last-ditch diplomatic effort to persuade Haiti's military leaders to step down.


In 'Prince Igor,' a Lesson in Western Ways
For five singers from the former Soviet Union and its satellites, appearing in the New York City Opera production of "Prince Igor," Alexander Borodin's pageant of Russian nationalism and pagan temptations, carries the echo of once-learned lessons, lately discarded.
"We were taught, we were raised, to be poor," said Dejan Miladinovic, the director of the Belgrade National Opera, who is directing "Prince Igor." "And when nothing worked, we blamed the capitalists, the Americans, the wealthy people."


CHRONICLE
A magazine publisher's worst nightmare: TROY MASTERS, the publisher of a three-year-old weekly called N.Y.
Casting Magazine, which features casting notices for theater, film and other performing arts, was awakened at 4:30 A.M.
Tuesday with unsettling news.
"My distributor called to say, 'Troy, there's no logo on your magazine,' " Mr.
Masters said.
Indeed, there was not a hint of the publication's identity on the front page, which was adorned with a photograph of a bald, bespectacled Woody Harrelson from the film "Natural Born Killers."


CHRONICLE
THOMAS S. FOLEY, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, plans to appear in an opera tonight in Spokane, Wash.
But he won't be singing.
The Democratic leader and his wife, HEATHER, are to play walk-on roles in the Uptown Opera's performance of "Die Fledermaus," The Associated Press reported.


Espy Releases Documents On 135 Trips
Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, who is under scrutiny by an independent prosecutor, today apologized for being "inattentive to the appearance of impropriety" and made public five volumes of documents about the 135 trips he had made since taking office.
The records provide information about some trips that have been under scrutiny by Federal authorities, but they shed little new light on the question being examined by Federal authorities: whether Mr.
Espy illegally accepted transportation, lodging and sports tickets from agricultural interests like Tyson Foods, the nation's largest poultry processor.


The Ad Campaigns; Race for Governor: Cuomo Goes After Pataki
Candidate: Gov. Mario M. Cuomo
Producer: The Garth Group, New York


Kubek Retires From MSG
Tony Kubek, the MSG Network's tenacious and candid Yankee analyst, retired yesterday, giving up about $500,000 to return for a sixth season.
"There are so many things I want to catch up on," said Kubek, a former Yankee shortstop.
"After 41 years in this business, it's time. I want to be involved in things other than a marriage to baseball."
Kubek called games for 24 years, starting with NBC's "Game of the Week," where he worked with Joe Garagiola, Curt Gowdy and Bob Costas, and spent 13 years broadcasting with the Toronto Blue Jays.


Redskins Offer Something Special
The Giants were relieved today when kicker David Treadwell took the practice field.
Treadwell has recovered from back spasms that sidelined him Thursday and is expected to play Sunday against the visiting Washington Redskins.
The Giants' kicking game is coming off a down Sunday, and they must contend with the Redskins' special teams, which are hot.
One of the big reasons Washington was able to hammer New Orleans, 38-24, last week was the play of Brian Mitchell, a punt and kickoff returner.
Mitchell, a five-year veteran out of Southwestern Louisiana, returned a punt 76 yards for a touchdown and also raced 86 yards with a kickoff to set up another score.
In all, Mitchell had 225 yards in returns.
He was named the National Football Conference's special teams player of the week.
What worries the Giants is how Mitchell was untouched on his touchdown run and on the kickoff return.
No Saints player got a hand on him until the end of the play.
Whether the Saints' special teams are that bad or the Redskins' that good remains to be seen.
Giants Coach Dan Reeves says he thinks he knows the answer: Washington is that good.
Reeves gives a lot of the credit to the Redskins' special teams coach, Pete Rodriguez, who is considered to be one of the best in the business.
Everywhere Rodriguez has coached, the special teams have always been special.
In 1992, when he was with the Cardinals, the special teams were always rated No. 1 or among the best in the National Football League.
That season, he was named special teams coach of the year by the N.F.L.
Under Rodriguez, punter Rich Camarillo and returner Johnny Bailey made the Pro Bowl.
When Rodriguez was with the Raiders in 1988-89, Tim Brown made the Pro Bowl by leading the league in kickoff returns.
The Raiders were also among the top three in both kickoff returns and punt coverage.
"Pete Rodriguez does a super job," said Reeves.
"He was great when he was in Phoenix and now he does a great job.
"Norv Turner is a big part of that, too," Reeves added about the Redskins' first-year head coach and former Cowboys assistant, "because Dallas had great special teams. Our guys have to match that."
Against the Cardinals, Giants punter Mike Horan averaged just 30.6 yards and one attempt was blocked.
The left-footed punter probably had one of his poorest performances in his 11-year career.
"I've been around Mike now for a lot of years," said Reeves, who coached Horan in Denver for eight years before bringing him to the Giants last season.
"That's the worst night he ever had kicking the football. He's bounced back in the past and we expect him to bounce back again." Players Go, but Rivalries Stay
Despite the massive player movement brought about by free agency, rivalries still remain strong.
The Redskins and the Giants will probably be that way no matter which players are on the field.
Dan Reeves said the reason is simple.
"I think my experience is that with teams competing for a division, the rivalry just gets bigger," said the Giants coach.
The Giants have played the Redskins more times (122 regular-season meetings) than any other opponent, followed by Philadelphia (119) and Arizona (103).
The Giants and the Redskins have played each other at least twice a season since 1932 except in 1967 and 1969 when the two teams met once.
Reeves knows something about this rivalry and also about the Giants-Dallas rivalry when he was a player with the Cowboys.
Reeves was asked what he thought about the Giants going back to their old uniforms on Sunday, as part of the N.F.L.'s Throwbacks Weekend.
The outfit features the "NY" on the helmets, instead of "Giants."
"We used to beat them bad when they had those uniforms," said Reeves.
Good Luck With the Chuck
Maybe the biggest rules change to affect teams is the 5-yard chuck, where defensive backs cannot touch a wide receiver 5 yards past the line of scrimmage.
The Giants have responded by moving their defensive backs closer to the line of scrimmage and telling them to make sure they get a hand on the receiver within the first 5 yards to disrupt the pattern.


Tax Breaks In Hartford If Cars Use Clean Fuel
Two months ago, Connecticut staked out a new position among states with air pollution problems: it opened up its checkbook.
Under a new law that energy experts say is only the second in the nation, Connecticut announced that any commercial fleet operator that wanted to convert vehicles from ozone-spewing gasoline to cleaner fuels like natural gas or electricity would get a big tax break.
For every dollar spent on conversion or on building alternative fueling stations, fleet owners could deduct 50 cents from their corporate profits tax.
After the conversion, the new fuel would be exempted from the 31-cents-a-gallon state fuel tax.


Haitians Hunker Down As U.S. Warships Near
With an American armada sailing toward them and radio stations rebroadcasting President Clinton's stern warning, residents of the Haitian capital began preparing with relief and dread today for a long-threatened invasion.
Tension and nervousness rose through the afternoon as news broadcasts by commercial radio stations here repeatedly focused on Mr.
Clinton's speech on Thursday night warning that the United States would invade unless leaders of Haiti's military junta immediately stepped down.
Haitians who could afford to do so flocked to grocery stores or outdoor markets to stock up on food, water and charcoal, and vendors of black-market gasoline seemed busier than usual.


Richard A. Heyman Dies at 59; One of First Openly Gay Mayors
Richard A. Heyman, a former Mayor of Key West, Fla., who was among the first openly gay Americans to be elected to public office, died on Friday.
He was 59 and lived in Key West.
He died of pneumonia that was brought on by AIDS, said his former assistant, June Keith.


Sweden's Rightist Coalition Seen as Facing Defeat
As Sweden prepares for a national election on Sunday, the message from every major public opinion survey seems clear: Prime Minister Carl Bildt's tenure as the head of the country's first rightist coalition Government in decades appears to be entering its final days.
His four-party coalition has been a casualty not only of Sweden's economic crisis -- double-digit interest rates and Europe's most crippling budget deficit -- but also of nostalgia among voters for the salad days of the nation's cradle-to-grave welfare system.
Since he took power in 1991, Mr.
Bildt's reformist zeal has been aimed at reducing many of those benefits, as a way to trim soaring Government expenditures.


AVON JOINING BETTERWARE OF BRITAIN IN VENTURE
Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it would form joint ventures with Betterware P.L.C. of Britain in North and South America to sell Betterware's housewares directly to consumers through local independent distributors.
Betterware, based in Birmingham, England, contracts third parties to make its houseware products, more than half of which are exclusive designs.
It has recently expanded into European markets, including France, Spain and Germany.
Avon, the world's leading direct seller of beauty products, said the companies would form their first venture in a major Latin American market by the third quarter of 1995.
Avon stock was off 87.5 cents yesterday, to $59.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Marshall Sprague, Western Author, 85
Marshall Sprague, who wrote books about the American West, died last Friday at St.
Francis Hospital in Colorado Springs, his hometown.
He was 85.
He had had a long illness, said his wife, the former Edna Jane Ailes.


Hotel Workers Lift Strike Threat
Just five hours before a 6 P.M. deadline yesterday, Atlantic City hotel operators and union negotiators reached a tentative labor agreement, lifting the threat of a strike that could have halted the annual boardwalk parade of contestants in the Miss America pageant.
If the 11,500 waiters, bartenders and housekeepers had gone on strike, the Miss America Organization had planned to cancel the Friday night parade because of its concern that demonstrations by striking hotel workers might turn violent.


Redskins Offer Something Special
The Giants were relieved today when kicker David Treadwell took the practice field.
Treadwell has recovered from back spasms that sidelined him Thursday and is expected to play Sunday against the visiting Washington Redskins.
The Giants' kicking game is coming off a down Sunday, and they must contend with the Redskins' special teams, which are hot.
One of the big reasons Washington was able to hammer New Orleans, 38-24, last week was the play of Brian Mitchell, a punt and kickoff returner.
Mitchell, a five-year veteran out of Southwestern Louisiana, returned a punt 76 yards for a touchdown and also raced 86 yards with a kickoff to set up another score.
In all, Mitchell had 225 yards in returns.
He was named the National Football Conference's special teams player of the week.
What worries the Giants is how Mitchell was untouched on his touchdown run and on the kickoff return.
No Saints player got a hand on him until the end of the play.
Whether the Saints' special teams are that bad or the Redskins' that good remains to be seen.
Giants Coach Dan Reeves says he thinks he knows the answer: Washington is that good.
Reeves gives a lot of the credit to the Redskins' special teams coach, Pete Rodriguez, who is considered to be one of the best in the business.
Everywhere Rodriguez has coached, the special teams have always been special.
In 1992, when he was with the Cardinals, the special teams were always rated No. 1 or among the best in the National Football League.
That season, he was named special teams coach of the year by the N.F.L.
Under Rodriguez, punter Rich Camarillo and returner Johnny Bailey made the Pro Bowl.
When Rodriguez was with the Raiders in 1988-89, Tim Brown made the Pro Bowl by leading the league in kickoff returns.
The Raiders were also among the top three in both kickoff returns and punt coverage.
"Pete Rodriguez does a super job," said Reeves.
"He was great when he was in Phoenix and now he does a great job.
"Norv Turner is a big part of that, too," Reeves added about the Redskins' first-year head coach and former Cowboys assistant, "because Dallas had great special teams. Our guys have to match that."
Against the Cardinals, Giants punter Mike Horan averaged just 30.6 yards and one attempt was blocked.
The left-footed punter probably had one of his poorest performances in his 11-year career.
"I've been around Mike now for a lot of years," said Reeves, who coached Horan in Denver for eight years before bringing him to the Giants last season.
"That's the worst night he ever had kicking the football. He's bounced back in the past and we expect him to bounce back again." Players Go, but Rivalries Stay
Despite the massive player movement brought about by free agency, rivalries still remain strong.
The Redskins and the Giants will probably be that way no matter which players are on the field.
Dan Reeves said the reason is simple.
"I think my experience is that with teams competing for a division, the rivalry just gets bigger," said the Giants coach.
The Giants have played the Redskins more times (122 regular-season meetings) than any other opponent, followed by Philadelphia (119) and Arizona (103).
The Giants and the Redskins have played each other at least twice a season since 1932 except in 1967 and 1969 when the two teams met once.
Reeves knows something about this rivalry and also about the Giants-Dallas rivalry when he was a player with the Cowboys.
Reeves was asked what he thought about the Giants going back to their old uniforms on Sunday, as part of the N.F.L.'s Throwbacks Weekend.
The outfit features the "NY" on the helmets, instead of "Giants."
"We used to beat them bad when they had those uniforms," said Reeves.
Good Luck With the Chuck
Maybe the biggest rules change to affect teams is the 5-yard chuck, where defensive backs cannot touch a wide receiver 5 yards past the line of scrimmage.
The Giants have responded by moving their defensive backs closer to the line of scrimmage and telling them to make sure they get a hand on the receiver within the first 5 yards to disrupt the pattern.


Stocks and Bonds Plunge on Inflation Specter
In 30 minutes of trading frenzy, the stock and bond markets plunged yesterday morning in response to a Government economic report that raised the specter of accelerating inflation.
Both markets calmed by 10 A.M., but the damage was done.
As bond prices dropped, the yield on the benchmark 30-year bond, which moves in the opposite direction, jumped to 7.77 percent, the highest since the end of June 1992 and up from 7.63 percent on Thursday.
The spurt in the yield also pushed it out of a trading range it had been in since July.


Chaparral Steel Co.(CSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Britain Pledges Referendum If Ulster Status Is to Change
In a move intended to calm the fears of Protestants in Northern Ireland, the British Government promised today that it would hold a referendum in the province on any proposals to change its constitutional status as part of Britain.
At the same time, in a careful balancing act, the Government announced that it was immediately lifting a six-year ban that prevented the voices of representatives of Sinn Fein, the political arm of the Irish Republican Army, and of other proscribed organizations from being broadcast inside Britain.


Retrial in Sullivan vs. N.F.L.
A Federal appeals court in Boston yesterday ordered a new trial in a $51 million lawsuit that the former New England Patriots owner WILLIAM H. SULLIVAN won against the National Football League.
The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit ruled that a second trial is necessary because of prejudicial errors made in the original trial.
Chief among the errors, the court said, was a judge's failure to tell the jury that Sullivan had been involved in developing the ownership rules he later contested in court. (AP)


Liberia's War Refugees Now United in Misery
Crouching by his tent under a fine drizzle, with the thick smoke of cooking fires stinging his eyes, the 65-year-old Liberian was awaiting news, as he has every day for the last six months, of some change that could help his family.
Although armed factions from his violence-wracked country heldpeace talks this month at a lakeside resort only 90 miles from here, the Liberian patriarch, James K. Flomo, expected little from them.


Bridge
Players from about 65 countries converged on this city today, ready for battle in the World Bridge Federation Championships, which will last two weeks.
The opening event, on Saturday, will be the World Mixed Pairs, lasting two days.
Subsequently, the main focus will be on the Rosenblum Open Teams and the World Open Pairs, but there will also be parallel events for Women's Teams, Women's Pairs, Senior Teams and Senior Pairs.


Owner Loses Zoning Fight
Robert Mnuchin, a onetime power on Wall Street, has lost a battle on Main Street: the Zoning Board of Appeals of Washington, Conn., has refused to grant a variance for his new home, which exceeds the town's 35-foot height limit by six feet.
Mr.
Mnuchin, a retired former partner in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, said he did not know what he and his wife, Adriana, would do now.


Irvan Moved Nearer to Home
ERNIE IRVAN, the stock car driver who was injured last month when his car slammed into a concrete wall during a practice session, was flown to a North Carolina hospital yesterday to continue his rehabilitation closer to home, hospital officials said.
Irvan was moved from St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital, where he has been since his Aug. 20 accident at Michigan International Speedway, to the Charlotte Institute of Rehabilitation. (AP)


Texas Industries(TXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Why He Won the Medal
To the Editor:
The identification of Robert K. Merton, the first sociologist to win the National Medal of Science (news article, Sept. 9), may have puzzled many readers.
You said he "studies scientists and is best known for creating the focus interview for marketing purposes."
Professor Merton is best known among scientists as the founder of the sociology of science.
His researches in that field of study were undoubtedly the primary reasons for his award.
His theoretical work was enormously influential following World War II.
He is well known for "On the Shoulders of Giants," a witty, learned exploration of the origins of that phrase.
The title of his essay "The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy" has become a commonly used phrase.


Irwin's Troops Carry the Day on Day 1 of Presidents Cup
A day that began thick with fog and uncertainty quickly snapped into vivid focus on the first day of the inaugural Presidents Cup.
On the shores of Lake Manassas, just down the road from Bull Run, the International squad ran headlong into a United States golfing army today.
If you listened hard enough, you could almost hear the International captain, David Graham, surveying his side's losses on the Robert Trent Jones Golf Club, shaking his head and saying something like: "Look at Irwin's brigade! It stands there like a stone wall!"


TOMAHAWK MISSILE PROGRAM GOES TO GM HUGHES
The Navy selected the missiles division of GM Hughes Electronics yesterday over the McDonnell Douglas Corporation to be the sole supplier for the Tomahawk missile program into the next century.
The Navy plans to buy almost 1,100 Tomahawks, at a cost of nearly $1.5 billion, by the end of the decade.
Today, it allocated $130.3 million to Hughes to begin work on the program, which is expected to continue to the year 2000.
In addition, the Navy awarded $226.5 million to Hughes to begin development work on a long-term program to upgrade the Tomahawk.


Turning the Village Into a Festival of Jazz
Every night of the week, 52 weeks of the year, Greenwich Village offers enough jazz to create a festival.
A 15-minute walk from the Village Vanguard on Seventh Avenue will get you to Bradley's, where the best of the young musicians, along with some brilliant older ones, congregate.
The Blue Note, just a few minutes away, offers concert-level headliners in an intimate club, and Sweet Basil has adventurous music, along with the irrepressible Doc Cheatham.
New Yorkers take this abundance for granted.
Twelve years ago, the Dewar's Greenwich Village Jazz Festival tried to rectify this blase attitude with an ambitious plan to turn the Village into a festival, selling passes that offered a discount for admission to most of the clubs.
In 1987, that attempt fell apart.
On Monday, the festival will start again.
The festival's existence, along with its new sponsorship, augurs well for jazz.


TCBY Enterprises Inc.(TBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


HUGHES AIRCRAFT PLANS SEVERAL PROJECTS IN CHINA
The Hughes Aircraft Company said yesterday that it had developed plans for several leading-edge technology projects in China, including electrification of the nation's huge public bus system.
Hughes signed an agreement yesterday to begin research on the project to provide electrical motors for the buses.
The company is also hoping to establish a joint venture to set up mobile satellite communications systems to improve China's still-rudimentary telecommunications systems, Michael Armstrong, the chairman of Hughes Aircraft, said in Beijing.


A Guitarist Who Knows What to Play
Dave Edmunds knows what he likes in a rock song: blues and country roots, a few basic chords, clever lyrics and room for a twisting guitar solo.
Now and then, he writes a song of his own, too.
He sees rock in terms of classicist virtues: concision, respect for form and a sense of tradition.
By now, the Welsh guitarist embodies a tradition himself: the 1960's British rocker who never lost his affection for American rock-and-roll.
At Tramps on Thursday night, he culled his long career for sure-fire songs: Smiley Lewis's hit "I Hear You Knockin'," George Jones's hit "The Race Is On," Chuck Berry's "Sweet Little Rock-and-Roller," Nick Lowe's "I Knew the Bride," Elvis Costello's "Girls Talk" and Graham Parker's "Crawling From the Wreckage," each one a gem.
There were also songs from his new album, "Plugged In" (Pyramid/ Rhino), that were somewhat more disillusioned: "Up the ladder, down the chute, what a game," he sang.


Knicks Lose Harper to Bulls
Ron Harper, who had been pursued by the Knicks, signed with the Chicago Bulls last night.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed.
The Knicks, who felt they had a good chance of signing the 6-foot-6-inch free-agent guard, offered $1.25 million, a salary which was created when they did not re-sign Rolando Blackman.
The Knicks could turn their attention to Kevin Gamble and Duane Ferrell, but neither possess the scoring punch of Harper.


So, You Won the Lottery, Now What?
Jess S. Razo, a retired postal worker, hit the jackpot, $6.4 million in the California Super Lotto.
"It took six months to a year to comprehend and believe I had really won," he said.
But the first installment quickly slipped through his fingers.
Taxes, homes and vacations took big bites.
And offers came pouring in to sell or borrow against future installments.
"You have to take care or you can go broke," Mr.
Razo said.
"People are always trying to scam from you."


DART FINANCIAL INCREASES ITS STAKE IN SALOMON
The Dart Financial Corporation has increased its stake in the New York investment bank Salomon Inc. to 8.4 percent of the common shares outstanding, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.
Dart Financial, based in Mason, Mich., now holds 8.85 million Salomon shares, worth about $364 million.
Dart Financial and funds associated with it spent about $52.5 million to buy 1.25 million Salomon shares between Aug. 8 and Sept. 14, the filing said.
Dart Financial is an arm of the Dart Container Corporation of Sarasota, Fla., a maker of polystyrene cups and plastic cutlery.


As Classes Resume After a Shooting, the Subject Is Safety
The debate was about guns and violence, safety and education yesterday morning on the sidewalks outside Sheepshead Bay High School in Brooklyn, where one student shot another earlier this week.
Some students talked about fear and distrust, unreported incidents, security guards carrying weapons.
Others, with level-headed relativism, volunteered that the school was good enough, certainly safer than others they had attended.


From the Right, Some Words of Restraint
Two prominent Republicans who are popular with religious conservatives appealed to the party today not to dwell heavily on emotional social issues like homosexuality.
Former Vice President Dan Quayle, who has been a favorite of religious conservatives because of his emphasis on family values, condemned journalists for portraying the Christian right as intolerant.


Making Hard Time Harder, States Cut Jail TV and Sports
As politicians around the country try to keep pace with the public's fury at criminals, and crime shows few signs of abating, state and county officials are cracking down on a new target: lawbreakers already behind bars.
From California to Florida, elected officials have proposed to make prison life harsher than it has been in years, and in some cases, they have succeeded.
On the table or already on the books are edicts taking away televisions, tennis and basketball courts, weight rooms, pornography and more.


New York Haitians Ambivalent Over Force
From the patrons in Carl's Barber Shop in Flatbush to Le Bistrot, a restaurant in Park Slope, the consensus in Brooklyn's large Haitian community seems to be that Haiti's military leaders must go.
But not everyone thinks an invasion is a good idea.
"It will be like the second coming of God," said Pierre Norgaisse, holding forth at the barbershop on the prospect of an invasion to restore Haiti's elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
"The current regime has destroyed the country. Anything is better than them."


Big Brother Is Watching As 9-Month Sail Starts
The empty plastic bottles were lined up like ducks in a row at the docks here.
A boat hand used a hose to fill the jugs with fresh water, a staple for the 19 solo sailors who are about to leave Saturday on the first leg of their nine-month yacht race around the world, the BOC Challenge.
The race begins here at noon.
For the next 27,000 miles of ocean passage, it will be a life of water, water everywhere and, except for the occasional desalinator, only bottled water to drink.
But food and liquid refreshment are the least of their worries.
With piles of freeze-dried food and cans of ham and beans stowed below decks, meals take a low priority.


Music Notes
Glass Wins
Did you notice how a commercial for the Acura that ran early this year had music that sounded a lot like Philip Glass?
Mr.
Glass did.
In fact, the composer thought the commercial's soundtrack music not only appropriated elements of his style but also was a direct copy of "Opening," the first piece on his "Glassworks" album.
So he hired a lawyer and threatened to sue the American Honda Motor Company and its advertising agency, Ketchum Communications.
After several months of wrangling, the case was settled out of court, with Acura withdrawing the commercial and paying Mr.
Glass a sum that both sides agreed not to disclose.


Microsoft to Introduce New Windows NT
The Microsoft Corporation plans to renew its bid to become a big player in the network computing software market on Monday by introducing a new version of its Windows NT.
While Microsoft dominates software for individual personal computers, it has never been big in software that links personal computers into large networks and connects those webs with big computers like I.B.M.'s mainframes.


Giuliani Signs Police Merger Memorandum
With the conditional approval of the Federal Government, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani signed a memorandum of understanding yesterday with the New York City Housing Authority, setting the terms for a merger of the housing police and the New York City Police Department.
The agreement was reached several days after the housing authority received a letter from Joseph Shuldiner, an assistant secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, granting "conditional agreement" for the move, subject to the results of a public hearing.
The agency provides about $75 million a year to the housing authority.


Barry Says Whites in Capital Must 'Reach Back' to Him to Close Racial Gap
After a successful mayoral primary campaign in which he often wore clothes to suit the setting -- African kente cloth on some days, business suits on others -- Marion S. Barry Jr. appeared at a news conference this afternoon in a colorful Hawaiian-style shirt.
Was this an olive branch to white voters, who largely abandoned him on Tuesday in the Democratic primary, which Mr.
Barry won with wide support from black voters?


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about shopping on East Ninth Street credited the design of the pamphlet "Shop Guide '94: East Ninth Street" incorrectly.
It was by Harriet Spear, not by the street's shopkeepers.
The article also misstated the business of one shop, Cobblestones.
It carries collectibles and home furnishings, not stationery.


Corrections
An article in some copies on Wednesday about the New York primary for governor misstated the number of terms the Republican nominee, George E. Pataki, has served in the State Senate.
He is in his first term, not his second.


Bargemusic With Mozart, Schumann and Chausson
It is easy to imagine, during a Bargemusic concert of chamber music under the Brooklyn Bridge in Brooklyn Heights, that you are actually sitting in a chamber: a living room, perhaps, with a low-slung but panoramic view of the financial ramparts of lower Manhattan.
In fact, it is easy to imagine all sorts of things in the slightly giddy glow induced by the gentle rocking of the moored boat: might there, for example, be another group playing a Mozart trio on that fast-moving barge headed up the East River? (Oops! Suddenly the rocking is less gentle.)
Well, O.K., so it was not always easy to keep the mind focused on Mozart's Piano Trio in C (K. 548).
In current wisdom, hearing Mozart makes you smarter, as listeners were reminded by the cellist, Ronald Thomas; but perhaps not this piece, which is laid out from beginning to end for the piano, with the strings brought in as a mere afterthought.


CHRONICLE
It was the kind of quandary most people give no thought to until they must: TOUKIE SMITH, the restaurateur and actress, came home at 4 A.M.
Tuesday to find her beloved English bulldog Rufus had died.
What to do?
"I was hysterical," she said.
"I loved him more than some human beings. He was part of my family." In fact, the 9 1/2-year-old Rufus had belonged to Ms.
Smith's brother Willi Smith, the designer, who died in 1987.


Back to the Essentials With 2 Young Troupes
The Elizabethans of London may have had short life spans and lousy teeth, but it's hard not to envy them their chance to see Shakespeare with virgin eyes.
In the succeeding centuries, every play in the canon has acquired such a weight of interpretive baggage that most new productions twist themselves into pretzels trying to find a fresh slant.
Even at their most effective, such stagings seem to be shouting, Shakespeare is exciting!
Shakespeare is relevant!
Well, yes, but you don't always need post-modern exclamation points to say it.
It is a relief to come across the occasional bare-bones production that reminds us that Shakespeare was, on his own unvarnished terms, a crackerjack storyteller and master entertainer.


To Battle Inequality Isn't 'Bad Manners'
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 9 news article about Sima Rabinovicz, the "Jewish Rosa Parks," who refused to give up her seat on a Monsey Trails bus to a male rider to conduct his prayers, quotes Kevin J. Hasson, head of the legal group representing the bus company: "Not to move is deplorably bad manners." Nonsense.
Motive is everything.
The driver asked her to move because she is a woman.
In denying housing, jobs or public accommodations, if the motive is race, religion, sex or other discriminatory ground, it is illegal.


NEWS SUMMARY
Half of the country's people are believed to be living in exile, and many feel they are forgotten by the outside world.  3  SOUTH KOREAN CRACKDOWN  The South Korean Government has been cracking down on leftists at the very time when the death of the longtime leader in Communist North Korea would seem to improve the prospects of peace.  3  U.S.
But as the campaign for governor got under way in earnest, the commercials cut straight to the chin.  1  Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 13-19  Rare opportunity for Eastern European singers.13  Gish Prize goes to Frank Gehry.  16  Jazz festival to begin.  18  Theater: Critic's Notebook 13  Music: Dave Edmunds.  18  Bargemusic.  19  Television: Critic's Notebook 49  Obituaries 12  Richard A. Heyman, former Mayor of Key West, Florida.
Dr. Harry Most, authority on tropical diseases.
Dolly Haas, actress.
Sports 29-34  Baseball: Green wants Franco but not Gooden.  29  Football: Jets' Jones hurting again.  29  Horse Racing: Devil His Due has tax respite for Woodward.  29  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Guns in the schools.
An agency in trouble.
New York's Mystery General.
Healthy turmoil in Connecticut.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: The face-saving invasion.
Russell Baker: A most delicate matter.
Peter W. Rodman: Leaping into Haiti without a safety net.
Daniel Yankelovich: What polls say -- and what they mean.
Bridge 18 Chronicle 24 Crossword 16


Strategy and Durability: Twin Keys to Single Sculls
Xeno Mueller, a cocky young oarsman, will be saying to himself, "Economic strokes, economic strokes; be efficient, be efficient," during his heavyweight single sculls race Saturday at the world rowing championships.
Unlike college races, in which the eight-oared crews sprint over the 2,000-meter course, the single sculls is a test of strategy and durability.
Mueller's plan, according to his coach, Dumermuth Martin, will be to stay alert in the first 500 meters and watch the other five opponents.
"Because he won't know who will go out first," said Martin.
"Then in the middle of the race, he must attack."


Show Us Your Charity
To the Editor:
As Election Day nears, candidates will self-extol their generosity toward the disadvantaged and underprivileged, their proposals and votes for farm subsidies, student loans and aid for urban problems.


53 Japanese Companies Sued By U.S. Over Bid Procedures
The United States Government, which has long complained about the unfairness of bidding procedures for construction projects in Japan, struck back today by filing a lawsuit against 53 Japanese companies, charging them with colluding on bids for work at an American military base here.
Washington is demanding compensation of 544 million yen, or about $5.4 million, saying that the bid-rigging inflated the prices the United States had to pay for work at the naval base in Atsugi, southwest of Tokyo.
The lawsuit, filed in Tokyo District Court, cites 77 specific contracts awarded between early 1984 and early 1990.


Executive Changes
BILLY BLUES FOOD CORP., Houston, a barbecue restaurant operator, named Angelo Pitillo president and chief operating officer.


Secured Credit Cards Are Attracting Savers
LOOKING for a high rate of return on their savings, some people with stellar credit histories are using what has been known as the credit card of last resort.
The cards, called secured credit cards, were designed for people with a bad credit record (or none at all) who failed to qualify for a conventional card.
For a minimum deposit, generally $300 to $500, a Visa or Mastercard is issued with a matching line of credit.


PRICE CUTS ON DESKTOP PC'S ARE PUT AT 20%
Joining a wave of other personal computer makers, the Hewlett-Packard Company said yesterday that it would cut prices on its line of desktop PC's by as much as 20 percent.
The cuts, affecting the HP Vectra line, range from 5 percent at the low end of the line to as much as 20 percent on higher-end models.
A low-end Vectra, for example, will sell for about $1,380, almost 12 percent less than a similarly structured Value Point from I.B.M..


Statistics Will Be Final
The American and National Leagues announced yesterday that the player and team statistics, as well as team records, achieved before the baseball season ended on Aug. 12 would be the final, unofficial statistics for the 1994 season.


Volatility Rules Aggressive Growth Group
The volatility of aggressive growth funds can be glimpsed in the divergence of one-year returns of the three-year leaders.
But even the one-year results mask the funds' roller-coaster ride in recent months, said John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds.
The group surged in the first quarter, only to "take a pretty good beating" in the second quarter, he said.
With the market rally of recent weeks, they are coming back.


SALE ENVISIONED FOR FLEET OF 1,465 RAIL CARS
A unit of the Chrysler Corporation said yesterday that it was planning to sell its fleet of 1,465 railroad cars.
The Chrysler Capital Fund Management Corporation, based in Stamford, Conn., hired the Duff &amp; Phelps Capital Markets Company to advise in the sale, which includes freight cars and auto racks owned by Chrysler Capital Income Partners L.P.
The sale is being considered "as the result of the current strong market for existing rail equipment" and favorable prices, the company said.


Green's Vision for Mets' Future Is Missing Gooden
Dallas Green is not ready to say goodbye to John Franco.
He wants Franco, a free agent, back in the Mets' bullpen next season.
But forget about the rest of the Mets' free agent crop.
Green sees little reason to re-sign Pete Smith.
Or Luis Rivera.
Or Mike Maddux.


Skyline Corp.(SKY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Topps Co.(TOPP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Understanding the Pope's Visit to Croatia; Historical Amnesia
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration's main rationale for not lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia is that doing so unilaterally would undermine adherence to sanctions against aggressors and dictators elsewhere.
But Bosnia is the only case where punitive sanctions are being applied against the victim.
The embargo is not without precedent.
In October 1935, the United States imposed an arms embargo against both Italy and Ethiopia (the well-armed aggressor and the under-armed victim).
This Presidential action, supported by Congress, was supposed to impede the spread of war.
Instead, it encouraged aggression, first in Spain and then Germany.
The arms embargo on Ethiopia, and related failed policies, led to the loss of half a million American lives within the decade.


Sports of The Times; Game Stays; Ballplayers Come and Go
MARGE SCHOTT is right, of course: Ardent fans, hungry for baseball, will come -- first in trickles, then in droves -- to see a mixture of minor and major leaguers play baseball next spring.
Schott, who owns the Reds, and Peter Angelos, who owns the Orioles, refused to sign a historic resolution on Wednesday that ended the major league baseball season.
Angelos agreed with the decision to end the season, but objected to the resolution's wording.


Congress Weighs the Political Profit and Loss
Congress had planned to vote Monday on whether the President must seek its approval before invading Haiti, but if a diplomatic settlement is reached over the weekend, such a vote may not be necessary.
The Administration has been trying to avoid such a vote because of the overwhelming sentiment in Congress against an invasion.


U.S.-German Group Plans an American Academy for Berlin
A group of prominent Americans and Germans has announced plans to build an American Academy here, part of a web of new projects intended to assure that this city's ties to the United States do not weaken over the years ahead.
The academy, which is to open in 1996, would be a center for scholars from the United States, Germany and Central Europe.
Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, and Richard von Weizsacker, the former President of Germany, are the honorary chairmen.


Rooneys Consider Pirate Bid
The Rooney family is among 10 potential buyers for the Pittsburgh Pirates, a list to be cut to two or three finalists, Mayor TOM MURPHY of Pittsburgh said yesterday.
The Rooneys, Steelers' owners for nearly 60 years, have hired an investment firm to analyze the Pirates' financial records.
ART ROONEY 2d, a prominent Pittsburgh lawyer and DAN ROONEY's heir apparent as the Steelers' president, has confirmed family interest. (AP)


Jordan's New Career Continues
MICHAEL JORDAN will report to the Chicago White Sox's Florida instructional league team in Sarasota on Sept. 23, the team said yesterday.
The White Sox are awaiting word from the Arizona Fall League on whether the former pro basketball superstar, who hit .202 with 51 runs batted in and 30 stolen bases for Birmingham in the Class AA Southern League this season, will be allowed to play. (AP)


Calpers Chooses a Less Adversarial Voice
The huge California pension agency, which has been a prime force putting pressure on corporations in recent years to improve their financial performance, appears likely to become less active on that front.
Today the California Public Employees' Retirement System, also known as Calpers, named a new chief executive, James E. Burton, a top aide to several former California politicians.
In an interview, Mr.
Burton said the fund's role as corporate governance watchdog would become a less adversarial, less public one in keeping with the strategy adopted by the fund and his predecessor of the last two years.


Blount Inc.(BLT.B,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Tortuous Course To Equal Schools; Financing Remains a Roadblock
The new performing- and visual-arts center at Elizabeth High School opened last week, featuring walls freshly painted in pale peach and plenty of modern equipment for young musicians, dancers and actors.
There is a dance studio lined with mirrors and electronic pianos in the music lab that are linked to computers, allowing composition on software.
The new center is the first jewel of an ambitious scheme by the principal, Michael J. Weber, to decentralize the sprawling high school and divide its 4,400 students among seven small theme academies that cover specialties like law, medicine and business.


CKE Restaurants Inc.(CKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15


In Korea, Fears of North Bring Crackdown on Left
There is great anticipation of Saturday night's premiere of one of South Korea's most expensive films, "The Taebaek Mountains," the movie version of a best-selling novel.
But what in most countries would be an occasion to admire stars and starlets has been transformed into a dramatization of the growing anxieties over the possible opening of North Korea.
Right-wing groups have threatened to bomb the theaters that show the film, which takes a sympathetic look at a band of Communist guerrillas before and during the Korean War, and the police have sought an indictment of the novel's writer, Cho Jung Rae, on charges that his 10-volume epic is pro-Communist.


Denmark's Tall Ship Finds a Way to Duck


Music Notes
Glass Wins
Did you notice how a commercial for the Acura that ran early this year had music that sounded a lot like Philip Glass?
Mr.
Glass did.
In fact, the composer thought the commercial's soundtrack music not only appropriated elements of his style but also was a direct copy of "Opening," the first piece on his "Glassworks" album.
So he hired a lawyer and threatened to sue the American Honda Motor Company and its advertising agency, Ketchum Communications.
After several months of wrangling, the case was settled out of court, with Acura withdrawing the commercial and paying Mr.
Glass a sum that both sides agreed not to disclose.


Rangers Prevail on Ice; a Draw So Far in the Boardrooms
While the Rangers and the Devils staged a Stanley Cup playoff revival in an exhibition game at Madison Square Garden last night, two more important contests took place in verbal arenas.
One occurred uptown, between two groups over a conference table; the other took place upstairs, with an executive talking by telephone to the father of a missing captain.
The only certain outcome came in the game, a rather spirited one for an exhibition between two teams that played seven games in the Eastern Conference finals last spring while the Rangers were en route to the Stanley Cup.
The Rangers prevailed, 4-2, for their second victory in two preseason games.
Petr Nedved scored two goals for the Rangers; Aleksei Kovalev and Steve Larmer added the others.
The Devils got goals from Randy McKay and Stephane Richer.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Comes Back Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic overcame a tantrum and struggled to a 3-6, 6-2, 6-2 victory over Alex Corretja of Spain yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Romanian Open in Bucharest.
Ivanisevic threw his racquet several times during the first set, but regained his composure and used his service and powerful left-handed shots to beat Corretja.
Ivanisevic, the defending champion, will meet Renzo Furlan of Italy today at the Progresul clay arena. (AP) GOLF Albus and Powell Lead Jim Albus and Jimmy Powell each shot six-under-par 66's yesterday to share the opening-round lead in the $550,000 Bank One Classic in Lexington, Ky.
Albus shot 33's on both nines and Powell followed a front-nine 31 with a 35 over the 6,760-yard Kearney Hill Links. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.79
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.58
4.56
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.01
4.93
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.49
7.33
5.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.63
6.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.47
7.03
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.52
6.44
5.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Werner Enterprises Inc.(WERN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


If Churches Play Politics, Let Them Pay Taxes; Keep Commandments
To the Editor:
In "Population Meeting Is Really About Knowledge" (letter, Sept. 8), Bishop Richard F. Grein of the Episcopal Church of New York states, "The church must refrain from inhibiting individuals from making their own moral choices." That is not what the textbook for Religion 101 teaches.
In both the Old and New Testaments it is crystal clear that we must obey the Ten Commandments, whether we like it or not.
Christ never hesitated to "inhibit" people.
Not one of the Gospels gives us the freedom to make "our own moral choices." The "Big Ten" are not mere suggestions or recommendations.
They are the most absolute commands from God.
"If you love me," Christ insisted, "keep my commandments."


Transactions
Auto Racing INDY RACING LEAGUE -- Named Jerome Hauer commissioner.
Baseball American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Announced a two-year working agreement with Trenton of the Eastern League.
National League FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed a four-year working agreement with Charlotte of the International League.
Fired Vada Pinson, first base coach; Frank Reberger, pitching coach; and Bob McClure, bullpen coach.
Retained Cookie Rojas, third base coach.
Named Rusty Kuntz first base and outfield coach and Joe Breeden coach.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Signed a four-year working agreement with Lynchburg of the Carolina League.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Signed a two-year working agreement with Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball National Basketball Association PHOENIX SUNS -- Signed Wayman Tisdale, forward, to a one-year contract.
Received league approval on forward Danny Manning's one-year contract.
UTAH JAZZ -- Traded Tyrone Corbin, forward, and a 1995 second-round draft pick to the Atlanta Hawks for Adam Keefe, forward.
Football National Football League CINCINNATI BANGALS -- Claimed Adrian Hardy, cornerback, and Artie Smith, defensive end, off waivers from the San Francisco 49ers.
Waived Marcello Simmons and Forey Duckett, defensive backs.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Alai Kalaniuvalu, guard.
Signed Charles Hope, guard.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Activated Sebastian Savage, defensive back, from the practice squad.
Released Leslie Shepherd, wide receiver.
Golf USGA -- Named Andrea Solomita assistant manager for media relations.
Hockey National Hockey League ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Assigned John Tanner, goaltender; Mark Ferner, Jason Marshall and Scott Chartier, defensemen; Dean Ewen and Maxim Bets, left wings; Scott McKay, Brian Sullivan and Craig Reichert, right wings; and Jean-Francois Jomphe, center, to San Diego of the International Hockey League.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Assigned Barry Potomski, right wing, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Assigned Jarrett Deuling, left wing, to Worcester of the American Hockey League.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Signed Mats Sundin, center, to a multiyear contract.


Must the Sex Shops Blare Their Presence?
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to join the neo-Puritans is disappointing.
By proposing to restrict New York City's sex-oriented establishments to a few relatively isolated nonresidential neighborhoods (front page, Sept. 11), the Mayor is missing an opportunity to use zoning far more prudently.
The chief problem for most New Yorkers is not what sex shops are selling but the discordance their store facades create in a neighborhood.
To attract customers, owners apparently believe they must blare their presence.
We all know the shorthand for sex shops: bright, flashing lights, huge signs and even loudspeakers.


Dolly Haas, 84, an Actress And the Wife of Hirschfeld
Dolly Haas, a petite and vivacious actress on stage and screen, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 84.
The cause was ovarian cancer, said her husband, the Broadway artist Al Hirschfeld.
For many decades the two were an elegant couple on the aisle at all Broadway opening nights, watching the actors and actresses whom Mr.
Hirschfeld would sketch for The New York Times.


Foodarama Supermarkets Inc.(FSM,A) reports earnings for 13wks to July 30


Taylor and Chavez: Old Soldiers Who Keep Fighting
For his comeback, Meldrick Taylor hired an unemployed Philadelphia street vendor to impart an Eastern spiritual approach to his daily training regimen, which now includes isometric exercises, yoga and whole-grain foods.
The former world champion also enlisted the services of the man who trained him as an amateur, Willie Rush, to help him return to his professional roots, when he utilized blinding hand speed and effective counterpunching.


Hawks Deal Keefe for Corbin
The Hawks have traded forward ADAM KEEFE to Utah for forward Tyrone Corbin and a second-round draft pick in 1995.
Keefe, selected 10th in the 1992 draft, averaged 5.6 points and 4.4 rebounds in two seasons with the Hawks.
Corbin, who averaged 8.0 points and 4.7 rebounds for Utah last season, has averaged 10.5 points and 5.5 rebounds in nine seasons with San Antonio, Cleveland, Phoenix, Minnesota and Utah. (AP)


Heirs Sue Harriman's Widow, Saying She Squandered Trust Funds
A long-simmering family feud among the heirs of W. Averell Harriman erupted in Federal court this week, as trustees for the daughters, grandchildren and great-grandchildren of the former Governor of New York sued his widow, Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France, claiming she had squandered more than $30 million from their trust funds on high-risk investments that included an ill-fated New Jersey resort.
Also named in the suit, made public yesterday in Federal Court in Manhattan, were Clark M. Clifford, a Secretary of Defense under President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Paul C. Warnke, an Assistant Secretary of Defense under President Johnson.


Support for Troops But Policy in Dispute
When the Commander in Chief spoke to the nation on Thursday night about Haiti, he at least succeeded in getting Americans who had been wondering about an invasion to prepare for one.
Before there was any announcement of a diplomatic mission to Haiti today, people all across the country were speaking of rallying behind the troops.
As Melvin Player, a 64-year-old car dealer in Houston, said: "If we're going in there, let's do the job. If we're there to restore some democracy, well, let's restore some democracy."


An Agency in Trouble
The Immigration and Naturalization Service is an agency in disarray, serving neither its clients nor the taxpayers well.
The Clinton Administration is trying to make changes, starting with the basics of better management.
But this is an agency that needs a radical makeover.
The I.N.S.'s dual mission is a big problem.
It is a law enforcement agency charged with catching and deporting illegal aliens.
It is also a service agency that helps foreigners who come here legally become eligible for work and citizenship.


Vijaka Journal; Croats Return, in Reversal of 'Ethnic Cleansing'
After eight months as Croatian refugees and a journey home that required evading military-police checkpoints, Josefina Pestic and her husband, Ivo, had a frustrating welcome back to their Hansel-and-Gretel village in the forested highlands of central Bosnia.
"I have strawberries and blueberries over there," Mrs.
Pestic said, looking down from the porch of her home toward her sister's house.
"But I can't go near anymore because Muslim refugees have moved into the place. Muslims have taken our cow and our gardens, too, and it really bothers me to see them walk around wearing our clothes."


Haitians Hunker Down As U.S. Warships Near
With an American armada sailing toward them and radio stations rebroadcasting President Clinton's stern warning, residents of the Haitian capital began preparing with relief and dread today for a long-threatened invasion.
Tension and nervousness rose through the afternoon as news broadcasts by commercial radio stations here repeatedly focused on Mr.
Clinton's speech on Thursday night warning that the United States would invade unless leaders of Haiti's military junta immediately stepped down.
Haitians who could afford to do so flocked to grocery stores or outdoor markets to stock up on food, water and charcoal, and vendors of black-market gasoline seemed busier than usual.


After the Primaries; New York's Mystery General
What, exactly, does the New York State Attorney General do? What should the job be?
In the end, Karen Burstein's victory in Tuesday's Democratic primary probably turned less on her answers to these questions than on her appealing manner and the usual political demographics of geography, sex and ethnicity.
Money, for a change, was not the deciding factor.
Ms.
Burstein, a former state legislator, commissioner and judge, lagged far behind her opponents in campaign spending and fund-raising.


White House Smoke Alarm


MOVE TO SELL FINANCIAL SERVICES EMPIRE CONFIRMED
The ITT Corporation formally confirmed yesterday that it planned to sell its financial services empire, seeking an estimated $3 billion to $4 billion to finance the conglomerate's debut in the media and entertainment business.
"We believe this is a particularly opportune time to sell this type of business," Rand V. Araskog, ITT chairman, president and chief executive, said in a statement.
"Our goal is to achieve greater balance between our financial service, manufacturing and hotel and entertainment businesses." Last month ITT agreed to buy Madison Square Garden, the New York Rangers hockey and Knicks basketball teams and MSG cable system.
ITT stock closed $1.875 higher, to $82, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Missteps Produce an Upheaval in Financing for Youth
For more than 40 years, New York City has helped finance Big Brothers/Big Sisters, a nonprofit group that provides volunteer mentors to disadvantaged children.
This year, the city decided not to renew its contract.
For more than a decade, the city has also supported the Door, a group that offers help to runaway and homeless youngsters in Manhattan.
Last year, the group received more than $324,000.
This year, the money will stop.


PHILLIPS PETROLEUM IS PLANNING TO LAY OFF 800
The Phillips Petroleum Company will lay off 800 workers, including 300 at its Bartlesville, Okla., headquarters, by the end of the year.
Earlier this year management ordered a review of the company's operations and support staffs for ways to increase efficiency and reduce operating costs.
The cutbacks will drop Phillips's worldwide employment to about 18,600.
When the 800 layoffs are completed, Phillips will have reduced its total employees by about 15 percent since 1989.
The companywide review of Phillips's operations, which began last spring, follows the sale of about $600 million in assets that was part of an earlier cost-cutting program.


Ray's Pizza, Now Called Infamous?
"IT'S got nothing to do with us," said Frank, the man behind the counter at the One and Only Famous Ray's of Greenwich Village at 11th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
He was responding to questions about the headlines describing the arrest of 79 people charged with being in an international drug ring operating from Famous Original Ray's Pizzeria at 686 Third Avenue, near 43d Street.
"No kidding," said Harry, the counterman at World Famous Ray's Pizza on Avenue of the Americas and 17th Street, cheerily.
"Must have been some other Ray. There's more Rays selling pizza than there are Docs playing cards."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug. 4 about a Federal court case involving Caltex Enterprises Inc. misstated the nature of the company's guilty plea.
Caltex pleaded guilty to a charge that it assisted in the undervaluation of imported merchandise; it did not plead guilty to charges of evading import quotas by falsely labeling garments.
A lawyer in the case alerted The Times to the error this week.


CNN Asks Judge to Ignore Its 1990 Report on Use of Noriega Tapes
Lawyers for CNN asked a Federal district judge today to disregard the network's newscasts and press releases four years ago that explained why it broadcast recorded telephone calls by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega despite the judge's order not to do so.
The news reports and a statement issued by the network in November 1990 said the tapes were being made public because CNN had the right under the First Amendment.
But in closing arguments in the network's trial on criminal contempt charges today, a lawyer for CNN, William B. Killian, said there was no intention of defy the judge, William M. Hoeveler, who is hearing the contempt case without a jury.


Corrections
An obituary on Aug. 31 about Walter Raines, a dancer and choreographer, omitted two survivors.
They are Clarence Milton Raines, of Greensboro, N.C., and Roosevelt Marty Raines, of White Deer, Pa., his half-brothers.


A Hobbled Homecoming for Marvin Jones
They had been waiting five years for Marvin Jones to return home to Miami as a starter.
But it is very likely that his family and friends will have to wait till next year.
He is leaving 25 tickets for the hometown folks, who had hoped to see him as the Jets' starting middle linebacker Sunday against the Dolphins.


A Secret Computer Code Is Out
In an act of business espionage whose impact is not yet clear, someone has anonymously circulated the underlying software formula of one of the most popular coding systems used for protecting information sent over computer networks.
The formula, which has been a closely guarded trade secret, belongs to RSA Data Security Inc. a small, privately held software company in Redwood City, Calif., that sells encryption software to the nation's largest computer and software companies, including Apple Computer, I.B.M., Lotus Development, Microsoft and Sun Microsystems.


Frank Gehry Is Awarded First $250,000 Gish Prize
The first recipient of the Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize, an annual award of about $250,000 established by the actress Lillian Gish to recognize an individual for an outstanding contribution to the arts, is the architect Frank O. Gehry.
The prize committee -- made up of Arthur Penn, John Williams, Carol Burnett, Roddy McDowall and Hugh Hardy -- announced its decision yesterday.
Mr.
Gehry is to receive the award, one of the largest of its kind in the United States, in a ceremony on Oct. 12 in Manhattan.


When Baseball Returns, Speed Up the Game; War Couldn't Stop It
To the Editor:
With the cancellation of the baseball season, I am reminded of a simple fact that illustrates the state of the American psyche in 1994: 50 years ago, baseball was being played.
In fact, throughout World War II, professional baseball continued while war ravaged the world.
Baseball was a mainstay during the war and served as a vital -- if not diversionary -- buttress to the spirit of the nation.
With the exception of the 1943 All-Star Game (canceled due to wartime travel restrictions) all games were played from Pearl Harbor to V-J Day.


Metro-North Rail Workers Threaten to Disrupt Service
Frustrated that negotiations for a three-year contract have dragged on for nearly three years, some employees at the Metro-North Commuter Railroad say they may disrupt operations with illegal job actions between now and Election Day, Nov. 8.
Many of the 5,000 unionized employees, in 19 separate unions, are seeking pay parity with their counterparts at the Long Island Rail Road, who have historically been higher paid and who won significant raises after a brief strike earlier this summer.
But the Metro-North employees cannot legally strike in the next few months, because of the provisions of the Federal Railway Labor Act.


Changing Tack on Haiti
President Clinton's surprising reversal tonight, shifting from the brink of combat to the resumption of diplomacy, is grounded in a belief that the key to the Haitian crisis is the negotiated departure of the nation's military leaders, especially Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras.
On the surface, it is far from clear why Mr.
Clinton has attached such a high priority to getting the three leaders out of the country peacefully, particularly when Defense Secretary William J. Perry said only this afternoon that invasion troops could dispatch the junta in a matter of hours.


Cuomo and Pataki Ads Start Aiming for the Chin
For weeks, the television commercials of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Senator George E. Pataki have bobbed and feinted in a round of preliminary recriminations.
But as the general election campaign for governor of New York got under way in earnest this week, the commercials cut straight to the chin.
Last night, Mr.
Cuomo released a sneering 30-second spot that points out inaccuracies in a recent Pataki commercial, then features news footage in which Mr.
Pataki appears to excuse himself by acknowledging that candidates often say nasty things that they "may or may not believe." The tag line is, "George Pataki. Politics as usual."


Kate Mulgrew Replaces Bujold in 'Star Trek'
Kate Mulgrew has been hired to replace Genevieve Bujold as the captain in "Star Trek: Voyager," Paramount Television's latest spinoff of the original "Star Trek" series.
On Sept. 9, several days after it was announced that Ms.
Bujold would become the first female starship commander in the series' history, she abruptly quit the show, citing the pressures of working on a weekly television show.
A frantic casting search ensued.


Observer; A Most Delicate Matter
Here's New York magazine publishing salary figures of the famous and others not famous enough to interest you.
Where do they get inside information like this?
I suppose the pay of Daniel P. Tully, who is said to earn $8,168,900 per year, has to be disclosed in stockholders' reports since he is chairman, president and C.E.O. of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
But what about people like Julie Voshell, described as "ballet dancer"?


CIRCUIT CITY STORES INC. (CC,N)
Circuit City Stores Inc. said yesterday that its fiscal second-quarter earnings rose 29 percent as sales soared 34 percent.
Circuit City, the nation's largest retailer of brand-name consumer electronics and major appliances, said net income rose to $36.1 million, or 37 cents a share, from $28 million, or 29 cents, in the year-earlier period.
Sales for the quarter ended Aug. 31 rose to $1.22 billion from $906.7 million.


Floating Free in Space


More Police for Same Taxes In Suffolk's Proposed Budget
The Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, proposed a $1.6 billion budget today that he said would hold county property taxes at their current level through next year.
The budget includes money to hire more than 100 police officers, increasing the size of the county force to 2,701, the highest level since 1989, said Mr.
Gaffney, a Republican in the third year of a four-year term.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO AND PATAKI ADS AIM FOR THE CHIN For weeks, the television commercials of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Senator George E. Pataki have bobbed and feinted in a round of preliminary recriminations.
But as the general election campaign for governor of New York got under way in earnest this week, the commercials cut straight to the chin.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  A SCHOOL ATTEMPTS TO RETURN TO NORMAL On the sidewalks outside Sheepshead Bay High School in Brooklyn, where one student shot another earlier this week, the debate was about guns and violence, safety and education.
Some students talked about fear and distrust, unreported incidents, security guards carrying weapons.
Administrators urged calm in front of a half-dozen television cameras.
The police, who were everywhere, predicted a quick return to normalcy.
Suddenly, all debate halted.
A detective burst from an unmarked car, raced into the school and emerged with a student.
Page 27.
A TASTE OF INFAMY FOR FAMOUS RAY After decades in which pizza makers have battled one another for the right to call themselves Ray, the drug bust at Famous Original Ray's Pizzeria on Third Avenue near 43d Street was causing strains.
Even though the United States Attorney said that the crimes were limited to the one store and that no chain was involved, some of the Rays were worried.
At his Columbus Avenue pizzeria, Rosolino Mangano was clearly shaken.
Rosolino Mangano is the original and famous Rosolino.
He is the man who by his own account put the Ray in pizza.
About New York, Page 27.
POLICE MERGER PLAN ADVANCES With the conditional approval of the Federal Government, Mayor Giuliani signed a memorandum of understanding with the New York City Housing Authority setting down the terms for a merger of the housing police and the New York City Police Department.
Page 27.
REGION  RAIL WORKERS THREATEN ACTION Frustrated that negotiations for a three-year contract have dragged on for nearly three years, some employees at the Metro-North Commuter Railroad say they may disrupt operations with illegal job actions between now and Election Day, Nov. 8.
Many of the 5,000 unionized employees are seeking pay parity with their counterparts at the Long Island Rail Road, who have historically been higher paid and who won significant raises after a brief strike earlier this summer.
Page 28.
TAX BREAKS FOR CARS USING CLEAN FUEL Two months ago, Connecticut staked out a new position among states with air pollution problems: it opened up its checkbook.
Under a new law that energy experts say is only the second in the nation, Connecticut announced that any commercial fleet operator that wanted to convert vehicles from ozone-spewing gasoline to cleaner fuels like natural gas or electricity would get a tax break.
For every dollar spent on conversion or on building alternative fueling stations, fleet owners could deduct 50 cents from their corporate profits tax.
After the conversion, the new fuel would be exempted from the 31-cents-a-gallon state fuel tax.
Page 28.
MORE POLICE FOR SAME TAXES IN SUFFOLK The Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, proposed a $1.6 billion budget that he said would hold county property taxes at their current level through next year.
The budget includes money to hire more than 100 police officers, increasing the size of the county force to 2,701, the highest level since 1989.
Page 28.


No Headline
Albert Decourtray, the influential and outspoken Roman Catholic cardinal who held the formal title Primate of the Gauls, died yesterday in Lyons, France.
He was 71.
The cause of death was a cerebral hemorrhage, a hospital spokesman said.
Cardinal Decourtray was hospitalized after collapsing in his apartment on Monday and falling into a deep coma from which he never emerged.


From the Right, Some Words of Restraint
Two prominent Republicans who are popular with religious conservatives appealed to the party today not to dwell heavily on emotional social issues like homosexuality.
Former Vice President Dan Quayle, who has been a favorite of religious conservatives because of his emphasis on family values, condemned journalists for portraying the Christian right as intolerant.


After the Primaries; Healthy Turmoil in Connecticut
The spirit of Lowell Weicker infused this week's primary elections in Connecticut, although he is not running.
Four years ago the freewheeling former Senator Weicker bolted the Republican Party and won the governorship as the candidate of his own third party.
This unhorsed the Democrats, who had held the office for 16 years, and infuriated Republicans, who felt their time had come.
He has withdrawn now, after one term, but state politics is not on its way back to normal.
There are four contenders to be reckoned with this November.
Both Democrats and Republicans went through primary battles to pick their gubernatorial candidates.
Democrats rejected the party convention's nominee and anointed Bill Curry, the State Comptroller.
Republicans confirmed their convention nominee, former Congressman John Rowland, but his primary opponent got 32 percent of the vote.


Business Digest
The Economy  Manufacturing is operating nearly at full throttle, a Government report suggested, raising fears of a surge in inflation.
The dollar fell to a two-year low against the Swiss franc.  [ 45. ] Copper prices surged on signs of increased demand from automobile makers and other industrial users.
The chief, James E. Burton, said the fund, known as Calpers, would be a less adversarial corporate watchdog.  [ 37. ] What do tiny Patch Products and giant Hasbro have in common?
A piece of the $150 million adult board games business.
TriBond, made by Patch, is the only game among the top 10 in the market that is not made by Hasbro.
The success of TriBond provides a window on one of the most competitive niches of retailing.  [ 37. ] Robert Bass and Chase Manhattan may pump more than $200 million into the Continental Corporation.
Sales of variable life insurance have surged this year, while life insurance sales over all have declined.  [ 35. ] Tax consciousness has grown at investment companies.
At Schwab, Vanguard and J. P. Morgan, new strategies make taxes a day-to-day concern, not just a one-time tactic like buying tax-free bonds or realizing a flock of capital losses at year-end.  [ 35. ] As corporate takeovers mount, charities may benefit.
Some shareholders in companies being acquired are donating their stock to a charity rather than pay taxes on windfall profits.  [ 35. ] Some secured credit cards have lured savers instead of borrowers because of their high rates on the amount on deposit.  [ 36. ]


Guns in the Schools
Three days into the school year, at a high school not considered one of New York City's most dangerous, a student was critically wounded by gunfire.
The incident was followed by the usual bureaucratic backing and filling.
Even the White House is vulnerable, one official said, referring to Monday's incident in which a light plane crash-landed on the South Lawn.
So how can we expect the schools to be secure?
Other officials offered explanations ranging from lack of money to the impossibility of patrolling all school entrances.
But an image emerges from the incident at Sheepshead Bay High School -- and from photographs in The Times showing students entering the school through a window -- of buildings easily breached by any imaginative intruder.


A Grievance Over Cap Cuts
The National Football League Players Association filed a formal grievance against the Philadelphia Eagles Thursday for cutting salaries to four veteran players.
The players -- right tackle BRODERICK THOMPSON, backup quarterback BUBBY BRISTER, backup safety RICH MIANO and special-teams captain KEN ROSE -- said they were told on Aug. 28 to take the cuts to make room under the salary cap or face release. (AP)


Unique Union Of Soldiers And Sailors
If President Clinton orders an invasion of Haiti, the military will rely heavily on new tactics that are the brainchild of the man who would be overall commander, Adm.
Paul David Miller.
His plan, untested in battle, has already drawn fire from some military experts who worry that it is a risky experiment.
His approach is to break with the cold-war tradition of deploying troops in set-piece units developed over decades: Army tank divisions, Air Force fighter wings and Navy aircraft carriers bristling with supersonic jets.
Instead, Admiral Miller, once one of the youngest four-star admirals in the Navy, says he is integrating diverse forces to match the mission.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BRITISH GAS P.L.C., London, signed an agreement with First Philippine Holdings Corp. to build as much as $2 billion worth of natural gas pipelines, distribution systems and power plants in the Philippines.
J&amp;L SPECIALTY STEEL INC., Pittsburgh, announced it would install the first direct cold roll/anneal and pickle line in North America and, as a result, would reduce the cost of its previously announced five-year capital plan by approximately $50 million.


For Devil His Due, Woodward Provides Tax Respite
On the eve of the shootout, Go for Gin streaked two furlongs in 22 seconds, Holy Bull shot three furlongs in 36 seconds and Bertrando galloped a mile and a quarter.
But over at Barn 30 on the Belmont backstretch, Devil His Due was the horse of distinction: He was the only horse in today's Woodward Stakes, maybe the only horse in the country, who had found a champion in a Federal judge and won a round against the Internal Revenue Service.
The victory wasn't complete, and it probably wasn't as important right now as a victory over Holy Bull.
But at least last week, the judge ordered the tax people not to "interrupt the training routine of the horse during the remains of the racing season." There no longer were signs on the stall door announcing that a lien had been placed on the horse's bankroll, and no tax agents were standing by to lasso him as a collectible asset.


Dress Barn Inc.(DBRN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Dolphins Spotty on Defense
The Dolphins are like a new car with a used engine.
They enter tomorrow's game against the Jets with a 2-0 record, but injuries have stripped away some of that shiny facade.
They plan to start a defensive backfield that includes two players who have started a total of three games in the National Football League.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Comes Back Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic overcame a tantrum and struggled to a 3-6, 6-2, 6-2 victory over Alex Corretja of Spain yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Romanian Open in Bucharest.
Ivanisevic threw his racquet several times during the first set, but regained his composure and used his service and powerful left-handed shots to beat Corretja.
Ivanisevic, the defending champion, will meet Renzo Furlan of Italy today at the Progresul clay arena. (AP) GOLF Albus and Powell Lead Jim Albus and Jimmy Powell each shot six-under-par 66's yesterday to share the opening-round lead in the $550,000 Bank One Classic in Lexington, Ky.
Albus shot 33's on both nines and Powell followed a front-nine 31 with a 35 over the 6,760-yard Kearney Hill Links. (AP)


If Churches Play Politics, Let Them Pay Taxes
To the Editor:
I was surprised by Robert Roecklein Jr.'s Sept. 8 letter defending Bishop James McHugh's "warning" that Roman Catholics would abandon the Democratic Party and the Clinton Administration because of their stance on abortion.
Mr.
Roecklein argues that the Catholic Church's political activity is legitimate because the framers of the Constitution intended that "churches will have a status no different from any other interest group."
But our system already grants churches, including the Catholic Church, privileged status: they are tax-exempt.
This exemption, as for all tax-exempt organizations, requires the church to abstain from nearly all partisan political activity.


Daly Agrees to Take Leave From Tour
John Daly, professional golf's troubled star, will not play golf for the rest of the year.
Daly and the PGA Tour have jointly agreed that he will sit out the remaining 11 events of the 1994 season while he prepares himself physically and mentally for coming back to competition, said Commissioner Tim Finchem.
Finchem, who made a statement about Daly today after inquiries about Daly's status from The New York Times and The Washington Post, declined to say what sort of mental and physical preparation the 28-year-old golfer would undergo.


EXXON IS ORDERED TO PAY $5 BILLION FOR ALASKA SPILL
A Federal jury in Anchorage yesterday ordered the Exxon Corporation to pay $5 billion in punitive damages to about 34,000 fishermen and other Alaskans who said they were harmed by the Exxon Valdez oil spill more than five years ago.
The 11-member jury also ordered the former captain of the Exxon Valdez, Joseph J. Hazelwood, to pay $5,000 in punitive damages.
Lawyers for Exxon and Mr.
Hazelwood said that the punitive damages, which are meant to punish defendants for harmful behavior, were unfair and that they planned appeals.


Wall Street's New Ways To Blunt the Tax Blow
DON'T let taxes drive your investments!
This standard rule of the road to riches has not been repealed.
But some industry leaders -- such as J. P. Morgan, Schwab and Vanguard -- are devising ways for taxes to do more and more of the navigating.
Last year's tax increase is hastening this change.
So too is growing attention to after-tax returns.
Morningstar now reports not just the pretax earnings of mutual funds, for instance, but their after-tax returns, too.
And, by starkly revealing taxes' impact, this monitoring further raises investor awareness.


Is Islanders' Lindros Ready for the N.H.L.?
This weekend may be the most important of Brett Lindros's hockey career.
The three exhibition games the Islanders play in three nights might decide whether he will make the team.
On Thursday, the 18-year-old right wing, whose older brother, Eric, is captain of the Philadelphia Flyers, was asked whether he too belongs in the National Hockey League.


Taking Charge of Insurance Investments
Consumers have become so comfortable with investment risk that they are even linking their life insurance policies to the stock market.
To do this, they are buying variable life insurance.
Unlike traditional policies, in which an insurance company collects premiums and invests them in its own portfolio, variable life insurance allows policyholders to direct their premium dollars into mutual fund investments of their choice.
The investments accumulate tax-deferred, creating the policy's cash value.
Sales of variable life insurance have surged this year, while life insurance sales over all have declined.


Private Banks on a Short Leash in Taiwan
For years, Chao Yuan-chi stood patiently in long lines to cash his checks at one of Taiwan's big state-owned banks.
Once a banker in the United States, he was convinced that there had to be a better way.
"I was so mad," he recalled.
"The service was so bad. They made us wait a long time. I said to myself, when I open a bank, we would not let people wait. We'd have a clean lobby, very efficient."


INSIDE
Easing Fears on Ulster
Britain promised a referendum to ease Protestant fears in Northern Ireland and lifted a broadcasting ban to reward the Irish Republican Army for its cease-fire.
Page 4.
Harriman Heirs Sue Widow
Trustees for W. Averell Harriman's heirs sued his widow, Pamela, claiming she had squandered more than $30 million from their trust funds on high-risk investments.
Page 25.


With Factories Near Their Limits, Inflation Fears Are Rising Again
Industrial production and factory operating rates rose sharply in August, the Government reported yesterday, raising the possibility of a new surge of growth in the American economy, and with it higher inflation.
The latest reports, suggesting that the manufacturing sector is operating nearly at full throttle, came despite the Federal Reserve's efforts to keep a lid on economic growth -- and on inflation -- by raising interest rates five times since February.


Midori Cancels
Midori has canceled her four appearances with the New York Philharmonic in October.
A Philharmonic spokesman said the violinist had a digestive disorder and was taking several months off from performing.


Public &amp; Private; The Face-Saving Invasion
It is an inexact art, psychoanalyzing the President of the United States.
But with the Administration threatening to enter a military conflict both senseless and unpopular, there is nowhere to look for possible explanations but inside Bill Clinton's head.
Certainly there was precious little enlightenment in the President's speech Thursday on why we could see our way clear to invade Haiti.
With a listlessness at odds with his usual sidewalk-preacher oratorical style, Mr.
Clinton couldn't drum up one compelling reason that a tiny nation whose economy is in shambles and whose military is a shadow of our own posed a risk to national security.
He was reduced to quoting George Bush and referring to Grenada as though it were Guadalcanal.
It evoked the movie "Dave," in which the President is impersonated by someone else after he falls ill.
Who was that man playing Bill Clinton?


Arthur Siegel, Song Composer And Pianist, 70
Arthur Siegel, a pianist and composer whose best-known song was "Love Is a Simple Thing," died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70.
The cause was heart failure, said Dr. Howard Rosen, a cousin of Mr. Siegel.


When Baseball Returns, Speed Up the Game
To the Editor:
Squabbling baseball players and owners arguing over salary caps and revenue sharing have missed the game's real problem: in the age of multimedia and instant gratification, baseball still moves at a 19th-century pace.
Played slowly and deliberately with a minimum of physical confrontation, baseball is a comparatively civilized endeavor that has much more in common with golf or croquet than with fast-paced, action-packed, body-bruising contact sports like football and basketball, which are more in tune with the essential spirit of their times.
To renew its appeal to the American mainstream, baseball needs to be re-engineered.
Here are a few suggestions designed to make the game more relevant:


Inquiry Continues in Shelter Rape Case
The Bronx District Attorney's office said yesterday that it was still trying to determine whether there was sufficient evidence to bring rape charges against two teen-agers and a man who were arrested Tuesday night at a residence for homeless youths.
At the time of their arrest, the police said a 32-year-old woman had been seized in front of the residence, dragged inside and raped.


HOLDING OFF, CLINTON SENDS CARTER, NUNN AND POWELL TO TALK TO HAITIAN JUNTA
President Clinton today sent former President Jimmy Carter, retired Gen.
Colin L. Powell and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia to Haiti in a final diplomatic attempt to make that country's military leaders step down and avert an imminent American-led invasion.
General Powell, who is the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Mr.
Nunn, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and Mr.
Carter were to fly to Port-au-Prince aboard a United States Government plane on Saturday.


Top Two Seeking An Edge In the Polls
The bizarre early-season shifts between Nebraska and Florida at the top of the national polls -- the unbeaten Cornhuskers and Gators have traded places -- may become more clear this weekend.
Nebraska will meet U.C.L.A., a team the Huskers defeated by 1 point last season on their way to a perfect regular season, and an opponent that could have an impact on the thoughts of voters.
Not that the polls matter to the coach of the Huskers this early in the season.
"I really haven't gone out in the streets and solicited opinions," Tom Osborne said.
"I could tell you my reaction is I couldn't care less."


Professor Ousted for Lecture Gets Job Back
A Federal judge found yesterday that the University of New Hampshire acted wrongly when it suspended a professor for sexual harassment after seven female students complained about comments he had made during a writing class.
The judge, Shane Devine of Federal District Court in Concord, N.H., ordered the university to reinstate the professor, J. Donald Silva, who has not been allowed to teach there for two years.


Investors Respond to Verdict With a Sense of Great Relief
Fear of the worst, a $15 billion award for punitive damages, had pushed the stock of the Exxon Corporation down since the Exxon Valdez trial began last spring.
And for most of yesterday, it was down again.
But after a Federal jury in Anchorage, Alaska, announced an award of $5 billion, there was a sigh of relief on Wall Street.
And even though the New York Stock Exchange had closed for the weekend, other markets in the nation remained open, and within minutes, the stock rose $1.50 to close at $60.25 a share.


Corrections
A listing of entertainment events in Weekend yesterday misidentified the hall where the pop singer Whitney Houston appeared last night and will appear tonight.
It is Radio City Music Hall, not Carnegie Hall.


UJB FINANCIAL ADDS PALISADE SAVINGS BANK
The UJB Financial Corporation said yesterday that it had acquired Palisade Savings Bank F.S.B. for $42.2 million in cash, strengthening its role as the top commercial bank in Bergen County, N.J., with 50 branches.
Palisade Savings, with $303 million in assets and $274 million in deposits, operates eight branches, five of them in Bergen County.
United Jersey Bank, a unit of UJB Financial, also has a strong presence in Hudson County with 16 branches, site of the other three Palisade Savings branches.
UJB Financial, based in Princeton, N.J., currently has $15 billion in assets and 269 branches throughout New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania.


Religion Notes
As a child, Noreen Collins was not content to accept anything unquestioningly, so she flummoxed her Sunday school teacher by asking, if God was everywhere, why did she have to go to church?
As a teen-ager, Daniel Mallon Durante was kicked out of a prep school for the priesthood when he spent more time leaning over the felt with a pool cue than kneeling in prayer in a church pew.


Phoenix Suns Sign Tisdale
WAYMAN TISDALE signed a one-year contract yesterday with the Phoenix Suns, who also received league approval of DANNY MANNING's one-year, $1 million contract signed last week.


STOCK OF CERPLEX GROUP RETREATS BY 21%
Cerplex Group Inc. stock fell 21 percent yesterday after the company said slowing revenue from the International Business Machines Corporation would result in lower-than-expected third-quarter net income of about $1 million, or 7 to 8 cents a share.
Cerplex said late Thursday that it expected the decline in I.B.M. revenue to continue into the fourth quarter.
Cerplex's stock fell $3, to $11.25, in Nasdaq trading.


Harry Most, 86, Malaria Expert And Professor
Dr.
Harry Most, an authority on tropical diseases who helped protect American soldiers against malaria in World War II, died on Sunday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged on West 106th Street.
He was 86 and had lived in Manhasset, L.I., until December.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Susan Most.


The Season's Winners Are Right Here
LEAVE it to commercial producers to set up strategies for theater openings.
With the business of show business ruling Broadway, opening nights are being coordinated with awards deadlines and conveniently timed to lure summer tourists.
On Broadway, hardly a glimmer of theater is to be sighted for the rest of the year except for two presold mega musicals, "Show Boat" and "Sunset Boulevard."
But the state's regional theaters waste no time getting on with the real business of theater -- and it's no secret that New York's critics are betting on Hartford Stage, Long Wharf, Stamford Center for the Arts and Yale Rep to be among the 1994-95 season's winners.


9 Injured in Sidewalk Collapse in SoHo


From a Retired Pete Rozelle, Some Points After
When Pete Rozelle became commissioner of the National Football League in 1960, there was no Super Bowl and 12 teams were scraping for a share of the weekend sports audience.
When he retired 29 years later, the 28-team league was big time and prime time, and Rozelle was one of sports' most visible figures.
He remains a consultant to the league, now from Southern California instead of Park Avenue.
This past year has been a tumultuous one for his family: He had a benign brain tumor removed in December, and his wife, Carrie, had surgery in July to remove a malignant brain tumor.
Last week, the 68-year-old Rozelle spoke to Samantha Stevenson about his tenure and about the league past, present and future.
Q.  What was the decision you regret?
A.
I'm always asked the worst decision I ever made, and I always answer the Kennedy decision.
Pierre Salinger, the President's press secretary, was my friend.
I had attended the University of San Francisco with him.


Books From The Times
IN LOVE WITH NORMA LOQUENDI, by William Safire. (Random House, $25.) Nine times has William Safire gone to the fount for another collection of his On Language columns from The New York Times Magazine, and it's still running copiously.
This time around, Mr.
Safire explains why aggression is "naked," not "nude"; how large is "larger than life"; who first strove to put the genie back in the bottle and the toothpaste back in the tube; and where people are coming from when they go to hell in a hand basket.
The book reprints 75 On Language columns, augmented with second thoughts, corrections and arguments from himself, from readers and from Mr.
Safire's unpaid corresponding zealots, the Lexicographic Irregulars.


M. M. Ashmead, Timothy Robinson
Marianna Merritt Ashmead, the daughter of Duffield Ashmead 3d of Philadelphia and the late Penelope M. Ashmead, was married yesterday to Timothy Trumbull Robinson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barclay Robinson Jr. of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Mark K. J. Robinson performed the ceremony at St.
Eustace Episcopal Church in Lake Placid, N.Y.
Mrs.
Robinson, 30, graduated from Lake Forest College.
She is the service manager for members of the United States Sailing Association in Newport, R.I.
Her father is a retired partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Drinker, Biddle &amp; Reath.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
99.95
99.18
104.45
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5790
1.5379
1.6140
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3503
1.3668
1.3133
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5790
1.5530
1.5310
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$389.60
$392.00
$350.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


For Queens, a Place in the Sun; Hollywood Is Suddenly Zooming In, With a Vengeance
"Queens is not New York!"
Thus bellows Martin Scorsese in a scene from the new movie "Quiz Show," explaining why the perspiring game-show winner Herbert Stempel is about to return to Forest Hills a loser.
As far as the movie is concerned, his geography is absolutely right.


Lisa Fitzgibbons, Christopher Mines
Lisa Ann Fitzgibbons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Spence Fitzgibbons of Amherst, N.H., was married yesterday to Christopher William Mines, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Mines of Eastham, Mass.
The Rev.
Paul Lannan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Paul Church in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride and bridegroom are directors at Geopartners Research, a management consulting company in Cambridge.
Ms.
Fitzgibbons, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Howes Leather Company, a leather tanner in Quincy, Mass.


Besides Rape, Crime Having Average Year
A spate of rapes in Central Park from mid-July to the end of August brought the total for the year to nine, according to police statistics, up from six for all of 1993.
In response, the precinct stepped up patrols in the areas and during the times that the rapes occurred.


U.N. Suspends Group in Dispute Over Pedophilia
The United Nations has suspended the only organization here that represents gay and lesbian rights because of its perceived links to groups that promote pedophilia.
The United States argued that pedophilia was inconsistent with the United Nations Charter's provisions on the rights of the children and that members of the International Lesbian and Gay Association -- an umbrella group representing gay and lesbian groups worldwide -- supported and condoned such behavior.


Holy Bull Romps by 5 Lengths in a Bid to Be No. 1
In a smashing performance that ended his racing year and may have won two championships in less than two minutes, Holy Bull dazzled a field of seven all-star rivals at Belmont Park yesterday as he swept to a five-length victory over Devil His Due in the Woodward Stakes.
The great gray colt, who will go home for the winter now while other horses grapple for honors, won for the eighth time in 10 races in 1994, clinched the championship of the 3-year-old division and staked a large claim to the ultimate title, Horse of the Year.


Innovation for Innovation's Sake
To the Editor:
The truth of a True Artist is always recognizable and never definable, least of all by himself -- or herself, as William H. Gass would say ("On Experimental Writing: Some Clues for the Clueless," Aug. 21).
There are as many ways to skin a cat as there are cats and skinners, but innovation, at least innovation that works, is involuntary.


Can't Anyone Say 'I'm Sorry,' With Feeling?
MY telephone rang. "McDonald's?"
This happens about once a month, although there are no McDonald's listed in my telephone exchange, nor do any have my last four digits.
I'm usually polite, "Sorry, wrong number," although once a year or so, if the voice on the other end offends me, I will accept a large advance order and very politely promise to have it ready ASAP.


Ellen S. McCabe, Edward L. Melton
Ellen Schuyler McCabe, the daughter of Ann McCabe of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Benjamin Y. McCabe, was married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Trinity in New York to Edward Lawrence Melton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew J. Melton of Tequesta, Fla.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr. performed the ceremony, with the Rev.
John H. Melton, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bridegroom, taking part.
Mrs.
Melton is an associate in human resources at Eileen Fisher Inc., a clothing designer in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Villanova University.
Her mother teaches the first grade at Guggenheim School in Port Washington.


INSIDE
Health Care's Death Knells
This week could be the death of significant health care legislation in 1994, and some in Congress think it's already too late.
Page 36.
U.N.
Looks to Its Future
The United Nations is being pressed to re-evaluate its role, facing tough issues in areas ranging from regional conflict to human rights.
Page 16.
Karl Popper Dies at 92
Karl Popper, a philosopher known for his views on both government and knowledge, has died.
Page 54.


Totaling Taxes Paid by Visitors
ON Sept. 1, New York State ended its 5 percent tax on hotel rooms costing more than $100 a night, a result of lobbying in Albany by the travel industry.
And on Dec. 1, New York City will eliminate 1 percentage point of its hotel tax, lowering it to 5 percent, with another $2 for rooms costing over $40.
These two reductions will take New York City lodging tax out of the top national spot it occupied -- 19.25 percent for a room costing more than $100 a night, plus $2 -- down to 13.25 percent plus $2.
This will leave Columbus, Ohio, the champion at 15.75 percent and put New York in the tax neighborhood of Houston, with 15 percent; Chicago, with 14.9, and Cleveland, with 14.5.


Stemming a Talent Drain Among Women
To the Editor:
Activities that companies undertake to promote greater sensitivity toward gender issues will indeed bridge a growing gap in the workplace ("The Gender Wars: Talking Peace," At Work, Aug. 14) and pay long-term dividends to the company and its employees.
At Deloitte &amp; Touche, we began an initiative in 1993 to retain and advance women because we found women were leaving our firm at a faster rate than men were.
And they weren't leaving to stay at home -- more than 85 percent left for other opportunities.
The call to action was clear: address this issue or face a future talent drain.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
OPPOSITES ATTRACTING
Two artists whose work could not be more diametrically opposed are featured in an exhibition at the Caboose Gallery of Jacques Kaplan's Paris-New York-Kent gallery complex at Station Square, Kent, through Oct. 2.
Richard Cleaver's pieces are reminiscent of the settings for one of Vincent Price's horror films, except that they are nonviolent.
He works from archival photographs, carving interpretations of Baroque, Renaissance and Victorian sculptured busts, drapery, nudes and architectural fragments out of clay.
He then paints over the surface with oils and surrounds the composition with an elaborate frame.
The results are at once striking, spooky and amusing; they sell for $1,800 to $4,000 and range in size up to 35-by 50-inches.


Katharine Huth And Bret Parker
Katharine Louise Huth, the daughter of Pamela and William Huth of Fairfield, Conn., is to be married today to Bret Ian Parker, the son of Lynne K. Fina of New York and James L. Parker of Ridgefield, Conn.
Rabbi Benjamin Feller and Msgr.
Charles W. Stubbs will perform the ceremony at the Indian Harbor Yacht Club in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University, and she and the bridegroom received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father is a partner in Huth, Grinnell &amp; Flaherty, a law firm in Stamford, Conn.


The Case of the Deadly School Bus
RECKLESS DISREGARD Corporate Greed, Government Indifference, and the Kentucky School Bus Crash.
By James S. Kunen.
Illustrated. 379 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


From Korea, the Makings of a Dialogue With a New Homeland
THE Whitney Museum of American Art at Champion in Stamford is busy with small images that from a distance could easily be mistaken for tiles on a mosque.
Upon entering, visitors pass through a proscenium packed floor to ceiling with the canvases of Ik-Joong Kang, each of which measures three inches square.
Beyond, they see similarly covered walls acting as backdrops for a few assemblages by Nam June Paik.
But the largest of these stands in a corner alone, a 15-foot-high pyramid of television monitors playing the same videotape, but not in unison.
The show pays tribute to the multiplicity of everything in the United States and in so doing it illuminates the contribution made to 20th-century art by artists born in Korea.
Officially, this contribution began in the late 1950's, when Mr.
Paik, a musician and composer just graduated from the University of Tokyo, went to work in Germany with the master of sonic experiment, Karlheinz Stockhausen.


Jennifer Meyers, J. L. Parsons 4th
Jennifer Lynn Meyers, the daughter of Gloria Myles Meyers of Southampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Joseph Lester Parsons 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Parsons 3d of Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark Anshutz performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James' Church in New York.
Mrs.
Parsons graduated from the Hun School and the Culinary Institute of America.
She was presented at the Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball in New York.


Eric Sibley and Carol Ann Somersille
Dr.
Carol Ann Somersille, an obstetrician and gynecologist in San Jose, Calif., and Dr.
Eric Sibley, a fellow in pediatric gastroenterology at Stanford University Medical Center in Stanford, Calif., were married yesterday in Elmsford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Cecil A. Scantlebury performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Joseph of Arimathea.
The couple graduated from Harvard University, he cum laude, and received their medical degrees from Johns Hopkins University.


Behind the Scenes at the White House: Clinton Takes 'Last Best Chance' to Avoid Invasion
Minutes after telling the nation on Thursday night that he had exhausted diplomacy in his standoff with Haiti, President Clinton went into his small study off the Oval Office and made a round of telephone calls to enlist emissaries for the high-level mission that Mr.
Clinton today called the "last best chance" for peace.
That he did so surprised some top Administration officials, most of whom learned only Friday afternoon that Mr.
Clinton had decided to send Jimmy Carter to Port-au-Prince.
Some of them expressed concern today that the mission -- which also includes Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia and retired Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff -- could turn into the kind of negotiating session for which Mr.
Clinton had said the time was long past.


Correction
An article last Sunday about the Cartoon Bank, a computerized service that helps cartoonists distribute their unpublished work, misstated the number of customers the company has.
They exceed 500.


The Loire's Garden of Artistic Delights
Until Oct. 16, the seven-and-a-half-acre park of the chateau of Chaumont-sur-Loire is open for the third International Garden Festival.
Twenty-seven individual gardens have been designed by artists and landscape designers invited from France, Japan, Argentina, Sweden, Spain and Germany, among other countries.
Three Americans have taken part: Lynden B. Miller and Gail Wittwer, designers, and Bob Wilson, a theater director.
Each participant was given a 2,600-square-foot plot on which to unleash his or her fancy on the theme of "Acclimatization."
On the hilltop site overlooking the Loire Valley, visitors walk through the gardens, which range from the radically innovative to the more traditionally decorative.
There is a Canary Islands garden (ships over the centuries have left an astonishing collection of plants there), a strange garden of 150 fiberglass rods covered with climbing plants, and a grotto and water garden.
Some gardens make the point that it is not the vegetation that has to adapt to the environment but people who should adapt to the plants.
For instance, the "Hostile Garden," by Frederique Garnier, features plants that scratch and burn.


Lisa Eisenberg, R. B. Goodwyn Jr.
Lisa Eisenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis M. Eisenberg of Rumson, N.J., was married there last evening to Richard Blackwood Goodwyn Jr., a son of Mrs.
Goodwyn of Little Silver, N.J., and the late Mr.
Goodwyn.
Rabbi Joseph Goldman officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
The Rev.
Thomas McVey, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Goodwyn is a project manager and an assistant designer at Cullman &amp; Kravis, an interior design firm in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father is a co-chairman of the Granite Capital International Group, an investment management firm in New York.


Ceramic Vessels in a Myriad of Forms
WHILE many of Adrian Saxe's ceramic vessels in the large one-man show at the Newark Museum here reflect the elegant forms of ancient Chinese court vessels, others are molded from eggplants or squash picked right out of his garden.
Sevres glazes and gold luster give his porcelain surfaces an opulent aspect and yet his accessories include Mickey Mouse ears, curliqued handles, Victorian buttons and reproductions of mechanical gears.
Miniature antelope play on many of his pot lids.
This Los Angeles ceramist's fecund imagination develops incongruous clay assemblages that are both cerebral and smart-alecky.
His visual puns and funky pop symbols are juxtaposed with details borrowed from the decorative arts of other cultures.
Naturalistic forms lend support to the artifices.


HOW TO GIVE ORDERS LIKE A MAN
Because the Japanese are an ancient and homogeneous nation, it seems logical that their communication skills would be highly refined.
In contrast, the American workplace commonly is diverse.
In a mixed work environment, miscommunication can more readily occur.
Perhaps our tendency to be direct is rooted in an effort to avoid cross-cultural miscommunication.
MICHAEL KUSEN Maspeth, Queens


Schumacher Says He Won't Switch Teams
MICHAEL SCHUMACHER, leader in the Formula One driver standing, ended speculation about his future yesterday by saying he will stay with his Benetton racing team.
There had been reports he would break his contract, which runs through the 1995 season.


Hard Time


Jane Harvey, Charles Curtis
Jane Whitthorne Harvey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. H. Harvey of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Charles McBride Curtis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
F.
Kingsbury Curtis of Bainbridge Island, Wash.
The Rev.
James R. Crowder performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Edward B. Gross, a Presbyterian minister who is the bride's uncle.
The bride, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania and a master of laws degree in environmental law from the University of California at Berkeley.
Next month, she is to become an associate at Hillis, Clark, Martin &amp; Peterson, a Seattle law firm.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman of the Maryland National Corporation in Baltimore and was the chairman of the board of trustees of Johns Hopkins University.


DEFIANTLY DEAF
Imagine my amazement when Jackie Roth asked me, minutes after we first met, about my accent in English (it's Spanish and Hungarian).
Lip-reading, she could tell this from the way I shaped my vowels.
NORA WEINERTH Forest Hills, Queens


Rome on 2 Wheels
To the Editor: I read Alan Cowell's article "Rome on Two Wheels and a Prayer" (July 17) with much enjoyment and some nostalgia for the years I spent there as a singing student back in the 50's.
I traveled frequently on friends' motorbikes and Vespas -- this was pre-motorini time.
I had one friend with a substantial beast of a bike who used to collect me at my lodgings in Parioli, and I would sit sidesaddle behind him until we were out of the city.
In those days women didn't wear jeans on the street or sit astride bikes or Vespas and no one wore helmets.
Once outside the city I would straddle the bike.
One time, as I dismounted from sidesaddle position, I was horrified to discover that my circular skirt had become entangled in the wheel and a huge hunk of it had disappeared.


Sept. 11-17: Trademark Reclaimed; Germans Soothe a Pain Lingering Since 1918
In the wartime atmosphere of 1918, Bayer, the big German chemical company that had developed aspirin, lost its rights to sell the familiar pain killer in the United States under the Bayer name and trademark.
Last week, ending 75 years of lawsuits and negotiations, Bayer bought back the last of the rights in a $1 billion agreement with SmithKline Beecham, a British-American drug maker.
The United States Alien Property Custodian auctioned off the Bayer name and products in 1918 as confiscated enemy property, along with the American assets of other German chemical and drug companies.
The Sterling Drug Company got the American franchise for Bayer aspirin for $5.3 million, and it later added rights in Latin America and the British Empire.


Prints To Set A Pattern
The explosive patterns and vibrant, clashing colors of traditional Senegalese prints on cotton fabric have made an impact this summer.
Moreover, they suggest a springboard for the fashion world to rediscover prints after decades of monotones; indeed, the traditional African prints are beginning to attract the creative downtown dressers.
At bottom left, a length of African print is wrapped into an ankle-length skirt, worn with a comic T-shirt.
Many African-American men and women have adapted pieces of Senegalese clothing to mix with kente cloth.
Others favor more subtle African patterns, as at lower right.
The elaborate prints satisfy the age-old desire to embellish the body.


Ms. Jacobson, Mr. Marciano
Meredith Lee Jacobson, a casting director and the owner of Amerifilm Casting in New York, is to be married today to Anthony Marciano, a producer and director who owns American Montage Inc., a film production company in New York.
The Rev.
Constance Morrison, a Congregational minister, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at Maison Robert in Boston.


1,500 Degrees Can Be Nearly Too Cold
READY?" asked Kurt Swanson. "Ready," said Lisa Schwartz, preparing to make a quicksilver maneuver with molten glass. Turning from the glory hole, a fiery oven used to reheat glass, Ms. Schwartz crossed to where Mr. Swanson, her husband and partner in Pinkwater Glass here, sat turning a glob of hot, clear glass attached to a tube. The rod she held had colored glass at the end, and now the two hot bubbles were melded together for further shaping into a bowl.


THE ZEPPOLE THAT ATE MANHATTAN
Tierney misses the point.
Street fairs are not popular because of their wide selection of high-quality merchandise and unique foodstuffs.
They are popular because they give back to New Yorkers the one thing that used to make this city livable -- public space, with a sense of community.
Stop traffic for 30 seconds on any Manhattan street and pedestrians will start to reclaim it.
Street fairs keep cars off the streets for an entire day.
That's why people keep on buying the same old sausages.


Auburn Interceptions Cap Miracle Comeback
Auburn 30, Louisiana State 26
"I've never seen anything like it in my life," Auburn Coach Terry Bowden kept repeating.


Enough, Already!
SHE'S the gum crackin', chain-smokin' Bay Ridge/Woodside/Richmond/Woodlawn hairdresser/secretary who tells it like it is and don't take no crap from no one.
Only her best friend has bigger breasts and hoop earrings, a thicker accent and make-up job.
Only her Pops gets to call her his "little girl" and slap her can when she serves his eats.
Her mother makes a good sauce, the best, and crosses herself frequently.
Her boyfriend?
Well, all's he ever wants is to hang out with his loser buddies: flashy mobsters, unemployed home boys or blue-collar toughs.
Sure, she loves him but, ya know, like she's got dreams as symbolized by The Bridge, which looms in the near distance, majestically back lit.
It's her ticket outta this lousy neighborhood, her chance to finally become someone.
Could it be that underneath her helmet of hair lies a C.E.O.'s brain with the potential for appreciating literature and painting?
Or will she just win Lotto and get to shop at Saks?
It's the genuine article, The Outerborough Chick.
Coming soon to a theater near you!


DEFIANTLY DEAF
As the parent of an oral hearing-impaired child who received a cochlear implant two years ago at the age of 4, I can say it's nothing short of a miracle.
Am I trying to "restore" my son's hearing to the greatest degree possible?
You bet, just as I would strive to restore his eyesight.
I'm happy to report that he continues to make great strides in a hearing world.
TAMMY REYMANN Baltimore


From the Files of the Bunco Squad
"THEY do the mustard," says Detective Richard Iannozzi of the Special Frauds Squad, offering an update not on a dance craze but on the latest twists in the sure-fire cons, stings and frauds that eminently believable New Yorkers still spring on one another in the timeless arts of urban thievery.
The con artists, ever adaptive in their demimonde, continue to con with such nonviolent brio that it almost seems cruel to have police sleuths still tracking and arresting them in this age of 9-millimeter urban mayhem.
"The mustard -- those little packets of mustard you get in the fast food joints? -- one guy squirts a bit on the back of your jacket as you leave the bank and then the next guy comes up says, 'Hey, what's that on you?' " relates Detective Ianozzi, a mustached, quietly watchful (and camera-shy) veteran of 21 years on the force who manages not to smile even a little at the Laurel-and-Hardy word pictures of his work routine.


Taylor Older But No Wiser As Chavez Wins Again
Meldrick Taylor gambled tonight against Julio Cesar Chavez and lost.
Again.


Diana Cadeddu, Jonathan Ruhl
Diana Marie Cadeddu, the daughter of Silvana and Frank Cadeddu of Plandome, L.I., was married yesterday to Jonathan James Ruhl, a son of Gretchen and James Ruhl of Ballston Lake, N.Y.
The Rev.
Kevin Smith performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Ruhl, 24, graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her husband, and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
She is to become an associate next month at Fish &amp; Neave, a law firm in New York.
Her parents own Nasa Real Estate, a management company in New York.


Idiosyncrasy Under Glass; CHICAGO'S TWO-WHEELERS
AS befits a humble, human-powered machine that has not fundamentally changed in 100 years, the Bicycle Museum of America, part of an entertainment complex-cum-mall in downtown Chicago, feels like the inside of a gearbox.
Under a wood-plank ceiling and a tangle of pipes sit the 1866 Boneshaker, the 1883 high-wheeler Columbia that riders had to mount as they would a horse and the 1898 Sociable duplex with its two seats side by side.
Nearby are the 1897 Waverly, the first modern bicycle, with its drop handlebars and same-size wheels; the 1949 Donald Duck bike, which has a quacking horn and, below the handlebars, a duck face whose eyes light up; the muscle bikes of the 1970's, featuring high-rise handlebars and metal-flecked banana seats, and the recumbent bicycle of the 1980's that never really caught on because people were afraid they could be run over in traffic.


Robert Austerlitz, 70, Professor And a Researcher in Linguistics
Robert Austerlitz, an authority on linguistics whose professorship was at Columbia University and whose fieldwork ranged the globe, died on Sept. 9 in Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 70 and lived in the Morningside Heights section of Manhattan.
He had cancer, his family said.


2-Family Subsidized Housing Almost Sold Out
The rebuilding of Bushwick, one of Brooklyn's most troubled neighborhoods, is taking another step forward with the construction of 68 two-family homes to be occupied by low- and moderate-income families.
The homes, part of a housing program called Bushwick Green, are expected to be completed by early next year.
Most are already sold.
The construction has two parts: 28 buildings known as Linden Gates, on a site bounded by Linden, Gates, Central and Bushwick Avenues, and 40 buildings known as Madison Park, bounded by Broadway, Bushwick Avenue, Gates Avenue and Madison Street.


On Growing Older
To the Editor:
In her review of Leonard Hayflick's "How and Why We Age" (Aug. 21), Mu riel Gillick criticizes his view that "the goal of gerontological research should be . . . to maximize average life expectancy by eradicating the leading causes of death: cardiovascular disease, cancer and stroke." Ms.
Gillick says that prolonging life "is laudable only if those final years are of high quality."


A Studio for Young Actors, Specializing in Roles for Life
A dozen children and teen-agers are sitting on the floor of Lola Loui's tiny acting studio on East 233d Street, and Ms.
Loui is teaching them how to depict emotions.
Tonight, the emotion is sadness.
"Think about something sad that might have happened to you," she says.
"I want you to go deep inside and come back with something."


Hits, Runs and Memories
KEN BURNS CLOSES HIS EYES FOR A moment.
His head tilts up slightly.
He looks like a kid, this powerful film maker and self-described "emotional archeologist." The preamble to "Baseball," his long-awaited documentary, arrives on his lips without warning, words written by Walt Whitman: "In our sundown perambulations of late, through the outer parts of Brooklyn, we have observed several parties of youngsters playing base, a certain game of ball."
Baseball has consumed Mr.
Burns and his staff of 20 in Walpole, N.H., for the four years since his last major work, "The Civil War," a five-part documentary that won two Emmys, two Grammys and a Peabody Award in 1990.
As has been much noted, Mr.
Burns sees the national pastime as the metaphorical successor to the Civil War; he believes that much of what has happened in the United States since 1865 -- the culture of racism, labor's struggles, the decline of cities and the changing roles of women and the media -- can be viewed through the prism of the game.


Stewart Wants Another Year as a Blue Jay
DAVE STEWART has decided to play one more season and he hopes it will be in a Toronto Blue Jays uniform.
"I'm going to play next year, there's no doubt," he said on Friday, after wrestling with possible retirement all season.
"I just hope it's in Toronto. I think Toronto's a magnificent city and a great organization, from management to the clubhouse attendants."


Celebrating the Art and Culture of African Americans


The World; Yoked in Twin Solitudes: Canada's Two Cultures
THE shops are funkier in Quebec than in English Canada.
Women dress with greater panache.
There is less prudishness about sex.
Architecture is lighter, more frivolous, contains more extravagant gestures.
Theater is more visceral.
Dining is better.
Advertisers know the differences.
So waiting for a bus in Montreal, you may see a stocking ad showing a lot of leg.
Never in Toronto.
McDonald's has changed its logo in Quebec to J'M, a play on j'aime, French for "I love." English Canadians drink V-8 because they think it's healthy.
"Have you had your veggies today?" asks the V-8 ad in English Canada.
In Quebec a magician appears.
"What an act," says the copy.


A Visual Feast as the Trees Bear Fruit
LEAVES are on the minds of many travelers these days as they await the annual fall color spectacular.
Meanwhile trees can be appreciated for other showy qualities, particularly their often-interesting fruits.
After all, where would we be if there were not apples, pears, peaches, cherries and plums?
But there is no point in limiting enjoyment to on-the-table displays, or even to fruit that has nutritive use to humans.


In the 19th, A Family Seat Vs. First Woman
THERE may be another Hamilton Fish in Congress after all, albeit the first Democrat to fill what has become a Republican family seat in the Hudson Valley district, the 19th.
Mr.
Fish, son of the incumbent United States Representative, showed broad strength in defeating two competitors in last week's Democratic primary.
Alternatively, the district might remain in Republican control, presided over by the first woman to represent the Congressional District, if Sue W. Kelly of Katonah can extend her Republican primary victory to the general election.


How Cairo Conference Echoed Health Debate; Question of Conscience
To the Editor:
Since the 1930's the United States Government has made several attempts to improve health care without much success.
Whereas the United States became the leading country in biomedical research and clinical progress after World War II, it failed consistently to provide satisfactory access to health care for growing parts of its own population.


A Girl With Kick, Boys With Ideas And 'Silas' Redux
The Next Karate Kid  Noriyuki (Pat) Morita, Hilary Swank Directed by Christopher Cain PG 104 minutes


High Rollers Are Taking Over
The Austrian designer Helmut Lang has had a big influence on the women's collections this season, from the shiny glamorous fabrics to the to-the-knee lengths of skirts.
But it looks as if Mr.
Lang is making his mark on American jeans as well.
He always shows starched Levi's jeans on the runway, rolling them up in one big hand-span-high cuff.
Now, Levi's has a billboard at the north end of Times Square with a model wearing just that look.
And Calvin Klein's billboard, at the south end, has Kate Moss posed like a cat about to spring, her jeans rolled the same way.


World Markets; Waiting for the Other Peso to Drop
A RECENT announcement that the Bank of Mexico would start printing several new peso-denominated bills next month unleashed a wild round of speculation about the state of Mexico's economy.
Was Mexico's newly independent central bank flirting with inflation by increasing the money supply?
Or was the bank paving the way for a devaluation by printing, for the first time, 200 and 500 peso bills when the biggest bill until now has been 100 pesos?


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review on Aug. 21, about "The Last Years of the Monroe Doctrine, 1945-1993," by Gaddis Smith, misquoted President Theodore Roosevelt.
The so-called Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine says, in part, that "flagrant cases" of governmental "wrongdoing or impotence" in other countries of the Western Hemisphere might force the United States to exercise an "international police power," not an "international policy power."


Farewell to Last Effects Of Effects-Loving Lady
WHEN one has been wed three times (to a film producer-director, another producer and a British merchant banker) and divorced three times, has staked out seven digs in California, New York, Connecticut and England, has loved shopping and collecting and has had tastes ranging from impeccable to whimsical, chances are that one has wound up with an impressive collection of furniture and objets d'art.
Nancy Lady Keith was just such a woman, say the pals and adoring acquaintances who knew her as Slim.


Technology; After Setbacks, a Disease Fighter Re-Emerges
WHEN a new biotechnology emerged about five years ago with the unlikely name of antisense, it offered the promise of treatments for cancers, viruses and other diseases that would be highly effective and have few side effects.
Hopes were raised. Companies were founded. Capital was ventured.


Hasidic and Hispanic Residents in Williamsburg Try to Forge a New Unity
Division Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, is just that: a demarcation line between Hasidic Jews, who live, for the most part, to the north, and Hispanic residents to the south.
But there is no dividing the air over Williamsburg.
In that irrefutable fact lie the roots of a budding cooperation between two groups that have, for three decades, written a history of contention and sometimes violent confrontation.


Immigration Service Trashes Free Speech
To the Editor:
A counterpoint to "Porous Deportation System Gives Criminals Little to Fear (front page, Sept. 13):


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Economist's 'Just So' Story
It didn't quite pack the wallop of Demi Moore posing nude and pregnant, but the cover of The Economist -- with a photo of an evidently impassioned pair of humped beasts to illustrate the magazine's lead editorial, "The Trouble with Mergers" -- caused a bit of a stir on Wall Street last week.
Not all of the talk was negative.
"Reaction has been roughly divided 50-50," said Bill Emmott, the editor of the very serious but rarely somber international news magazine, which is based in London.
"Fifty percent disgusted and 50 percent highly amused."


What We Don't Know About TV Could Kill Us
LATE IN THE MEDIA-CRAZED murder spree that is "Natural Born Killers," Mickey and Mallory Knox (Woody Harrelson and Juliette Lewis) point their guns at Wayne Gale (Robert Downey Jr.), the unctuous Australian star of a tabloid television show.
That series, "American Maniacs," has helped make Mickey and Mallory pop-star murderers.
Now Mickey turns on the reporter and speaks the truest lines in Oliver Stone's film.
He says: "Killing you and what you represent is a statement. I'm not exactly 100 percent sure of what it's saying." But it's a statement, all right.
It wouldn't be fair to reveal whether Mickey pulls the trigger on Wayne, but his confusion about what the trash-TV reporter represents is a perfect reflection of the film's own problems.
"Natural Born Killers" seems to say something about the insidious influence of the media -- tabloids and celebrity journalism in print as well as on television.
Yet under its entertaining flash-and-dazzle surface, the film's statement is "TV can be a bad influence." No kidding.


Blocking the Yellowstone Mine
The Canadian conglomerate that proposes to build a huge, high-altitude mine precariously close to Yellowstone Park is feeling the weight of public condemnation.
A company executive told The Associated Press two weeks ago that Noranda Inc. would consider a buyout of the property "if we got a fair return on our investment."
That opens the door to a plausible solution to what could become an environmental disaster.
It is now incumbent upon the environmentalists in the Clinton Administration -- from Vice President Al Gore to Bruce Babbitt at the Interior Department to Carol Browner at the Environmental Protection Agency -- to walk through that door.


In Love With the Yankees
To the Editor:
It should come as no surprise to learn that Marxism is alive and well at Berkeley.
However, Prof.
James E. B. Breslin's review of "October 1964," by David Halberstam (Aug. 14), is ridiculous.
As a Yankee fan born in the Bronx in 1923, I think the idea that class differences made Yankee fans different from Dodger fans is fantasy.
It is also insulting to the hundreds of thousands of working-class Bronxites, the sons and grandsons of immigrant working people, as I was, who loved the Yankees because they were good, and they were ours.
STANLEY M. BLUMBERG  Port Jefferson, L.I.


Singapore Arrests U.S. Businessman in Case Linked to Flogging
Only months after a furor over the flogging of an American teen-ager here, the United States and Singapore may again be on a collision course, this time over the arrest of an American businessman on assault charges.
The case of the American teen-ager, Michael Fay, is linked to that of the businessman, Robert Freehill, a 51-year-old aerospace executive who has lived in Singapore for nine years.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Aug. 7 about the reopening of the Shannon-Erne Waterway in Ireland located the town of Belturbet incorrectly.
It is in County Cavan in the Republic of Ireland, not in County Fermanagh, Northern Ireland.


Diane Jance, Stephen Jones
Diane Sofia Jance, the daughter of Larry and Irene Jance of Fresh Meadows, Queens, was married yesterday to Stephen Allan Jones, a son of the late Alton and Katherine Jones.
The Rev.
John Garvey performed the ceremony at St.
Nicholas Albanian Orthodox Church in Jamaica Estates, Queens.


A Burgeoning Tourist Turnout Overshadows Decline at Beaches
THIS may have been the best summer ever for the tourist industry on Long Island, but the turnout at the beaches was well below that of last year, despite the clean sand, replenished dunes and even some improved bathhouses at Jones Beach State Park.
Attendance at Jones Beach from the beginning of the year through Labor Day totaled more than 5.9 million people, down from nearly 7.3 million last year, according to figures gathered by state park officials.


THE VALUE OF ERROR
The "Entire Mistake" building was the favorite part of our 5-year-old-son Sean's visit to your fine city.
DIANNE KEILLOR Windsor, Ontario


Venison and Other Hearty Fare for a Cooler Time of Year
IT'S beginning to feel like fall at dinnertime.
A simple tomato salad followed by grilled or roasted fish served at room temperature with a cool salsa and a couscous salad no longer satisfies.
Warming soup, red meat, earthy grains, mushrooms and the like are starting to whet the appetite.
The following is a good dinner party plan for now through the holiday season.
It begins with a chowder rich with corn, potatoes and spice.
At this time of year there is still good fresh corn to use.
Later, frozen or canned corn or whatever fresh corn is still in the market makes good substitutes.


POSTINGS: 157 East 70th Street; An Elegant House and a Fluctuating Market
The gray stuccoed house at 157 East 70th Street became known over the years for the elegance of the art collection of the publisher S. I. Newhouse Jr. and his wife, Victoria, who made extensive renovations to what had once been two separate buildings -- including adding a two-story rear atrium sheathed in bullet-proof glass.
In recent years the house has also reflected the vicissitudes of the Manhattan real-estate market.
In February 1992 the house went on the market for $5.5 million.
That August the price dropped to $4.8 million; then in December to $3.9 million.
In February 1993 the price fell to $3 million.


Present Arms; Talking Tough -- and Often
President Clinton, elected with a mandate to concentrate on domestic issues, has regularly resorted to threats when confronting prickly international problems.
If Haiti's military junta remains intransigent, he said last week, the United States will remove it.
In earlier confrontations with regimes in such countries as Somalia and Bosnia, threats were a regular part of the Administration's diplomatic repertory; action was not.
These excerpts reflect the Clinton Administration's style of saber-rattling.
Haiti: Oct. 18, 1993: I have also, with the authorization of the Haitian Government, directed our ships in the area to move closer to the shore so they will be in plain sight.
And that has been done today. -- Mr.
Clinton, in an interview with radio reporters May 3, 1994: . . .
I don't think it's useful to rule out any option, and I'm not ruling out any option.
But to use a phrase the Vice President made famous in 1992, 'It's time for them to go.' I mean, the military leaders of Haiti have abused their authority. -- Mr.
Clinton, in an exchange with reporters July 14, 1994: A U.N. force would help to pave the way for the restoration of Haiti's democratically elected President.
It would assist the Haitian Government in providing security for officials, international relief and human rights workers, and key installations.
It would assist the authorities in assuring public order and in the holding of elections.
The United States is prepared to participate in this force and to lead it, but we invite the participation of other states and expect to receive it. -- Madeleine Albright, United States chief delegate to the U.N., in remarks to the National Press Club Sept. 15, 1994: The message of the United States to the Haitian dictators is clear.
Your time is up.
Leave now or we will force you from power. -- Mr.
Clinton, in an address to the nation on Haiti Cuba Aug. 21, 1994: Well,  [ a blockade is ]  obviously one of the options that we would look at in the future, as we see whether or not Castro begins to make some legitimate movements towards Democracy. -- White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta on "This Week With David Brinkley" North Korea Nov. 7, 1993: North Korea cannot be allowed to develop a nuclear bomb.
We have to be very firm about it. -- Mr.
Clinton on "Meet the Press" March 31, 1994: Indeed, we are pursuing firm but patient diplomatic steps with North Korea on their nuclear program.
But at the same time, we are prudently increasing the defensive capability of our forces there in the event our diplomacy is not successful. -- Defense Secretary William Perry, addressing the Navy League of the United States Bosnia May 6, 1993: Secretary Christopher will be insistent that the time has come for the international community to unite and to act quickly and decisively.
America has made its position clear and is ready to do its part, but Europe must be willing to act with us. -- Mr.
Clinton, in remarks at the Export-Import Bank in Washington


How Cairo Conference Echoed Health Debate; Not Playing Politics
To the Editor:
"Still a Chance on Health Care" (editorial, Sept. 14) charges that meaningful health care reform may be stalled because of my "political calculations" based upon "an election-year strategy."


Disney Takes the Ice to the Players
DESERVEDLY IDENTIFIED WITH Los Angeles, Frank Gehry is in fact Canadian by birth, and while the fragmented forms of his buildings are often taken as symbols of a socially atomized society, Gehry is actually keen on roots.
The fish form that he has used in several projects, Gehry told the historian Thomas Hines, owes something to his childhood memory of gefilte fish, and of the live carp, soaking in the family bathtub, from which his grandmother prepared it.
And for some years now the architect has paid homage to his native country by devoting weekend mornings to ice hockey sessions with his sons.
Gehry's new Anaheim Ice Rink, which goes into construction this week, is thus a kind of symbolic architectural homecoming for this transplanted child of the north.
But skating itself, John Cheever observed, can feel like a homecoming, precisely because it cuts the skater loose from roots.
In "Oh What a Paradise It Seems," Cheever writes about watching a group of skaters "completely absorbed in the illusion that fleetness and grace were in their possession and had only to be revealed." On the ice, gravity is suspended; minimal exertion produces maximum propulsion.
Perhaps no other sport is so viscerally analogous to freedom, and the exhilaration it induces springs from the sensation that this freedom is a natural state of being.
The act of holding the body upright puts the whole world in balance.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'GRASS ROOTS' SHOW
Every year since 1976 the Gallery at Hastings-on-Hudson has held a juried exhibition called "Grass Roots," dedicated exclusively to the work of Westchester artists.
This year's show opens today with a reception from 4 to 6 P.M. and continues through Oct. 16.
Among the six artists represented is Maureen Mullarkey, a Chappaqua wife and mother who will show 7 paintings along with 45 works by the remaining artists and photographers.


In the Region/Westchester; Yonkers Completes Its 7th Public Housing Project
WHEN Madelin Rodriguez first saw her new home in a recently completed low-income town-house development on Central Park Avenue here, she couldn't believe her luck.
She proudly showed a visitor around the bright two-bedroom apartment, where she is living with her mother, Maria Torres, who is confined to a wheelchair.


Gillick's Retiring Another Big Loss
This is not the way he envisioned his last season as the Toronto Blue Jays' general manager, but Pat Gillick doesn't plan to postpone his retirement.
"Why wouldn't I want to go out as the world champions?" Gillick asked, deftly turning an unwelcomed circumstance into what seems like an obvious point.
"We are still the world champions, right? Does this mean we can three-peat?"


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; Real America
Herewith, a partial list of those thanked by chef Art Ginsburg in his forthcoming book, "Mr. Food Cooks Real American," for sending him recipes.
A few people are mentioned.
But Ginsburg has apparently recognized, as few before him, that real American cooking does not start in the home.
Beef Industry Council


Dawn A. Jahn, James B. Moses
Dawn Anne Jahn, a daughter of Robert and Catherine Jahn of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Barringer Moses, a son of Henry C. Moses of New York and Jean S. Moses of Carrboro, N.C.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Steffey Morrow, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
The bride, 28, is a special assistant to the director of the Center for Mental Health Services, a Federal agency in Rockville, Md.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton and received master's degrees from the University of Texas, she in public affairs and he in architecture.
Her father is a professor of engineering at Princeton.
Her mother teaches at the University League Nursery School in Princeton.


GARBAGE WORKERS TO PICK UP MORE OR HAVE PAY CUT
The Giuliani administration reached a tentative agreement yesterday with New York City's sanitation union that would increase salaries but require workers to pick up at least 20 percent more garbage each day or have their pay docked.
The agreement, subject to ratification by the union's rank and file, would for the first time allow the city a free hand to extend the routes on which workers collect residential garbage.
Until now, the specific routes have been negotiated between the city and the union.


Color blind
It is a mysterious annual ritual.
First the nation's fashion arbiters determine the new fall colors and explain why America desperately needs clothes in these hues.
Then they make sure not to wear any of these clothes themselves.
After all, they live in New York.
They don't do colors.
At this fall season's Seventh Avenue shows, the runways featured dresses in shocking pink and lemon chrome and bright mango, but the audience, as usual, looked like a convention of Amish undertakers.
Vogue and Harper's Bazaar are proclaiming that "color and shine have returned" and "all signs point to neon," but in the Conde Nast and Hearst buildings, the women who put out those magazines are still wearing coal-colored leggings and miniskirts -- the timeless Elf Angst look.
At Charivari, the clothing stores that tout their Manhattan hipness with the slogan "Never Coming to a Mall Near You," the company president, Jon Weiser, explains New York's fundamental law of fashion by paraphrasing Henry Ford: "We like every color as long as it's black."


How Difficult Is a 3-0 Start? Jets Will Find Out
It isn't easy being green, and 3-0.
For the Jets, 3-0 has happened only once -- 28 years ago.
Football historians will remember that that 3-0 start in 1966 ended without fanfare.
The Jets won only three more games the rest of the season, with Joe Namath, then in his first full year, unable to overcome a struggling defense.


Elizabeth Torrey, Bruce Kiracofe
Elizabeth Page Torrey, a program specialist at the United States Agency for International Development in Washington, was married yesterday to Bruce Edward Kiracofe, a division manager at Autometric, a software development company in Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Scherry V. Fouke performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Torrey, 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree in international studies from Johns Hopkins University.
She is a daughter of Ella and Carl Torrey of Philadelphia.
Her father owns a marketing firm in Oreland, Pa.
Her mother retired as the executive director of the Philadelphia International Visitors Council.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Capitol Song: Take Me Out To a Hearing
CONGRESS may not be able to prevent an invasion of Haiti or pass a universal health insurance bill, but somehow you'd think the nation's lawmakers would find a way to keep the national pastime from shutting down.
But no.
The pooh-bahs of politics have sat pat.
Not just this year when talk of a baseball strike loomed.
But ever since 1922, when the Supreme Court issued the ludicrous ruling that baseball was not subject to antitrust laws because it was not a business engaged in interstate commerce.
Since then, the Court has declared that baseball is obviously a business in interstate commerce, but it has upheld the antitrust exemption anyway on the sensible ground that Congress has implicitly approved the exemption by refusing over the decades to repeal it.


After Decades of Icing Each Other Out, Two Buildings Are Feeling a Warming Trend
Keith Mitchell, an office administrator at North General Hospital, and Joan Levine, a retired elementary school teacher, have been neighbors in Morningside Heights for more than 30 years.
Until last November, Mr.
Mitchell and Mrs.
Levine had never met.
And if they had, Mr.
Mitchell says, they might have regarded each other with suspicion and a bit of hostility.


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; Godzilla Lives
Godzilla lives and breathes, although not so well.
Stagehands must spray cooled compressed air at the monster, as in the photo at left, to enable the actor to stay comfortable inside his hot, confining suit.
Still, for 40 years now the crusty old lizard has been emerging from his watery lair to kick the living daylights out of scale-model Japanese cities.
He is now making his 20th movie, "Godzilla versus Space Godzilla," to appear in Japan at Christmas.


Video Company That Does Family Trees
MY parents, Bernard and Charlotte, met at Malines, an internment camp outside of Brussels, at the beginning of World War II," said Andre Bernard of Mount Kisco.
"My father, who had been beaten by the S.S., was brought into the infirmary at the camp where my mother was working as an aide. She was there in the infirmary because when she was first sent to the internment camp she told the officials she was a nurse, which was not true, but since they thought she had a usable skill, she was assigned to the infirmary. She spent the entire war in the camp and when it ended, she was the only survivor of her entire family."


Autumn Leaves From Another Perspective: Vermont; Taking the Train To the Leaves
The sound of steel wheels on rails accompanies passengers on the Lamoille Valley Railroad's foliage tours, which travel through the Vermont countryside on classic Pullman rail cars from the early 1900's.
The tours begin in Morrisville and include a two-hour round-trip run east to East Hardwick, and a one-hour trip west to Johnson.
Each trip accommodates up to 280 passengers; the eastward route travels through the Fisher Bridge in Wolcott, which company officials say is the only remaining covered railroad bridge still in use in the nation.
The westward trip passes Dog's Head Falls, on the Lamoille River, where the train creeps along, giving passengers time to try to identify three rock formations: a turtle, a beaver and the eponymous dog's head.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Detective Richard Ianozzi works in a city of innocents, where there are more than enough cons and schemes to go around.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 The AIDS epidemic is propelling one of the fastest-growing trends in medicine: intravenous drug treatments at home.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 10 In Morningside Heights, paintings with a beat; in Jamaica, men who cook.
MOVIE CLOCK 11 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 12 Near Lincoln Center, popular performers for a new season: Duck risotto at Picholine; pot-au-feu at des Artistes.
SOAPBOX 13 Comic.
Italian.
Crude.
Blue Collar: How Hollywood portrays "outerborough" women.
Plus, Photographer's Journal.


Correction
An article on Aug. 28 about a new design by the architect Frank Israel for the Fine Arts Building on the University of California's Riverside campus misidentified the city in which Boora Architects has its head office.
It is Portland, Ore., not Seattle.


Pavin, Plus a Wedge, Stems International Tide
For a few brief moments today, it appeared that the United States' lead in the Presidents Cup was about to dissolve in the heat, humidity and rain that swept across the Robert Trent Jones Golf Club.
After starting the day with a 5-point lead, the United States had dropped three four-ball matches to the International team in the morning, and it was on the way to losing three more in the afternoon.
Things were looking, if not grim, at least somewhat dimmer than they had been.


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; Why Otters Turn Bad
They look so cute.
But this July two otters in the Jefferson River in Montana attacked and bit several swimmers, who all received rabies shots.
Officials planned to trap the animals but one victim's relatives shot and killed the creatures, reportedly when the pair emerged from the water and advanced on them, hissing.
The one otter tested did not have rabies.
They apparently suffered from the same thing that pushes humans round the bend.
Stress.
Jim DeBoer, a game warden, said the river was low, fishing was bad, and there were young to protect.


Georgia Military Town Expresses Its Doubts
If and when the shooting starts in Haiti, they will support the troops as they always have.
But at the shops and other businesses down the road from Dobbins Air Reserve Base in this conservative Atlanta suburb, where support for the military runs as solid as a vein of iron ore, the voices of a divided, edgy era are a lot louder than the sounds of traditional flag-and-country patriotism.


Nebraska's Offensive Line Takes a Stance for a Heisman
If the Nebraska Cornhuskers can continue to do the remarkable things they did again today, if they can ring up overwhelming numbers and inspire comparisons to athletic greatness even when they don't, the keepers of the Heisman Trophy might have to find an innovative way to reward their effort.
Just give it to the Husker offensive line, and let each member keep a limb.
Nebraska's 49-21 victory over U.C.L.A. today, its third of a convincing early season stretch, was built upon a rushing game that was powerful, intricate, and damaging.
The Huskers gained 484 of their 555 yards on the ground, the most rushing yards U.C.L.A. has allowed in its modern history.
Nebraska's 49 points equaled the most scored against the Bruins in Terry Donahue's 19 seasons as coach.


They're Playing Our Dirge
WOMEN AND GHOSTS By Alison Lurie. 179 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $21.


Former Bridgeport Mayor And Two Others Are Shot
Former Mayor Leonard S. Paoletta was shot and seriously wounded late Friday night and a priest and a parishioner were injured in a shooting after a church dinner, the police said.
The shooting was just one of dozens that occur annually in a city that has become synonymous with urban decline.
But unlike the others, this one, on the steps of the Holy Rosary Roman Catholic Church School, sent ripples of shock through Bridgeport.
The police said the gunman was apparently aiming at another group of men standing down the street.


Habitats/The Alice Tully Apartment; 6,500 Square Feet And a Mini-Kitchen
THE dapper gray-haired man came forward into the circular entrance hall, his hand outstretched, his smile wide, exuding the bonhomie of the polished man-about-town.
Irwin S. Scherzer had just returned from Europe and been asked to give a tour of the apartment of his closest friend, the late Alice Tully.
Her companion for 25 years, he remembered her tales of gradually buying up all five apartments on the 27th floor of the Hampshire House; he remembered the impromptu concerts in the Music Room by her friends Jessye Norman, the soprano, and James Galway, the flutist.
Miss Tully died last winter, after a paralyzing stroke, and Mr.
Scherzer, the founding administrative director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center -- based in Alice Tully Hall -- is one of three executors, as well as a beneficiary, of her will.


Wreckage in the Desert Was Odd but Not Alien
A mysterious 1947 crash in the New Mexico desert that became legendary among flying-saucer fans and cover-up theorists turns out to have involved something nearly as strange as an alien spaceship.
The wreckage, quickly whisked away by the Air Force, was part of an airborne system for atomic-age spying that was invented by a leading geophysicist and developed by Columbia University, New York University and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, according to an Air Force report on the once-secret project as well as principals in the espionage effort.


Making House Calls
"HEY, Cabbage Head!" exclaims J.J. Cordero.
"How's my Garbanzo Bean?" responds Eileen Schnitzler.
Ms.
Schnitzler has come to visit one of her favorite patients, a bright-eyed 6 1/2-year-old who has been fighting a long battle with cancer and its complications.
His treatment has been about as harsh as it gets: radiation and chemotherapy, a bone marrow transplant and complications that included severe diarrhea that almost killed him.
The nurse's visits to the Cordero family home have been crucial to insure that sophisticated equipment delivers nutrition and drugs directly into the little boy's heart.
But she has also played another role: she was J.J.'s principal playmate when germ worries barred visits from most others.


'The Best Breed Of New Yorker'
To the Editor:
The excerpt from Helen Epstein's biography of Joseph Papp, "How a King Did and Did Not Seek a Successor"  [ Aug. 21 ] , neglected to mention a significant point about Papp's fight against the anti-obscenity provisions that arch conservatives in Congress briefly imposed on the National Endowment for the Arts.
To protest having to sign a "purity oath" required by the new N.E.A. regulations, Papp turned down a significant N.E.A. grant to the Public Theater, which may have forced on him some of the very economies -- closing the electric, scenery, sound and prop shops -- to which Ms.
Epstein refers.


Sarah W. Conrad And C. O. Smythe
Sarah Wilder Conrad, the daughter of Alison W. Conrad of Old Lyme, Conn., and Peter G. Conrad of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Christopher Oakes Smythe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Smythe of Lynchburg, Va.
The Rev.
Joshua Crowell performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Old Lyme.
The bride, 24, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Washington and Lee University, he magna cum laude.
She was until recently a production assistant at National Geographic Television in Washington.


Idiosyncrasy Under Glass; ECLECTIC ART IN TOKYO
THE Nezu Art Museum, smack in the middle of Tokyo, is a rare surprise.
This 50-year-old institution, nestled in a traditional garden, houses an eclectic collection of Asian art that dates from 2,000 B.C. to the 1920's.
I like the Nezu because its exhibits include both painstakingly refined and crudely fashioned objects, a satisfying cohabitation of easy spontaneity and rigid control.


Architect of Self-Rule Apparently Leaves Arafat's Government
An architect of the Palestinians' self-rule agreement with Israel has apparently quit Yasir Arafat's provisional government out of frustration with Mr.
Arafat's leadership, attacked by many Palestinians as highly rigid and by some as fully autocratic.
The official, Ahmed Qurai, declined to confirm that he had given up his economics and trade portfolio in the Palestinian Authority, the Arafat-led council that runs the four-month-old Palestinian autonomy in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
During 7th-Inning Stretch, Yankees Stretch Parking
The baseball strike may make it a moot point, but that hasn't stopped a Florida company from testing a system to increase the parking capacity of Yankee Stadium in the Bronx.


Subversive Art
To the Editor:
Having just read Andrew Solomon's review of Barbara Rose's monograph on Magdalena Abakanowicz (Aug. 21), I must reply.
I have been an ardent admirer of Ms.
Abakanowicz's work since the mid-1970's, when I was a young arts journalist, but it was not until after doing anthropological fieldwork in Russia that I understood its deeper power.


Bidders Down to One, for Now
Community Access, the nonprofit agency whose bid for a Gramercy Park building unleashed a firestorm this summer, is now the only bidder being considered for the property at 117 East 18th Street.
The agency intends to create 28 studio apartments for the mentally ill with financing from the state Office of Mental Health.


En Route to Becoming A Genuine Heartthrob
Eric Stoltz's red hair is shoulder-length for "Rob Roy," which he's in the middle of filming in Scotland, with Liam Neeson.
His hair seemed to arouse so much suspicion with airport security in London that he has decided to fly back to Glasgow nonstop, even though the only way is to do it on a plane with no first class.
"You know, you try to make a movie about 17th-century warriors," he says, "and you just get harassed at every possible opportunity."
Mr.
Stoltz is wearing a suit, which seems out of character.
In "Pulp Fiction," which opens the New York Film Festival on Friday, the wardrobe for his role as a heroin dealer consisted of a bathrobe over a T-shirt.
And in "Sleep With Me," which opens on Friday, he's the picture of southern California casual as a newlywed too busy flirting with other women to notice that his wife (played by Meg Tilly) and his best friend (Craig Sheffer) are gazing into each other's eyes.
Finally, in "Killing Zoe," which opened last month, he dressed down as a safecracking bank robber with a heroin and wine hangover.


Jimmy Carter's Contribution
In undertaking a special mission to Haiti for President Clinton, Jimmy Carter is showing once again that a former President can be a unique diplomatic resource.
This is Mr.
Carter's most dramatic, but not his first venture into very choppy waters.
He has helped his nation as peacemaker, backstage diplomat, monitor of foreign elections and advocate for the homeless, while finding time to write poetry and by his own example provide the best kind of case for traditional religious values.
Mr.
Carter, who will be 70 on Oct. 1, deserves the growing harvest of honors from Americans who seem surprised to discover how much the Georgian has grown in stature since his defeat in 1980 by Ronald Reagan.


RJR and KKR: The Games May Not Be Over
THERE may be more to come in the great RJR Nabisco paper shuffle aimed at somehow letting Henry Kravis and his clients get their money out of the largest lackluster deal in history.
To figure out whether or not Mr.
Kravis and his colleagues at Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company have more up their sleeves, watch the bond news.
RJR is now paying an extra $7 million or so in interest each year just to keep Mr.
Kravis's options open.


DEFIANTLY DEAF
As a hearing-impaired person, I view the existence of a separate Deaf community with mixed emotions.
I rejoice in the celebration of Deaf culture, which serves as a model for other marginalized peoples, yet I fear the dangerous ideas of the Deaf separatists.
It is absurd to deny that deafness is a disability.


At 14, Lessons in Film Success: Bronx Actor Is Wary of Fame
Sean Nelson, 14, stood in the lobby of Lola Loui's acting school in the Bronx the other day, under a giant poster of "Fresh."
From the glossy paper, two years younger and with longer hair, he stares into the distance.


Colorado Clubs Badgers
Capitalizing on four interceptions and strong performances by tailback Rashaan Salaam and quarterback Kordell Stewart, Colorado cemented its position as a top contender for the national title, drubbing Wisconsin by 55-17.
It was the Badgers' most lopsided defeat since Coach Barry Alvarez came to Wisconsin five years ago, and it was the most points Colorado had ever scored against a nationally ranked team.


DEFIANTLY DEAF
My daughter, Rachel, is the national 1994 child for Better Hearing and Speech Month.
Though born profoundly deaf, she now hears and speaks, thanks to a cochlear implant followed by extensive auditory training.
Rachel is able to attend her neighborhood public school.
When she is older, her college choices will not be limited to the few deaf colleges in the country and her future career choices are unlimited.
MELISSA K. CHAIKOF Atlanta


Q and A
Pilgrimages From London
Q.
I will be in London next May and would like to visit the Catholic shrines of Fatima, in Portugal, Santiago, Spain, and Lourdes, France.
Are there any pilgrimage tours to these places from London? -- Steven Antonov, New York, N.Y.


Sept. 11-17: Unfriendly Fire; Guns Keep Giving U.S. A Bad Reputation
Europeans and Asians often say they can't understand the American tolerance of firearms in the hands of so many private citizens.
And the bewilderment flares when compatriots become casualties.
Last week, even as a judge in Louisiana offered a measure of recompense to the family of a Japanese exchange student killed two years ago, a German tourist on a cruise around Manhattan was shot through the shoulder, becoming the latest victim.
In Louisiana, a civil suit was filed last year after a criminal court acquitted Rodney Peairs of manslaughter in the shooting death of 16-year-old Yoshihiro Hattori on Halloween night in 1992.
The boy, in search of a Halloween party with an American friend, had rung the wrong doorbell.
His appearance frightened Mr.
Peairs's wife, who called for her husband.
Mr.
Peairs grabbed a gun, told the boy to "freeze" -- a phrase the boy seemed not to understand -- and then shot him dead.


Rachel Kittredge, Christian Hoheb
Rachel Lisa Kittredge and Christian Richard Hoheb, lawyers in Hartford, were married yesterday in Avon, Conn.
Judge Robert L. Holzberg of Connecticut Superior Court in New Britain officiated at the Avon Old Farms Inn.
Mrs.
Hoheb is an associate in the law firm of Schatz &amp; Schatz, Ribicoff &amp; Kotkin.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and from the Boston University School of Law.
She is a daughter of Elizabeth Kittredge of Longmeadow, Mass., and Sidney Kittredge of Enfield, Conn.


Sharon Robock, Michael Kiernan
Sharon Ann Robock, the daughter of Paul and Kathleen Robock of Tokyo, was married yesterday to Michael Patrick Kiernan, a son of Vincent and Ellen Kiernan of Marco Island, Fla.
The Rev.
Thomas Rita performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Assumption Church in Osterville, Mass.
Mrs.
Kiernan, a graduate of the University of Connecticut, is an advertising saleswoman at Windows Sources magazine in New York.
Her father is a senior engineering manager at I.B.M.
Asia Pacific in Tokyo.
Her mother is a private English tutor.


College 101: Mapping the Skills Maze
YOU can teach chemistry.
You can teach Western civilization.
You can teach anything from algebra to zoology, but it will all be for naught if the students in the class haven't mastered such basic skills as taking effective notes, getting enough sleep to prevent them from nodding off in class or even managing their finances so they can afford course textbooks.
Enter "College Success," the class that bills itself as "the course that helps freshmen become graduates." The 15-week course offered at Westchester Community College runs the gamut from teaching students how to study to offering advice on how to avoid sexually transmitted diseases.


THE ZEPPOLE THAT ATE MANHATTAN
I got a lift from John Tierney's article on street fairs (The Big City: "The Zeppole That Ate Manhattan," Aug. 28).
Once a year, a group calling itself the Bedford-Barrow-Commerce Association has a street fair on my block.
I live on the first floor of my building and get the event full blast, from 7:30 in the morning until 11 or 12 at night.
The vendors set up tents, racks, carts -- spilling onto the sidewalk so you can hardly leave the house.
The rationale for this nuisance is a report that money is given to the Village Nursing Home; a few trees are planted.
What happens to most of the boodle?


Sports of The Times; The 'Cap' No Longer In Style
IT'S why there will be no World Series this year.
It's why the Giants released Phil Simms.
It's why the Knicks can't put together a trade for Karl Malone.
It's why National Hockey League players are worrying about a lockout.
It's suddenly such a familiar phrase, it's as if it were the name of somebody who seems to be playing every sport: Sal R. E. Cap.


Susan Frankenberg and Robert Beer
Susan Frankenberg, the vice president of marketing in Suffern, N.Y., at the Dress Barn retail clothing chain, and Robert Beer, an assistant professor of chemistry at Columbia University, are to be married today in New York.
Rabbi Rolando Matalon is to perform the ceremony at the Stanhope.
Mrs.
Beer, 36, graduated from George Washington University.
She is the daughter of Marilyn Frankenberg of New York and Paul Frankenberg of Tacoma, Wash.


A 'Singin' in the Rain' Served With Taste and Flair at the Paper Mill
WITH the incredible shrinkage of good old-fangled new musicals, one can accept, hopefully with grace, a show once cavalierly dismissed.
Like "Singin' in the Rain."


HOW TO GIVE ORDERS LIKE A MAN
I am once again impressed by Deborah Tannen's insights and agree that the indirect versus direct styles of command do not necessarily say anything about the speaker's self-esteem.
Rather, the communication choices are embedded in the complexity of relationships and the hierarchy that is imposed in work cultures.
Training co-pilots to be more direct in speaking to pilots will not change the inherent one-down (to use a Tannen term) that is felt in that environment.
You would have to restructure the entire agency -- perhaps even give co-pilots a crack at the better parking spaces -- before equality might be felt and thus internalized.
DONNA C. MOSS White Plains


Mavericks Sign Draft Pick to 4-Year Deal
TONY DUMAS, the Dallas Mavericks' second first-round draft pick, signed a four-year contract with the team yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed, however, The Dallas Morning News reported yesterday that Dumas would receive $700,000 for his rookie season and average $1 million a year during the life of the contract.
The Mavericks' other first-round pick, JASON KIDD, signed a nine-year, $54 million contract earlier this month.


Just Where Did Gauguin Become Gauguin?
GAUGUIN WILL ALWAYS BE identified, above all, with Tahiti.
The big-city stockbroker who abandoned wife and job and "found" himself in balmy, bare-breasted paradise is too potent a tale to succumb to reality.
Still, the great Gauguin retrospective of 1988 and a number of other recent shows have helped dispel this popular myth a little.
The fact is that Gauguin became Gauguin not among the sun-drenched Polynesians but earlier, among the Bretons, back in France, where natives do their fishing in the icy North Atlantic.
The history of 19th-century art in France is dotted with stories of painters who thrived in small towns near the sea -- Seurat at Gravelines, Monet at Etretat.
For Gauguin it was Pont-Aven, a picturesque Brittany port.
In 1886, when he first arrived, it had a population of 1,500, a number of them artists who, like him, had come to admire the rugged landscape, live cheaply and soak up exotic local color.


Mariellen M. Lane, Peter W. Bradley
Dr.
Mariellen Margaret Lane, an associate in clinical pediatrics at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, was married yesterday to Peter William Bradley, an associate at CCM Capital, an investment firm in New York.
The Rev.
Timothy Scannell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Mount Mercy Chapel in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The bride, 33, will be known as Dr.
Lane Bradley.
She graduated summa cum laude from Fordham University and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Lane of Ardsley, N.Y.


The View From: Hartford; Purveyors of the (Very) Proper Suit
SEVERAL weeks ago, William S. Tryon, president of the downtown Hartford store bearing his family name, called Michael Peters, the Mayor of Hartford.
At first Mr.
Tryon thought the Mayor seemed apprehensive.
"I think he thought I was going to tell him we were leaving downtown or going into Chapter 11," Mr.
Tryon said.
Instead, he said, he was asking Mayor Peters and the city to honor the clothing store's 85th birthday this Thursday.
"Is that all?" Mr.
Peters said.
"You got it."


Anke Kohn, Owen Kotler
Anke Marianne Kohn, the daughter of Marianne and Heinz Kohn of Hanigsen, Germany, is to be married today in Woodstock, N.Y., to Owen David Kotler, the son of Helen Kotler of the Bronx and Dr.
Martin Kotler of Manhattan.
Town Justice Franklyn Engel of Woodstock is to officiate at the country home of the bridegroom's father.
Mrs.
Kotler, 31, is a fashion designer, and Mr.
Kotler, also 31, is a clarinetist, both in New York.
She graduated from the Technical University for Art and Design in Hanover, Germany.
He graduated from the Manhattan School of Music.


Karen Silverman And Leon Hodes
Karen Jill Silverman, the daughter of Phyllis and Howard Silverman of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Leon Hodes, the son of Hannah and Dr.
Meyer Hodes of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson performed the ceremony at the Plaza Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Hodes, 25, is an employment manager at Gruntal &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
Her father is Gruntal's chairman and chief executive.
She graduated from the C. W. Post Center of Long Island University and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.


Talks Give Little Hope To Aristide Supporters
For Haitians who have prayed for bombs to blow their tormentors from the earth, the arrival of three prominent Americans to meet with Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras offered scant comfort today.
Opponents of Haiti's military junta are still being slain at the rate of three or four a day, residents of the capital's slums say.
And they say they doubt the killing will stop while the United States defers an invasion and former President Jimmy Carter, retired Gen.
Colin L. Powell and Senator Sam Nunn talk with General Cedras this weekend.


Corrections
An article on page 26 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the Lyons Opera Ballet misstates the opening day of the company's weeklong engagement at the Joyce Theater in New York.
It is on Sept. 27, not this Tuesday.


Two New Tie-Ins For Frequent Fliers
Members of United Airlines' frequent-flier club can now receive 500 bonus miles if they rent a car from Avis.
To inaugurate the tie-in, Avis customers will receive an extra 500 miles (for a total of 1,000) through November.
On renting a car, United passengers must present a Mileage Plus card and a boarding pass or ticket showing that they just flew on United or are about to.
Passengers on Northwest Airlines or its partner, KLM, to Asia can add 500 miles to its frequent-flyer program for a stay in a Shangri-La hotel.
The chain has 25 hotels and resorts in the Far East and one in Vancouver, British Columbia.
For the extra miles, hotel guests must present a ticket showing they flew on either airline within a day of check-in.


Seeing Green, $71 Million Worth
Coming to Central Park next year: The grass will be greener on the Great Lawn and the North Meadow.
Benches and food stands will be added to the Columbus Circle entrance.
An amphitheater for storytelling will appear near West 83d Street.
This week the city and the Central Park Conservancy plan to announce $71.5 million in restoration projects throughout the park, particularly along the entire western perimeter, where playgrounds will be upgraded and new gardens and paths put down.


Glenn F. Griffin and Susan D. Tonetti
Susan Dillon Tonetti, a daughter of Joseph L. and Ann S. Tonetti of Snedens Landing, N.Y., was married yesterday to Glenn Frederick Griffin, a son of John P. and Barbara Griffin of Tully, N.Y.
The Rev.
Deborah Dresser officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Sparkill, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is a sales-forecasting manager at Avon Products Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the principal architect at Tonetti Associates Architects in New York.


No Headline
"We have a very simple but very important mission in Haiti, to work with Haitian officials to devise a peaceful implementation of the policies of the United States Government and the resolutions passed by the United Nations." JIMMY CARTER.  [ 1:6. ]


The Hudson Valley
From now until the end of October, the Mid-Hudson Valley of New York will be ablaze with color, as ripening red apples stand out against the green leaves of the trees, and the sumacs turn crimson.
Around Columbus Day, the normalpeak of foliage season, the ashes and hickories will be yellow and the sugar maples, the most gloriously colorful of trees, will be beacons of bronze and bright red.


The University-Industrial Complex
To the Editor
"Baltimore Has Seen the Future, and It Is Biotechnology" (Technology, Aug. 28) highlights a major contradiction in the ethos of academia.
A university's raison d'etre includes the accumulation and exchange of knowledge for the benefit of students and humanity.
In recognition of these services, universities are supported by gifts and grants.
Altering the priorities of teaching institutions, as described in the article, substitutes the marketplace's concerns for those of academia.


Commercial Property/Going Public; A Veteran Realty Company Takes the Market Plunge
IT took longer than anyone expected -- the offering was postponed three times -- but on Aug. 25 the Cali Realty Corporation, a real estate investment trust that includes Cali Associates' 12 office buildings and one apartment complex, hit the market.
Cali, based in Cranford, N.J., sold 10.5 million shares at $17.25 a share -- a mild disappointment to a company that had hoped to sell 9.179 million shares at $18 to $20.
Still, the offering, combined with the proceeds of a separate financing supplied by Prudential Securities, the new REIT's lead underwriter, yielded enough to pay down much of Cali's debt and have cash left over.


Lisa Goodrich, Eamon O'Neill
Lisa Vaughn Goodrich, a daughter of Robert and Nancy Goodrich of Concord, Mass., was married there yesterday to Eamon Gearoid O'Neill, a son of Liam and Therese O'Neill of Killiney, County Dublin, Ireland.
The Rev.
David Barney officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Paul O'Brien, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Goodrich, 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University and is studying for a Ph.D. in neurobiology at Stanford University.
Her father is the president of Business Forecast Systems, a software manufacturer in Belmont, Mass.
Her mother is a senior associate at Abt Associates, a research firm in Cambridge, Mass.


Home Sweet Hell
VINEGAR HILL By A. Manette Ansay. 240 pp. New York: Viking. $22.95.


Catherine Devine, George Moore Jr.
Catherine Marie Devine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth P. Devine of New Windsor, N.Y., was married yesterday to George Charles Moore Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Moore of New York.
The Rev.
Edward Straub performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Most Holy Trinity Chapel in West Point, N.Y.
Mrs.
Moore, 36, graduated from Belmont Abbey College and is a saleswoman at the Sun-Up Gallery, a clothing and gifts boutique in Avondale, R.I.
Her father retired as the chief of information management policy at the United States Military Academy at West Point.
Her mother, Lillian C. Devine, is a teacher's aide at the Horizons-on-Hudson School in Newburgh, N.Y.


New Merchants Make It a Resurrection on 34th Street
The remake of "Miracle on 34th Street" will head to theaters in November.
But among business watchers, something of a miracle has already happened: after a decade of the domino deaths of its department store giants, 34th Street is re-emerging as the midtown heart of middlebrow shopping.
"It's hotter than hot -- there's so much demand for 34th Street there's not enough space to fill it," said Faith Consolo, a partner in Garrick-Aug, the nation's largest retail leasing agency.


Reporter's Notebook; Quayle Looks to Right For Votes (and Sales)
Former Vice President Dan Quayle may not be a great speller but he is a master at subliminal advertising.
In his speech on Saturday night to the Christian Coalition, which is holding its annual convention here, somehow the words "standing firm," kept coming up.
That happens to be the title of the book his backers were hawking outside the ballroom.


For Namath, the Story of These Jets Could Be Called a Few Good Linemen
Every Jets fan can recite, chapter and verse, the team's woeful history since it won the Super Bowl in 1969.
It has been 26 years of heartbreak.
That's why for some fans the jubilance surrounding the team's 2-0 start this season is tinged with caution.
The Jets will play the Dolphins (2-0) today for an early lead in the American Football Conference East Division.
Since the league merger in 1970, the Jets haven't won a division championship.


A Heart Like a Coiled Serpent
SHELTER By Jayne Anne Phillips. 279 pp.
Boston: Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.


Formal Decor, Italian Fare, Fairway Views
WHAT a surprise to find a formal dining room overlooking a municipal golf course!
But that's what greeted us at Cafe on the Green Ristorante in Danbury, complete with a stern-faced maitre d'hotel in tuxedo who stiffly led us to a table commanding views of the fairway in two directions.
His demeanor and that of the formal staff contrasted sharply with the casual attire of many guests as well as the golf course backdrop.
The spacious dining room is a beauty, with large picture windows lining two entire walls.
Polished brass railings separate the serving area, and the white-napped tables are set with fresh flowers and burgundy cloths, a color picked up around the room.


With Factors Ruled Out, USAir Crash Emerges as Puzzle
From the time USAir Flight 427 crashed more than a week ago, one promising lead after another has dissolved, offering little help in silencing the question of what went wrong.
With each day, the mystery of what caused the worst air crash in the United States in seven years grows no less troubling.
For USAir, an answer might help deflect concerns about its accident record of five crashes in five years as well as its continuing financial difficulties.
That record will be very much in the spotlight in coming days when public hearings start on the cause of USAir's crash on July 2 amid torrential rain and gusting winds in Charlotte, N.C.


Sky Beauty Knocks Off Fifth Straight Victory
One hour before Holy Bull raced to glory in the Woodward Stakes, the 4-year-old filly Sky Beauty gave a theatrical performance of her own as she won the Ruffian Handicap carrying 130 pounds and shook down the cheers from the crowd of 25,956 at Belmont Park.
It was her fifth straight victory without a loss this year, her 11th straight without a loss at Belmont Park and her 14th in 17 starts in a career that has established her as the best filly of her time.
She has failed to run in the money only once, when she ran fifth in the Breeders' Cup Distaff last year.
But she can reverse that setback when she runs in the Distaff again at Churchill Downs on Nov. 5.


BEST SELLERS: September 18, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
2
29
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
8
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
4
6
13
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
5
4
15
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist on death row.
6
5
110
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
1
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
8
8
3
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Returning to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters a murderer he once knew.
9
7
5
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) An American woman's role as a chaperone in Georgian England brings her a surprising romance.
10
9
7
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) Animal royalty comes of age.
11
15
2
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
12
11
4
THE HIDDEN CITY, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $23.) In the "Tamuli" fantasy series, heroes and gods confront forces that shape destiny.
13
1
SIEGE OF DARKNESS, by R.A.
Salvatore. (TSR, $18.95.) A fantasy tale about a struggle for power between two hostile dynastic families.
14
10
23
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) Murder in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
15
13
4
DIXIE CITY JAM, by James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $22.95.) The search for a sunken Nazi submarine stirs up trouble for a New Orleans detective.
16*
1
HALF ASLEEP IN FROG PAJAMAS, by Tom Robbins. (Bantam, $23.95.) Three perilous days in the life of an inexperienced, not entirely ethical stockbroker.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
71
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
6
2
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
3
2
5
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of a family.
4
4
39
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
7
8
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
6
3
28
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
7
5
5
OCTOBER 1964, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $24.) The season in which the Cardinals beat the Yankees.
8
9
6
THE TRIBE OF TIGER, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) The culture of cats.
9
8
13
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
10
10
6
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent, lady's man and freeloader.
11
1
TRUE NORTH, by Jill Ker Conway. (Knopf, $23.) The memoir of an Australian woman: from graduate student at Harvard to president of Smith College.
12*
1
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
13
11
10
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
14
12
14
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
15
21
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
16*
13
5
FEAR OF FIFTY, by Erica Jong. (HarperCollins, $24.) A "midlife memoir" by the novelist, poet and essayist.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
69
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
21
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
21
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of oscillating designs.
4
1
I COULD DO ANYTHING IF I ONLY KNEW WHAT IT WAS, by Barbara Sher with Barbara Smith. (Delacorte, $19.95.) Advice about goals in life.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ANTI-EGOTIST: Kingsley Amis, Man of Letters, by Paul Fussell. (Oxford University, $23.) The old devil analyzed and explicated not only as the author of "Lucky Jim" but also as poet, literary critic, anthologist and moral satirist on the order of Pope and Swift.
BALZAC: A Life, by Graham Robb. (Norton, $35.) A thoughtful, abundant biography of the great, voracious novelist and man-about-everywhere, excessive in everything, who could write books about as fast as ordinary people can read them.
BRANDO: Songs My Mother Taught Me, by Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey. (Random House, $25.) Mr.
Brando at 70 (can this be?) spares some living people but is amply tough on himself in this vulgar, funny, revealing memoir.
A BUNDLE FROM BRITAIN, by Alistair Horne. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $23.95.) A generous chronicle of loyalty and gratitude to the Americans who sheltered a British boy during World War II, sparing him both the blitz and the agonies normally inflicted in upper-class schools.
THE GRANDMOTHER'S TALE: And Selected Stories, by R.K.
Narayan. (Viking, $24.95.) The title story (1992) and a selection of old favorites show the humanism that makes Mr.
Narayan's most poignant stories comedies of suffering rather than tragedies of laughter.
IN THE TENNESSEE COUNTRY, by Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $21.) In mellow, elegant prose, this fine novel follows the quest of an academic hustler and failed artist to pin down a cousin who escaped from history a generation after the Civil War.
THE LAUREL AND THE IVY: The Story of Charles Stewart Parnell and Irish Nationalism, by Robert Kee. (Hamish Hamilton/Viking, $29.95.) An intelligent, shrewd examination of Ireland's pre-eminent nationalist of the 1880's and of the absurd domestic drama that brought him down.
NO ORDINARY TIME.
Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Prodigious research lies behind this engrossing, colorful view of a changing nation as experienced by White House dwellers and habitues.
ONE TRUE THING, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) This second novel by a Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The New York Times concerns a talented journalist, the lingering death of her mother and the emotional changes and reflections forced upon her.
OPEN SECRETS: Stories, by Alice Munro. (Knopf, $23.) Bold, ambitious, risky short stories that never stop where stopping would be easy but go on to reach for the most expensive and difficult truths; Ms.
Munro's eighth book of fiction.
SCHOOLGIRLS: Young Women, Self-Esteem, and the Confidence Gap, by Peggy Orenstein in association with the American Association of University Women. (Doubleday, $23.50.) Using the association's research, Ms.
Orenstein, a skilled reporter, talked to real young women and shows them losing confidence as they mature.


Laura E. Butzel, David S. Berg
Laura Elizabeth Butzel, an associate of the law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler in New York, was married last evening to David Seth Berg, an associate in the New York office of Morrison &amp; Foerster, a San Francisco law firm.
Rabbi Deborah Zecker officiated at the Wheatleigh Mansion in Lenox, Mass.
Ms.
Butzel, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received her law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Brenda S. and Albert K. Butzel of New York.
Her father, a founder of the Berle, Butzel, Kass &amp; Case law firm, is an environmental consultant in New York, where her mother is a psychoanalyst.
The bride's great-grandfather Albert Kahn was the industrial architect who designed the Ford Motor Company's River Rouge Plant in Detroit.


The Executive Life; Pressing Their Cases Coast to Coast
IMAGINE: You spend years building a high-tech company and establishing yourself as one of its most powerful executives -- and then one day you're forced to ingratiate yourself with an inevitably bored kid in a New Jersey storefront who holds your reputation in his hands.
That's the lot of every West Coast high-tech executive stuck with promoting a new product or company to the East Coast trade publications on a whirlwind press tour.


G.O.P. Making Rare Run in 'Political Super Bowl'
It is a measure of the perils that Democrats face nationwide this election year that here in Tennessee, Senator Jim Sasser, a powerful three-term Democrat with a well-financed campaign, is nervous about a Republican newcomer more familiar with a hospital ward than a caucus room.
And that is just one of three races making Democrats anxious in what a political consultant here, Pat Nolan, described as a "political Super Bowl year" in Tennessee.


More Fans See Boston College Fall to Unbeaten Virginia Tech
Virginia Tech 12, Boston College 7
Virginia Tech, ranked No. 18 by The Associated Press, ruined Boston College's home opener at the improved and expanded Alumni Stadium yesterday.
An expected shootout turned into a defensive struggle and Virginia Tech prevailed, 12-7, in front of a crowd of 44,500.


CRIME
The narrator of MacKenzie Canter's seductively well-written first novel, THE INDICTMENT (Carroll &amp; Graf, $21), displays all the grim civility and desperate charm of a Southern gentleman who would rather not examine the dregs at the bottom of his bourbon glass.
"Cynicism had replaced detachment, and I suspected self-loathing was next," Kendall Wilkinson confesses.
A lawyer who comes from what they call "a good family" in an unnamed tidewater city, Wilkinson is content to make a soft dollar in his two-bit practice, until the murder of his cousin forces him to become a player in this dark morality tale.
As the executor of the victim's estate (and the lover of the victim's wife), he can't hide behind his sardonic wit when all the sex scandals, dirty politics and shady business deals begin to surface.
Mr.
Canter, a lawyer who lives in Virginia, might seem to be holding back his engrossing narrative for the genealogical history and personal peccadilloes of each passing character.
But in a society "as incestuous as the Hapsburgs," all these juicy bits and pieces are the narrative.
And in a novel that is ultimately about blood ties and social bonds, these little things will eventually add up to those huge, unforgivable generational sins that can destroy the very best of families.


Plan to Restrict Sex Businesses May Be Flawed, Law Experts Say
In moving to impose sharp limits on the location of sex-related businesses, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has been supremely confident that his plan would pass legal muster.
Every element has been tried elsewhere, challenged in court and upheld, he says.
But while many American cities, from Seattle to Boston, have successfully imposed restrictions on the locations of topless bars, adult video and book stores and theaters showing sexually explicit movies, a few cities' efforts to follow that lead have been tripped up in court.
Cities can use their zoning powers to corral adult businesses, but that power is not unlimited.


Primaries Over, Now Watch the Elbows Fly
THE day after Republicans and Democrats settled on their nominees for Governor in the primaries last Tuesday, Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice Strong Groark moved to secure a prominent place of her own in the race by putting two radio advertisements on the air.
In one, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. growls out his endorsement of Mrs.
Groark, warning that "the same old parties and politicians are back at the trough."


Cuba to Allow All Farmers to Sell Some Food on the Open Market
In a step away from the highly centralized Communist system that has defined its economy for more than three decades, Cuba announced today that it would allow all farmers to sell part of their produce on the open market.
Government officials said they were acting to ease the crushing shortages of meat, chicken, most vegetables and other food, which have set the black-market price of a big fish at the equivalent of a mechanic's monthly wage.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Staying Power Is the Secret
To the Editor:
Alex Ross's many sensible comments in his essay "Listening to Prozac . . . Er, Mozart"  [ Aug. 28 ]  obscure the power of Beethoven's claim over Mozart, "the one beloved of God."


Ethnic Diversity Lends Bustle to Flushing's Branch Library
At this library, two of the most popular authors are Ching Yao, a Chinese Danielle Steel, and Ni Kuang, a science-fiction writer to whom Desiree Lee could find no American counterpart.
So popular that not a single copy remained on the shelves.
"You see?" said Ms.
Lee, the branch's assistant manager, vouching that the library owned multiple copies.


Maude Bryt Valerie Berkowitz, Thomas A. Levy
Valerie Simpson Berkowitz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sydney S. Berkowitz of Philadelphia, was married last evening to Thomas Andrew Levy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Levy of New York.
Rabbi Max Hausen performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Levy graduated from a joint program of George Washington University and the Sorbonne University in Paris.
She owns At Your Service, a personal organic cooking service in New York.
Her father is the founder and president of the Doctors Medical Center in Philadelphia.


Florida's Passing Drenches Tennessee
The pre-game forecast called for rain and Tennessee fans yelled, "Hallelujah!"
Throughout the week, Volunteer fans, anticipating Tennessee's game with Florida tonight publicly touted their team's chance at home against the high-powered Gators, who were ranked either No. 1 or No. 2 in the polls.


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; The Tao of Gump
Multiculturalism assumes many guises.
It might seem that the enormously successful "Forrest Gump" is just another flick about a dumb white male.
Not so.
Newly uncovered textual evidence suggests that it is really a fable based on the "Tao Te Ching," otherwise known as "The Way of Life," by Lao-tzu.
The section in question, from an English translation by Witter Bynner, reads:
These possessions of a simpleton being


Political Memo; Cuomo Courts the Voters, One Interest Bloc at a Time
Throughout the last year, with a tough re-election campaign ahead, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has romanced discontented New Yorkers with the candy and flowers of tax cuts and crime bills, proposals calculated to seduce middle-of-the-road swing voters.
But as the election nears, Mr.
Cuomo is also working aggressively to shore up his base among traditional Democratic constituencies, including trade unionists, women and black, Hispanic and Jewish voters.
And so even as his television ads seek to persuade undecided voters, Mr.
Cuomo's schedulers have him sprinting from union halls to black churches, from yeshivas to Caribbean parades.


Quitters Never Win
Day 1: Wake up and put on nicotine patch to once and for all quit pack-a-day habit.
Write a list of reasons: Live 15 years longer, have healthy children, be socially acceptable.
Tear up list and make better one: Look younger, have fewer wrinkles, get more dates, spite enemies.
Decide to go out and buy carrots, celery, gum, orange juice, fruit, sugar-free lollipops and rice cakes.
Eat it all by 11 A.M., desperately craving cigarette.
Try to work.
Instead take all-day nap.
Have a drink later with old boyfriend Peter, who says, "Kissing a smoker is like licking a dirty ashtray," then drinks seven beers and a Cognac and comes on to me.
Actually consider it, but can't face sex without a cigarette later.
At 2 A.M., go out and purchase three packages of fat-free Entenmann's brownies.
Day 2: Wake up sick from brownies and cold caught walking 14 blocks to get them at 2 A.M.
Put on patch.
Buy Sudafed.
Take two.
Feel better.
Feel delirious.
Take a nap.
Try to work, but can't concentrate on anything but wanting to smoke.
One hour on exercise bike: Oprah's "Mothers Who Want Their Kids Taken Away" puts problem into perspective.
Read that schizophrenics and manic-depressives in mental hospitals commit suicide when their cigarettes are taken away.
Decide never to have children.
Ask brother the doctor for 65 more patches.
Take another Sudafed.
Is there a Sudafed group in the city?
Day 3: Put on patch.
Have breakfast with friend Vern, who says that after he quit smoking, his concentration didn't come back for two years.
Scan obits for people who died of lung cancer and feel happy when they're in their 50's.
Take a nap, dream I'm smoking and feel sad that I went off the wagon.
Wake up and find I'm not but want to be.
Take 100 deep breaths.
Breathing is overrated.
Take a walk and count how many stores on the blocks sell cigarettes.
Get more patches in mail from brother, along with pictures of cancerous tumors.
Try to work.
See a movie with Peter in which all actors smoke.
Eat two buckets of popcorn.
Peter says: "My cousin Janet quit in three days on Nicorettes. Try Nicorettes," though I told him I tried them and threw up, then went out and smoked two packs to get the taste out of my mouth.
Don't invite him in.
Read that nicotine's harder to quit than heroin.
Take another Sudafed.
Day 4: Put on patch.
Think of smoking.
Brother calls to say don't even think of smoking with patch on, someone's fingers fell off.
Lunch with Andrea, who coughed every time I took out a cigarette for 15 years but now says, "I can't hang out with you when you're like this, you're too intense." Bump into old colleague Dave, who quit smoking and gained 29 pounds in four months but thinks it was the smart choice.
Consider heroin.
Try to work but realize it's impossible to be a freelance writer, a nonsmoker and thin in the same year.
Sudafed losing its bite, check into Comtrex.
Negotiate self-destructive behaviors: decide that taking sleeping pill, smoking a joint, getting drunk or having sex with Peter one more time is better than a Marlboro or Oreos, though not if done on the same night.
Day 5: Put on patch.
Feel depressed and edgy, sweating.
Hand shaking while reading the paper, where tobacco company executives say nicotine isn't addictive.
Buy a pacifier, pretending it's a cool rap toy, wondering why anyone expects morality from the people who plastered penis-faced camels all over the country.
Think of 10 70-year-old smokers still alive.
Dinner with novelist friend Kathy, who chain-smokes in my face while saying she thinks it's great that I'm quitting.
On way home, try to buy a 25-cent loosie (loose cigarette) at local bodega but guy thinks I'm cigarette police.
Take it as an omen.
Try to think of one famous writer who doesn't drink or smoke.
Day 6: Put patch on.
Walk around city chewing.
Do high-impact aerobics for three hours.
Walk out of health club wanting cigarette.
Stare at people smoking and wonder why they look so beautiful and happy.
Think of money I'm saving from not smoking.
Spend $46 on seven boxes of fat-free cookies, 27 cinnamon sticks and three Lean Cuisines.
Snap rubber band around wrist 100 times.
My father, an oncologist, says, "You'll never do it," forgetting that when he quit his 35-year three-pack-a-day habit he gained 35 pounds and smoked a six-inch cigar every night.
Decide neurosis is genetic.
On stationary bike watch "Saturday Night Live," which quotes tobacco company execs saying that the 400,000 annual smoking-related deaths aren't really dead.
Neighbor complains bike makes too much noise.
Do serenity exercises.
Picture sitting on a tropical beach, where I'm happily smoking.
Day 7: Put on patch.
Have brunch with Peter, who says, while drinking six margaritas, that I've gained weight and need to learn more self-control.
Make note to quit Peter.
Read article about Bosnia, noticing only that soldier in picture is smoking.
Eat more celery, fruit, salad.
Polish off Oreos.
Feel sick and bloated, dying for cigarette.
Take off patch.
Run outside.
Bum cigarette from homeless person, who lights it.
Puff slowly.
Feel happy for the first time in six days.
Stop coughing, calm down.
Finish two articles.
Go back outside, offer same guy $2 for two more cigarettes.
Smoke them quickly.
Feel nauseated, dizzy.
Bump into Vern and Andrea, who say: "We were just coming by to say how proud we are that you haven't smoked in a week! Congratulations!" Feel guilty, defeated.
Drink bottle of wine by myself.
Fall asleep on couch with clothes on.
Day 1: Wake up and put on nicotine patch to once and for all. . . .


His Championship Seasons: Ewbank Reflects
As if he were a curator conducting a tour of his own museum, Weeb Ewbank was pointing to his favorites among the hundreds of trophies, plaques, awards and photos.
Perched on a top shelf were a plaster replica of his Pro Football Hall of Fame bust and a miniature Super Bowl trophy.
But he had sounded just as proud of a faded team photo of the 1936 McGuffey High School Marvelous Green Devils that he coached.
"Undefeated and unscored upon," he said.


Louise M. Fritts, C. M. Palmisano
Louise Mathot Fritts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Fritts of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday at St.
Bernard's Episcopal Church in Bernardsville, N.J., to Christopher M. Palmisano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Palmisano of Rochester.
The Rev.
Frederick Baldwin performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
John Corr, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Mrs.
Palmisano, 26, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is an account executive at Earle Palmer Brown, an advertising agency in New York.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft.
Her mother, Anne Fritts, is the director of Camp Arcadia, a girls' summer camp in Casco, Me.


The Lost Art of Getting Lost
NOT long ago in the Adirondacks on the summit of Mount Marcy, New York's highest mountain, a wilderness ranger was taken aback when a hiker whipped out a cellular phone to call his office more than 300 miles away in Manhattan and report: "I'm not feeling well. I can't make it in to work today."
On the summit of Mount McKinley in Alaska, several years ago, Mark Fincher, a back-country ranger at Yosemite, saw a climber use a hand-held radio to place a phone call to Los Angeles.
"It was the strangest thing I've ever confronted," Mr.
Fincher said.


Making the Library a Data Highway On-Ramp
Early this month, Gary E. Strong took over as director of the Queens Borough Public Library.
As State Librarian of California for the last 14 years, Mr.
Strong oversaw a system that carried books in 100 languages.
Last week, Mr.
Strong sat for an interview at the Flushing Library.
Here are some of his comments.
Q.
In what new ways will the Queens Library serve its members?
A.
We want to be sure that every branch is an on-ramp onto the information superhighway so that people can use the libraries from home computers, from schools, from offices or in the library itself -- that they have access equitably with all the people across the United States.
Many people can't purchase home computers, or don't have that capability at their workplace.
If you're a student who can't afford a computer, you're also disenfranchised.
So the library can be a common ground, a leveling influence.
Q.
How will you start doing this specifically?
A.
We will initially train our staff to do that surfing, getting around the Internet, getting the answers in, very likely in the same way we've delivered them to the public before.
Our on-line catalog, as we bring that out throughout the entire system over the next several years, will have an Internet connection in it, so that someone using our on-line catalogue can not only find out what is available in our collection but will have access to our resources in CD-ROM, and other connections that will definitely emerge.
Q.
What problems do you encounter when a library tries to serve a community as diverse as Queens?
A.First and foremost, we're developing collections in many languages other than English -- and collections that represent not only the popular new material in those languages but the classics that stand up along Shakespeare, Milton and Chaucer. . . .
One of things I've learned over the years is that people come to a library, particularly a new user, with very different backgrounds.
The Russian population comes with a strong tradition of public library service. . . .
Someone coming from a Central American country or other third world countries -- while there may have been libraries, they were often for the elite and educated in society.
The practice in those countries is also that you don't borrow anything . . . because books are so scarce or because the contents of books were so controlled by the regimes in power. . . .
So an initial step is to show how we use a public library in Queens.
N.O.


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; The Hidden Likes of Elizabeth Thomas
This week's question is for Elizabeth Marshall Thomas, the author of "The Hidden Life of Dogs," and, most recently, "The Tribe of Tiger."
Q. What animals do you hate?


Lois J. Schulman, David C. Rosenberg
Dr.
Lois J. Schulman, the daughter of Sarah P. Schulman of Scotch Plains, N.J., and the late Jacob Schulman, was married last evening to Dr.
David C. Rosenberg, a son of Francine and Nathan Rosenberg of Upper Marlboro, Md.
Rabbi Ezra Labaton officiated at Congregation Magen David in West Deal, N.J.
The bride graduated from Brandeis University and received an M.D. degree from New York Medical College.
She is to begin practicing next month at Woodbridge (N.J.) Internal Medical Associates.


Autumn Leaves From Another Perspective: Massachusetts; Concord by Canoe: How Thoreau Saw It
"Rivers must have been the guides which conducted the footsteps of the first travellers," wrote Henry David Thoreau in 1839.
"They are the constant lure, when they flow by our doors, to distant enterprise and adventure." Certainly if your idea of adventure is leaf-gazing in Massachusetts, canoeing on Thoreau's beloved Concord River is an enterprising way to spend one of those brisk fall mornings when Canada geese fly honking overhead and wood smoke sharpens the air.
The stretch of river between Concord and Bedford still looks much as it must have when Thoreau skimmed along, eating melons and musing about river life as he rowed to New Hampshire -- a voyage that became "A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers." Silver maples, birches and oaks still crowd the river banks, punctuated by enormous willow trees, clumps of buttonbush, grape and moonseed vines.
Great blue herons still stalk the shallows; bitterns hide among fallen tree branches, while turtles slide into the water with a cautious plunk when a canoeist glides by.
A few more houses have appeared, and a few stone bridges; otherwise the last 150 years seem hardly to have happened.


New Emelin Director Switches Emphasis
DAVID WATSON gleams when he talks about his wish list of new plays for the Emelin Theater here.
Then he reverts to real life.


Selling Vacation Homes
THE crowds have abandoned the beaches.
The plants in the yard are starting to droop.
There's enough snap in the air to make covering the swimming pool a good idea.
Despite all this, the fall season is still the best time of year to sell a vacation home.
"Lots of people look during the summer months," said Frank Newbold, a partner with Braverman Newbold Brennan Real Estate of East Hampton, L.I.
"But they're not really focused until they think they can find the best deal. And that means waiting for fall."


Forward, Pass: The N.F.L. Turns 75
The National Football League Celebrates its founding today, with its 28 teams in uniforms from seasons past.
But the unique character of American football was actually developed at Ivy League colleges in the 1870's and 1880's, when Harvard's soccer team was introduced to rugby football during a visit to McGill University in Montreal.


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; Win a Mansion
Real estate professionals love to say that location is everything.
In cyberspace, though, location is just a hangover from real space.
Consequently, the Internet would seem like the last place to stick a "House for Sale" sign.
William Powderly had a different idea.
After unsuccessfully trying to sell a three-building, 13-acre pre-Revolutionary War estate in New Hope, Pa., he hired professional programmers to create software for a trivia contest.
The demonstration software, which can be downloaded from the Net, explains the contest and features a virtual reality flight around a cartoon version of the mansion.


Lestra M. Litchfield, Steven J. Atlas
Lestra Margaret Litchfield, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ticknor Bushnell Litchfield of Suffern, N.Y., is to be married today to Dr.
Steven Julius Atlas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simon Atlas of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Robert A. Colman, a Presbyterian minister, is to officiate at the Tuxedo Club in Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
The bride, 30, will keep her name.
She is a research assistant in the architectural drawings collection at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Museum in Cambridge.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in art history from Tufts University.


Aristide Adopts a New Role: From Robespierre to Gandhi
The subject was the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and the House Intelligence Committee wanted some answers.
In a closed-door briefing by Administration officials last month, several lawmakers cited transcripts of secretly taped telephone conversations in which Haiti's ousted President vowed not to let Washington push him around and joked that he found it amusing when American officials thought of him as stubborn.


THE VALUE OF ERROR
I am sure that James Gorman's On Language column "The Value of Error" (Aug. 14) inspired many memories.
Here is mine.
I grew up in Boston when the Braves were still a Boston team.
My family and their friends, however, were all ardent Red Sox fans.
I thought it unfair that my team was not honored with its own song but instead had to sing the one that mentioned the despised other team, and I decided to launch a campaign to change the lyrics.
When I sang the song at the start of each game, I just changed the words from "the land of the free and the home of the Braves" to "the land of the free and the home of the Red Sox." And my parents, sitting by the radio listening to the game, sang right along with me.
MARGERY L. HAUSER New York, N.Y.


Venison and Other Hearty Fare for a Cooler Time of Year
IT'S beginning to feel like fall at dinnertime.
A simple tomato salad followed by grilled or roasted fish served at room temperature with a cool salsa and a couscous salad no longer satisfies.
Warming soup, red meat, earthy grains, mushrooms and the like are starting to whet the appetite.
The following is a good dinner party plan for now through the holiday season.
It begins with a chowder rich with corn, potatoes and spice.
At this time of year there is still good fresh corn to use.
Later, frozen or canned corn or whatever fresh corn is still in the market makes good substitutes.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: John Eells; When Volunteers Compose an Orchestra
AT the age of 36, John Eells directs the Farmington Valley Symphony Orchestra, a community organization he founded in 1981, the year he became director of music and chairman of the arts at Miss Porter's School in Farmington.
His objective was to create a student-and-community orchestra, an idea that evolved into two separate entities, a school ensemble, and a 60-member all-volunteer Farmington Valley symphony orchestra.
Mr.
Eells was born in Oakland, Calif., and moved at the age of 5 to England, where his father taught math at Warwick University.
He has a degree from York University and diplomas in conducting and the French horn from the Royal Academy of Music in London; he has also studied with Seiji Ozawa and Andre Previn.


Sept. 11-17; Order to Travel: Pizza and Coke
It used to be that the United States meant the world to the drug lords of Colombia.
It was not just their biggest market, but practically their only market.
But the appetite for cocaine has been growing in Europe, and the United States has become not only a final destination for the drug, but a way station for shipments headed across the Atlantic.
Federal investigators had suspected as much.
Now they say they have concrete evidence, supplied last week with the arrest of 29 men in New York, members of a gang that operated out of a midtown pizzeria and two loosely affiliated groups.


How Cairo Conference Echoed Health Debate; California's Better Deal
To the Editor:
Michael Goldeen (letter, Sept. 11) argues that you can buy a "truly affordable" medical insurance plan in California for $39 a month if you're younger than 30, provided you "take responsibility for the first $2,000 a year" and "some of the next $10,000." This, he implies, would be a much better deal than paying 7 percent to 14 percent under the proposed California Health Security Plan.
This is simplistic at best.


From France, Dance With an American Accent
WHEN HE TALKS ABOUT the Lyons Opera Ballet, the French company he directs, Yorgos Loukos keeps using the word "subvert."
Trying to characterize his 30-member troupe, which begins a weeklong engagement at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday, Mr.
Loukos calls it "a classical company dancing a contemporary repertory." But he also terms it "a subverted classical company." And he frequently makes other references to "subverting classicism." Yet Mr.
Loukos, 43, is no nihilist.
As he explained in a recent conversation, his subversion is ultimately benign, for his aim is "to turn classical technique around in a new way and revitalize it."


Sept. 11-17; Harvest Time


On an Endless Journey to One's Better Half
"AMERICA," SAYS THE RUMMY old schoolmaster, is "a vast restless place that doesn't give a curse about the past, and that's the way things should be. Impermanence and anonymity -- it offers great attractions."
That's not why Gareth O'Donnell is packing up to leave Ballybeg in County Donegal, Ireland, at the start of Brian Friel's "Philadelphia, Here I Come!," but it may well be his fate.
Gar, who is 25, has some vague hopes of making his name and fortune in a land he knows only through films, television and pop music.
Mostly he wants to escape an arid, loveless, hypocritical culture that has effectively neutered him.
Gar is less a romantic pioneer than a sweetly defiant fellow retreating with hesitant steps toward his fate.


Senator Dole vs. Free Trade
The Senate minority leader, Robert Dole, tried hard to sabotage health care reform this year.
Now he threatens to sabotage open trade -- by blocking approval of the international trade accord the Administration signed last April in Marrakesh, Morocco.
That is an odd stance for the leader of the party that has traditionally stood for free trade.
But Mr.
Dole appears more intent on humiliating President Clinton before the November elections than on serving the nation's 250 million other citizens.
The danger is that U.S. delay encourages protectionists abroad who desperately search for any excuse to sidetrack ratification of free trade.
The Administration bears some blame for Mr.
Dole's chokehold.
It waited too long to make a key concession.
There are only about 20 working days left before Congress breaks for elections; the time crunch puts Mr.
Dole in charge.
He can say that he wants a trade pact this year -- mollifying his big-business and farm constituencies that have the most to gain from the Marrakesh accord -- while dallying so that the legislation dies from neglect.


Don't Worry, Be Giddy
To the Editor:
In his review of "Pure Heart, Enlightened Mind: The Zen Journal and Letters of Maura 'Soshin' O'Halloran" (July 24), Philip Zaleski is in some respects trying to aid readers who may "recoil from the generic title," fearing "a dry catechism of Buddhist beliefs." However, I feel his references to Maura's seemingly lighter moments of monastic life are misguided.


France's James Bond Gets the Scoop on the Hunt for Carlos
While French newspapers have been competing for scoops on how the terrorist known as Carlos was arrested in the Sudan and extradited to France, many readers have been patiently awaiting the inside story on what really happened.
For that, they will be looking not in the daily press but in fiction, specifically in "S.A.S.: Hunting Carlos," the latest spy novel by Gerard de Villiers, whose mastery of political intrigue has made him France's most widely read author.
The book will be published on Wednesday.


Corrections
A chart on Aug. 18 with an article headed "What's Doing in San Francisco" misstated the initial fare for a taxi.
A reader's letter received early this month pointed out that it is $1.70, not $3.50.


Tracy Benchley, Christopher Turner
Tracy Parsons Benchley, the daughter of Peter Benchley, the author, and Winifred Benchley of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Henry Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas L. Turner of Springfield, Va.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wallace Alston Jr., a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the United Church of Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
Lawrence J. Madden, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, is a production assistant at Claypoint Productions, a documentary-film production company in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the author of "Jaws," "White Shark" and other novels.
Her mother is a former Freeholder of Mercer County, N.J.
The bride is a great-granddaughter of Robert Benchley, the author and humorist.


Plan to Protect Park Land at Kings Park Runs Into Snags
A NEW law and red tape are delaying a plan to protect 27 acres of proposed park land at the Kings Park State Psychiatric Center.
Since the state announced plans in 1993 to close the 600-acre hospital by 1997 vandals have struck the institution.
Two days after the Smithtown Town Board, on Aug. 2, agreed to maintain the 27-acre site -- which includes a two-story colonial house, an orchard, a greenhouse, gazebos, a waterfall, a fishpond and an arboretum -- and preserve it as a botanical park, the state announced that after a year of discussions it would review the revocable five-year lease that it negotiated with the town.


The Mobster and His Nose
To the Editor:
As the author of a book about cocaine ("Snowblind: A Brief Career in the Cocaine Trade"), I would like to reply to Vincent Patrick's review of "Capone," by Laurence Bergreen (Aug. 14).


The Statue of Liberty As Underdressed Hostess
DOWNTOWN -- Liberte. Egalite. Fraternite. Publicite.
It was one of those parties, a party requiring, in the manner of small military operations and the making of big-budget movies, political diplomacy and precise, last-minute maneuverings.


Idiosyncrasy Under Glass; New Orleans: Voodoo Dolls and Ju-Jus
It's not entirely clear whether or not Marie Laveau, the famous 19th-century New Orleans voodoo queen, had the New Orleans Historic Voodoo Museum in mind when she practiced her arcane arts.
But with its mix of gris-gris bags, voodoo dolls, snake dance art and a 12-foot Burmese python named Zombi, the place seems right at home in this city's steamy melange of attractions, where the line between exotic and tacky is often blurred.
In the heart of the French Quarter, the museum opened in the 1970's and sold roots, oils and voodoo paraphernalia.
Now it exists in a dark, cluttered incense-scented world somewhere between art and commerce.
Here you can learn about ju-jus (objects once alive that ward off evil spirits, like the alligator head above the front door) or ve-ves (spirit symbols).
In the occult room, there are cases of books, masks and statues, and the altar room pays homage to such spirits as Baron Samedi, who lords over cemeteries and is represented by a top-hatted skull resting just to the left of a hand-carved ju-ju totem.


Bush Pledges to Help North
Former President George Bush has promised to help the campaign of Oliver L. North, the Republican Senate candidate in Virginia, according to a letter released today by Mr.
North's headquarters here.
"I would be pleased to endorse you, if that would help in any way," the Republican former President wrote.
"Good luck to you. It's important that you win the race and that we get control of the Senate."


Nancy Goldstein, Matthew Rebold
Nancy Beth Goldstein, the daughter of Patricia and Bernard Goldstein of Rye, N.Y., was married there last evening to Matthew Ira Rebold, the son of Sol Rebold of East Williston, L.I., and the late Roslyn Rebold.
Rabbi Joel Gore performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 28, is an alcohol- and drug-use evaluation specialist at the Colorado State Probation Department in Boulder.
She graduated from Tulane University and received a master's degree in counseling from George Washington University.
Her father is a managing director of Broadview Associates, investment bankers in Fort Lee, N.J.
Her mother is a real estate broker at Coldwell Banker in Rye.


Columbia's Comeback Short by 21 Seconds
Two streaks were on the line when Columbia opened its season against Harvard yesterday at Wien Stadium.
First, the Lions had lost 15 consecutive openers, all to Harvard.
And second, no new Harvard coach had won his first game since Arthur Valpey in 1948.
Not even Joe Restic, who retired at the end of last season after 25 years as the head coach.
By the time the wild and exciting game was over, the new Harvard coach, Tim Murphy, had broken the first-game Crimson coaching losing streak.
But the streak did not end until quarterback Vin Ferrara scored from 4 yards out with 21 seconds left to play.
That touchdown, which climaxed an 83-yard drive, lifted Harvard to a 39-32 victory over the Lions.


Woodhull Security Chief Quits in Inquiry
The security director at Woodhull Medical Center in Brooklyn resigned on Friday in connection with an investigation by the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation into allegations that some employees were running a drug ring, supplying cocaine and heroin to patients and other employees.
The resignation occurs less than a month after the director of the hospital was asked to resign because of his resistance to a reorganization plan by the Health and Hospitals Corporation.


Town Council Meeting Takes Interactive Tone
IT'S not as if Larry King has to worry.
But when those first few calls from town residents came into the Greenburgh Town Hall switchboard at the Sept. 8 meeting here, the audience of nearly 100 residents, Town Council members and government officials drew in a collective gasp of mingled astonishment and pride that they were on-line and interactive.
It hardly mattered that the callers used their allotted two minutes on the air to complain about noisy leaf blowers, to voice concerns about traffic safety, to propose ice-skating rinks for the town's Recreation Department or to speak out against development.


Bonnie N. Jaffe, M. S. Bogdanoff
Bonnie Nicole Jaffe, a daughter of Barbara and David Jaffe of New York, is to be married today to Michael Steven Bogdanoff, the son of Shirley and Charles Bogdanoff of Rydal, Pa.
Rabbi Steven Ballaban is to perform the ceremony at the Lords Valley (Pa.) Country Club.
The bride, 28, is a pediatric physical therapist at Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Hunter College and is studying for a master's degree in physical therapy at New York University.
Her father is the chief counsel to the vice president of the New York State Senate.


Streetscapes/The 'Y' at 7 East 15th Street; A Romanesque Survivor Of Victorian Good Intentions
THE Victorians left the city littered with the architectural evidence of their improving impulses, only a few of which survive.
One of these is the delicious Romanesque-style brick and brownstone Young Women's Christian Association building at 7 East 15th Street, which has seen hard times in recent decades.
Now a Buddhist group, converting the structure into a temple, has completed an exterior restoration, but unfortunately only fragments survive on the interior.


Working Wonders In a Tight Frame
HENRY PURCELL'S chamber opera, "Dido and Aeneas," is plentifully represented on disk, but Nicholas McGegan's new recording, with the Philharmonia Baroque and the Choir of Clare College, Cambridge (Harmonia Mundi France 907110; CD), is the freshest and most compelling since Andrew Parrott's magnificent account of 1981 (on Chandos).
Mr.
McGegan's soloists -- Lorraine Hunt as Dido, Lisa Saffer as Belinda and Michael Dean as Aeneas -- work wonders with the concise characterizations provided by Purcell and his librettist, Nahum Tate.
As gorgeously as Emma Kirkby sang Dido for Mr.
Parrott, Ms.
Hunt captures the Carthaginian queen's anger and resignation far more vividly.
Her voice has the right coloration for the role.
Slightly dusky and nicely rounded, it sounds regal but not stolid.
As such, it contrasts nicely with Ms.
Saffer's brighter, lither sound, an important distinction in the work's opening scene, when the optimistic Belinda unwittingly urges Dido toward a fateful liaison with Aeneas.


Western-Style Roadhouse in Merrick
GET your kicks on Route 66." That old refrain now has real meaning for Long Islanders. Route 66, a new restaurant in Merrick that calls itself a roadhouse and dining saloon, is drawing crowds of animated diners.
Not all are nostalgia buffs familiar with the highway, song or television program.
Most are after good food and know that the same experienced restaurateurs who own George Martin in Rockville Centre are at Route 66.


FRAME OF MIND
I have always enjoyed "framing humor" and submit an additional example.
In the movie "Monty Python and the Holy Grail," an heir apparent is taken to a window that overlooks the vast domain he will someday inherit and told that all of it will someday be his.
His response -- "What, the curtains?" (which, by the way, is funnier than it sounds in my retelling) -- indicates that his frame of reference is the frame rather than the scene itself.
JOHN F. JOHNSTON Wilmington, Del.


POSTINGS: 8th Avenue and 43d Street; 4 Teams Compete To Design a Hotel
The southeast corner of Eighth Avenue and 43d Street may be one of New York's tawdrier intersections, but it has attracted some of the nation's best-known architects: Peter Eisenman, Frank Gehry, Denise Scott Brown and Robert Venturi.
They are among the finalists for a hotel that officials hope will be built at that corner, together with an adjoining retail and entertainment strip on the north side of 42d Street.
The four competing development teams were announced last week by the New York State Urban Development Corporation and New York City Econonomic Development Corporation, which expect to make the final selection by mid-November.


Sharpton to Continue Campaign for Senate
After briefly considering a run for governor, the Rev.
Al Sharpton said yesterday that he intended to continue his campaign for the United States Senate despite his loss in the Democratic primary.
Mr.
Sharpton said at a news conference in Harlem that he would re-enter the Senate race as a candidate of his own Freedom Party.


U.S. Judges To Decide On Cameras In the Courts
With 47 states now permitting television coverage of at least some judicial proceedings, the moment of truth has finally arrived for cameras in Federal courtrooms.
A three-year experiment that opened civil trials and appeals in eight Federal courts to television is about to expire.
On Tuesday, the 27 judges who set policy for the Federal courts will decide whether to convert the pilot program into permanent nationwide policy, as well as whether to take the first steps toward opening criminal proceedings to television coverage.


EXMOOR'S RURAL WAYS AND BYWAYS
AT Porlock Weir, on the north coast of Somerset, in England's West Country, there is the gated entrance to a toll road -- the Worthy Combe Road, up Culbone Hill.
If you buy an 80-cent ticket, the gates are opened.
You then drive up a narrow, unfrequented lane through steep woodland, a stream rushing past, fern gardens pitching down through the trees on both sides.
In spring, the ferns are green flames and the whole place is vibrant with birdsong; in autumn, it has turned to a tapestry of gold and rich brown.
You reach the top of the hill, and suddenly the woods have dropped away and you are at the edge of the moor itself, with sweeping views of the Bristol Channel, slate gray, the blue line of the Welsh coast on the rim of the horizon and the great green flanks of the land tipping down to the sea.
Turn away from the sea, and there are soft shoulders of moor in all directions, with Dunkery Beacon, the highest point in Somerset, rising to meet the swags of pewter-gray cloud.
In just a few minutes, you have climbed a thousand feet and glimpsed the contrasts of Exmoor scenery -- enchanted woods, wild moorlands, sky and water and solitude.
I have to declare an interest.
This is my patch.
I spent much of my adolescence around here, stumping along the lanes and over the hillsides with my indomitable grandmother, riding far and wide with my aunt.
I haven't sat on a horse for 40 years, and was a dud at the time, but I can still retrieve the sensation of plunging down the side of a combe rather faster than I liked, along a sheep track, with the horse up to its flanks in gorse and bracken.
My grandmother and her large family of siblings spent their holidays here in the 1880's, and eventually all made their homes in and around Exmoor.
In fact, I had better come clean entirely and admit that one of my great-uncles was master of the Devon and Somerset staghounds.
I now take a dim view of stag hunting, but I have to face up to this dubious ancestry.
My two bachelor great-uncles lived together in a house overlooking Porlock Vale, from whose walls projected innumerable mounted and labeled antlers: "Found Horner Woods, killed Watersmeet, Feb. 18, 1922."


How Cairo Conference Echoed Health Debate
To the Editor:
The news from the United Nations population conference in Cairo was depressing in its avoidance of central issues, namely that any child conceived, let alone born, should have the nurture, education and work opportunity to realize his or her capabilities; and second, that the increasing load of humanity this earth must bear is making the first objective very difficult, if not impossible, to achieve for most people.


In Russia, Tourism Drops As Street Crime Rises
TOURISM to Russia is declining, according to government and news media sources, as news reports of muggings, robberies and gangland slayings frighten away foreigners.
The United States Embassy in Moscow and the consulate in St.
Petersburg are issuing regular warnings to American tourists about theft and violence.
But 87-year-old Arthur Sachs of Miami cheerfully went ahead with his plan to take a cruise this summer from St.
Petersburg to Moscow.
As Mr.
Sachs prepared to enter his room in the three-star Hotel Moskva on July 10, his last day in Moscow, three muggers stepped off the elevator and threw him to the ground.
They snatched his camera, but threw away his passport, glasses and papers, which he later recovered.
The thieves never found his wallet.
Badly bruised, shaken and angry, Mr.
Sachs vowed never to return.


Tulips for the Soul
I DIDN'T plant tulips last fall.
Don't know why.
Midlife crisis, maybe.
Or was it Rollerblading?
Whatever. Big or small, a gardener's mood can do more damage than drought or hurricane.


Nancy L. Hoepli, Richard A. Phalon
Nancy Louise Hoepli, the editor in chief of the Foreign Policy Association's publications, was married yesterday to Richard A. Phalon, a contributing editor at Forbes magazine.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
E.
Kyle St.
Claire Jr. officiated at St.
Philip's Episcopal Church in New Hope, Pa.


Clues to Housing Shortage In the Ansonia's Rent Strike
To the Editor:
Regarding the Sept. 11 article, "See You in Court -- or at the Ansonia," most readers don't know that a 10-year-old rent strike like that at the Ansonia Hotel on Broadway and 73d Street is normally a death knell for older New York buildings with a high percentage of low rents.
And the Ansonia is famous for its low rent scale.
Similarly, most readers don't know what "between 40 and 50 rent-strike cases" means to the survival of a building.
Normally, that volume of litigation forces owners to walk away from their buildings -- which seems to be precisely what the tenant activists want.
It seems clear that the tenant leader, Thomas Soja, and his little band of rent strikers deliberately set out to destroy the financial viability of the Ansonia -- the owners have paid $5 million in legal fees so far -- in order to take over management of the building.


To Our Readers
The New York Times last week increased the size and spacing of the type used in news articles, in letters to the editor and on the Op-Ed page.
The goal of the change is ease of reading.
The change is most noticeable on news pages inside The Times, where white space has been added between lines of body type.
Previously, extra spacing was largely confined to the front page and the editorials.
In the next few weeks, the change will be extended to Sunday sections; article typography will then be consistent on all standard-size pages.


The Academic Season's in Swing Again
SCHOOLS and colleges are back in session, and with them busy concert schedules.
At Yale, for instance, the organist Charles Krigbaum opens the Sunday evening music series tonight at 8, his Woolsey Hall recital encompassing major works of Mendelssohn, Widor and Durufle.
Then, same time same place next Sunday, Colin Andrews and Janette Fishell present organ duos by Holst, Howells, Vierne and two Russian composers not often associated with such music, Gliere and Ippolitov-Ivanov.
Another organ option this afternoon is a recital at 4 by Thomas Murray of Yale, opening the Canterbury concert series in St.
John's Episcopal Church in Stamford (348-2619).


Corrections
An article on page 72 of The Times Magazine today about eight artists' interpretations of the New York fall fashion collections omits the fact that the works are on exhibit.
They are on view through Saturday at the Holly Solomon Gallery, at 172 Mercer Street in Manhattan.


The Electric Car Debate Continues
To the Editor:
S.
David Freeman gives the wrong conclusion about electric cars.
They are not practical for most uses because they are too costly to produce.


A Girl With Kick, Boys With Ideas And 'Silas' Redux
Milk Money  Melanie Griffith, Ed Harris Directed by Richard Benjamin PG-13 110 minutes


Business Diary: September 11 - 16
THE ECONOMY The Week's Scorecard: No Inflation, 2; Inflation, 1; Baseball, 0  This gets dizzying.
Just a week ago, the inflation cops were blowing their whistles again after an unexpected jump in producer prices.
But then came last week's report that consumer prices were nice and tame, and everyone quickly said, "Never mind." And after a second batch of data reinforced the low-inflation script -- a report by a regional Federal Reserve Bank, a drop in jobless claims, a rise in business inventories -- the stock market gleefully took off, with the Dow industrials hitting their highest level since this whole merry-go-round started with that first Federal Reserve rate increase on Feb. 3.
It was a short party, though, because the next day came word of a sharp rise in industrial production, the inflation warnings were trotted out again, and the Dow slumped.
But this week, who knows?
Perhaps these reports should be allowed to age so people can sip them a little more soberly.


Word for Word: The Health Care Papers; Now It Can Be Told: The Task Force Was Bold and Naive and Collegial
BILL CLINTON'S 20 months in the White House have been dominated by health care: the Administration's secretive efforts to write a health plan, followed by the agony of watching Congress tear it apart.
The urgency, boldness, creativity, political naivete, confusion and frustrations of the Administration are revealed in rich detail in thousands of pages of documents made public this month.
The Administration fought for 18 months to keep the records secret.
But, rather than defend its position in court, the White House voluntarily released the documents by turning them over to the National Archives in College Park, Md.


A Range of Arts
Four events, involving photographs, research, graffiti, books, music, art and fashion.


Guilt By Infiltration?
To the Editor:
After reading Bernard Holland's article "What Piano Did Beethoven Hear in His Dreams?"  [ Aug. 28 ] , I wonder if a more encompassing question should be raised regarding recent developments of the piano: What are present-day artists and pianos conditioning our musical sensibilities to accept?
I find that the gracious, warm and lyrical sounds of past years are being replaced by sounds that are brittle, hard and shattering, the guilt being shared equally by many "world-class" artists and their "world-class" pianos.


Carol P. Morse, Markus R. Holtby
Carol Prell Morse, the daughter of Dr.
Jane H. Morse of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Dr.
Stephen I. Morse, was married yesterday to Markus Rudolph Holtby, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Holtby of Toronto.
The Rev.
Jean Dix performed the ceremony at the Remsenburg Presbyterian Church in Remsenburg, L.I.
Mrs.
Holtby, 28, and her husband, 25, graduated from the University of Arizona.
She is a sales manager at Williams-Sonoma in Washington.
Her father was a professor and the chairman of the microbiology and immunology department at Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a clinical professor of medicine at Columbia University in New York.


Toss the Key: Horse of the Year Seems Locked Up
Now that the biggest name in all of horse racing is off to take a well-deserved vacation after turning in perhaps the most dominating performance of 1994, the question is: who is left to vie with Holy Bull for Horse of the Year honors?
That is, if the award has not already been locked up by the magnificent 3-year-old gray colt.


Americans Find Time For a Medal
There are two Lindsay Burnses, one a neuroscientist who will be back at work at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., on Tuesday.
The other is a world-class rower who won a bronze medal today at the world championships on Eagle Creek Reservoir.
Her event was the women's lightweight double sculls, and she and Teresa Zarzeczny from Washingtons Crossing, N.J., culminated a decade of high-level training in this sport with their third-place finish.


FRAME OF MIND
Regarding Jack Rosenthal's On Language column "Frame of Mind" (Aug. 21), my favorite is still the old standby:
"What's the difference between a sweet potato and a yam?"


DEFIANTLY DEAF
Solomon fairly portrays Deaf culture in the United States.
This culture, with its own language and many cultural artifacts, fully justifies the Deaf pride of those who are its members.


Rail Line Renting Cars for New Riders
WITH ridership figures growing at a brisker pace than expected, Metro-North Commuter Railroad has been scrambling in recent months to find extra passenger cars.
Donald N. Nelson, the line's president, said the commuter service, which served 60 million riders last year, was seeing its highest rate of growth since 1946.
Mr.
Nelson attributed the latest surge in ridership to last winter's storms during which many car travelers turned to the train.
He called them "snowbird riders who stayed on."


How Vatican Views Cairo
Time is a flexible commodity at the Vatican.
It took 350 years or so, for instance, to acknowledge that Galileo was right when he said the Earth orbited the Sun.
When the Vatican bureaucracy shepherded a beatification through its arcane channels in a mere 17 years, critics said it had shown unseemly haste.


The World; Yoked in Twin Solitudes: Canada's Two Cultures
THE shops are funkier in Quebec than in English Canada.
Women dress with greater panache.
There is less prudishness about sex.
Architecture is lighter, more frivolous, contains more extravagant gestures.
Theater is more visceral.
Dining is better.
Advertisers know the differences.
So waiting for a bus in Montreal, you may see a stocking ad showing a lot of leg.
Never in Toronto.
McDonald's has changed its logo in Quebec to J'M, a play on j'aime, French for "I love." English Canadians drink V-8 because they think it's healthy.
"Have you had your veggies today?" asks the V-8 ad in English Canada.
In Quebec a magician appears.
"What an act," says the copy.


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; Name Game Professionals
A cautionary folk tale for businesses: Decades ago, when Ford introduced a line of cars to South America, the company innocently gave one the name Caliente, South America's slang equivalent of "hooker." Ford couldn't afford the gibes and promptly changed the name.
To help industries with such linguistic complexities, a variety of consultants have appeared, including the Namelab in San Francisco, the Name Traders in San Jose and ABC Namebank International in New York and Toronto.


SUNDAY, September 18, 1994; Tara Incognito
The South may have risen again, but Tara has fallen, twice.
The original Tara, built in Culver City, Calif., for David O. Selznick's 1939 film, "Gone With the Wind," spent 20 years as a back-lot curiosity.
In 1959 (the date of the photo at right) two businessmen bought it, dismantled it and shipped it to Atlanta for a planned restoration that did not come to pass.
CBS constructed a new set for its coming mini-series "Scarlett," a sequel to the movie.
When filming was over, the set, constructed in South Carolina, was sold to a local man for $1 to tear down and cart away.


New Feud on the Range: Cowman vs. Tourist
Just outside the wind-polished walls of Arches National Park, D. L. Taylor is counting heads moving through the canyon at sunset.
There's a pair from New York.
A batch from the Midwest.
A couple of strays from San Francisco.
It's feeding time in the Virtual West, and you can almost hear the ranch hands humming the latest version of the cowboy classic: "Whoopee ti yi yo, get along, little tourists."


Another Day at the Border
ALL DAY LONG IN THE SIMMERING sun, a river of Rwandan refugees flows relentlessly north from Goma, a decrepit little town in eastern Zaire, toward a hulking range of volcanoes.
One bare foot after the other, they plod wearily on, as though they all have appointments at the end of the world, somewhere far beyond the thousands of bodies that line the road for the next 25 miles -- bodies abandoned without burial in this desolate corner of Africa as inhospitable to the dead as to the living, a thin sifting of black talcum over a bed of black rock.
As the road rises, the temperature falls and most of the corpses lack the straw mats or blankets customarily used to wrap them.
On this chilly moonscape, the living have more need of them, though without their shrouds the dead have stiffened into sad caricatures of life: a mother and child reaching for each other, a man sitting against a tree, a woman with arms stretched upward as though welcoming a lover.


Journal; Why Marion Barry?
When America has been looking for a laughingstock in the 1990's, there have been few better candidates than Marion Barry, the former Mayor of Washington.
The videotape of his humiliating F.B.I. bust at the Vista Hotel four years ago is now as indelible as most Washington monuments and, to those who enjoy melodramatic morality tales, vastly more entertaining.
But the easy jokes have always left me a little uncomfortable.
While Mr.
Barry's behavior was reprehensible in the final, disastrous years of his 12-year rule of the nation's capital, wasn't his downfall more depressing than comic?
I grew up in pre-home-rule Washington and remember the Barry of more than a quarter-century ago, who spoke up eloquently for the rights of a mostly black city that was ruled like a plantation by racist Congressmen.


Venison and Other Hearty Fare for a Cooler Time of Year
IT'S beginning to feel like fall at dinnertime.
A simple tomato salad followed by grilled or roasted fish served at room temperature with a cool salsa and a couscous salad no longer satisfies.
Warming soup, red meat, earthy grains, mushrooms and the like are starting to whet the appetite.
The following is a good dinner party plan for now through the holiday season.
It begins with a chowder rich with corn, potatoes and spice.
At this time of year there is still good fresh corn to use.
Later, frozen or canned corn or whatever fresh corn is still in the market makes good substitutes.


Sheila Delaney, Anthony DiNota
Sheila Kathleen Delaney, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Anthony Stephen DiNota, a staff lawyer in the Bronx office of the civil division of the Legal Aid Society.
The Rev.
Harry Boyle performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride, 27, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
She and the bridegroom received their law degrees from New York Law School.
She is a daughter of Kathleen Delaney-Bring of New York and Paul C. Delaney of Bronxville, N.Y.
Her father is a real estate broker in White Plains.
Her mother is an executive vice president of Turner Broadcasting Inc. in New York.
The bride's stepfather, Murray H. Bring, is the general counsel of the Philip Morris Companies in New York.


How G.E. Plays for Keeps in Diamonds
A LEISURELY dinner in Brussels two years ago might seem harmless enough.
But next month in a courtroom in Columbus, Ohio, the Federal Government will argue that what happened there was a crucial act in an elaborate international conspiracy in violation of American antitrust laws.
The meal in question took place one January evening in 1992, when Peter Frenz, the General Electric Company's industrial diamond sales manager for Europe, sat down with Phillipe Liotier, a Belgian business executive, at the Royal Windsor Hotel.


The Nation; Blessed Are the Forgiven, For They Shall Run Again
THE Mayor returned triumphantly to office after serving nearly six months in jail.
He blamed his troubles with the law on his political enemies who, threatened by his power, had set out to get him.
But now, the Mayor was as powerful as before.
That sounds like the story of Marion S. Barry, who last week staged one of the most audacious comebacks in political history: four years after the former Mayor of the District of Columbia was caught on videotape smoking crack and convicted on drug charges, he won the Democratic Mayoral primary.


Idiosyncrasy Under Glass; LIGHTING UP IN PARIS
GIVEN the bruised image of the "devil's weed" these days, it might seem imprudent for a tobacco company to run a museum that celebrates the sniffing, chewing and smoking of nicotania.
But this is Paris, where smokers are not yet ostracized.
Indeed, the Musee-Galerie de la Seita even carries the name of the state-owned manufacturer of such Gallic emblems as Gitanes and Gauloises.
In fairness, the little museum does not actually promote smoking.
Rather, it tracks the history of tobacco from its pre-Columbian New World origins through its rapid conquest of Africa, Europe and the Orient.
As early as 1561, for example, the French court granted the plant "letters patent of nobility" for its medicinal properties.
Catherine de' Medici, we are told in a pamphlet, found that a quick puff cured her migraine headaches.


The Tales Overtures Could Tell
THE NEW YORK Philharmonic, which opens its 153d season on Wednesday evening, will turn back the clock almost 100 years next week, with a program featuring a rare performance of Antonin Dvorak's triptych of concert overtures, "Nature, Life and Love," conducted by Kurt Masur.
Individually, the works have been heard many times, and the second overture has become a mini-warhorse under its more familiar title, "Carnival." But the Philharmonic last performed the three together, under Anton Seidl, in 1895, three years after the American premiere, led by Dvorak himself at Carnegie Hall.
The curious history of these overtures raises questions involving everything from the nature of multimovement works and program music to issues of taste and reception.
They were written in 1891 as a single large work with a single opus number.
Dvorak was celebrating his 50th birthday to much acclaim, and he clearly wished to make a major statement, perhaps even to rival his venerable compatriot Bedrich Smetana.


BACK TO SCHOOL
The Henley shirt: This preppy perennial is in favor with teen-agers trying to make the layered grunge look a bit tidier.
The Henley is usually worn peeking out from under a flannel shirt.


Crime Moves Into New Arenas And Justice Rushes to Catch Up
THEY lurk along the back alleys of cyberspace scouting out new territory and victims for their crimes.
Their milieu: the bulletin boards and chat rooms of on-line interactive services.
Their marks: computer-literate children on the Internet.
Take the case of 51-year-old Alan Paul Barlow.
The County District Attorney's office said he traveled from his home in Seattle to a candy store in Mamaroneck early this summer to meet a 14-year-old girl with whom he had been corresponding by way of sexually explicit E-mail messages.


Susan Ehrenpreis, Daniel Batlan
Dr.
Susan J. Ehrenpreis, an ophthalmology resident at the Friedenwald Eye Institute in Baltimore, is to be married today in New York to Dr.
Daniel E. Batlan, a Baltimore anesthesiologist.
Rabbi Zachary Heller is to perform the ceremony at the New York Palace.
The bride, 29, graduated cum laude from Cornell University and received her M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Ehrenpreis of Hollis Hills, Queens.


The Soup Kitchen Is Not Just a Phenomenon of the Cities
THE center of scenic Old Saybrook, a popular shore town that more than doubles its population in summer, is always busy on Saturdays no matter what the season.
Cars pass in endless streams along both sides of its wide and divided Main Street, a pattern only broken when one veers swiftly into a just-vacated parking space.
The street has an aura of late 20th-century commercial bustle and prosperity coupled with the earlier American charm of three stately churches and some homes that date to the 18th century.
It also has two soup kitchens.


Charlotte Triefus, Lloyd Zuckerberg
Charlotte Jane Triefus, a daughter of Diana and Michael Triefus of Brighton, England, is to be married today to Lloyd Philip Zuckerman, the son of Barbara and Roy Zuckerman of New York.
Rabbi Gilbert Klaperman is to perform the ceremony at Caramoor, the performing arts center in Katonah, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is the president of Design Pavilion, a fashion representative and press relations firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a master's degree in media ecology from New York University.
Her father retired as the managing director of Triefus Industries, a tool manufacturer in Horley, England.


Jennifer Caldwell, John H. N. Fisher
Jennifer Caldwell, a senior producer at the Hewlett-Packard Media Technology Group in Cupertino, Calif., was married yesterday to John Herbert Newall Fisher, a general partner in Draper Associates Venture Capital in Redwood City, Calif.
The Very Rev.
Francis B. Sayre Jr., the retired Dean of the Washington Cathedral, performed the ceremony on Martha's Vineyard at the First Congregational Church of West Tisbury, Mass.
The Rev.
James Martin, a Congregational minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is a daughter of Robert G. Caldwell Jr. of Chilmark, Mass., and the late Ruth F. Caldwell.
The bride's father retired from the State Department.


K. M. Cunneen, Daniel Kotlowitz
Kathleen Marie Cunneen, a daughter of Francine and David Cunneen of Cinnaminson, N.J., is to be married today to Daniel Justin Kotlowitz, a son of Robert Kotlowitz of New York and the late Billie Kotlowitz.
Marilyn Head, a justice of the peace in Williamstown, Mass., is to officiate at Gedney Farm in New Marlborough, Mass.
The bride, 32, is a graduate of Montclair College and was until recently a stage manager for the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father retired as a credit manager for J. C. Penney in Voorhees, N.J.
Her mother is a teacher's assistant in the Cinnaminson public schools.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 18, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
9
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
2
12
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
4
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
4
14
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5
5
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
6*
5
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
3
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
8
31
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young boy learns a deadly secret.
9
13
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
10
23
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
11
1
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
12
3
THUNDER POINT, by Jack Higgins. (Berkley, $5.99.) The discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War II scandals.
13
4
THE WYNDHAM LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A demanding earl and a serene duchess in Regency England.
14
2
GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) Romance between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large hotel chain.
15
1
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $14.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
36
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
3
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime cases reported by a veteran policewoman.
3
567
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
4
3
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
5
83
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
17
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
7*
36
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
8*
20
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
9
9
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past and present.
10*
18
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
11
19
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
12*
46
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
13
1
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
14
67
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
15*
153
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
183
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
2
4
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
3
45
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel.
4
1
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


When the Man at the Door Says He's a Needy Neighbor
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's Aug. 28 Coping column, "Between Pity and Anger, Guilt and Betrayal," could not have been more timely as far as tenants in my building are concerned.
The type of con artist he described has come here twice since the article appeared.
On the first occasion, the would-be scammer came to the front door claiming to be a fifth-floor tenant who had lost his keys.
He was unable to persuade anyone to buzz him in, but managed to slip inside when a legitimate occupant entered.


Kimberly Hillman, Robert E. Gilbert
Kimberly Ann Hillman, the daughter of Sheilah and Dr.
Robert S. Hillman of Cape Elizabeth, Me., is to be married there today to Robert Edward Gilbert, a son of Barbara and Henry S. Gilbert of Hollywood, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Alexander B. Cairns, a Presbyterian minister, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 33, is the director of the division of speech and language pathology at the Maine Medical Center in Portland, where her father is the chairman of the department of medicine.
She graduated from the University of Washington at Seattle, from which she also received a master's degree in speech pathology.
Her mother is an author.


For Rent in France: A Cave With a View
BILBO would approve of my cliffside cave.
Bilbo Baggins that is, the renowned hobbit who lived in a hole and went adventuring in J. R. R. Tolkien's delightful tale.
Granted, my cave's smaller than Bilbo's, but from mine, you can see 18 villages.
And if you climb still higher, to the top of La Butte, the ancient mound on top of the cliff, there's a map of this plain between the so-similarly named rivers Loir and Loire, showing these villages with their names and distances from this little French village of Troo, the top of a triangle of which Tours and Blois form the base.


In the Land of the Orthopedic Implant
HERE in the town that is to bone surgery what Detroit is to cars and Hollywood is to movies, the inability of Congress to agree on health care reform is widely seen as a blessing.
Not only is the northeastern corner of the state politically conservative, but some of the measures that have been proposed could make life difficult for orthopedics manufacturers, a $6 billion-a-year industry born here nearly a century ago.
Manufacturers of artificial knees, hips and other orthopedic devices based here these days include Zimmer, a Bristol-Myers Squibb Company subsidiary that is the market leader; DePuy Inc., a Corange Ltd. subsidiary that was the industry pioneer, and Biomet Inc., a fast-growing, publicly traded upstart.
These companies, along with smaller competitors and suppliers, helped Warsaw sail smoothly through the recessions that socked most of the Midwest during the 1980's.
They account for more than 40 percent of the nation's output of orthopedic implants, a share that has been creeping up as they acquire smaller players.


2 Leaders of Peace Effort Defend Push for British-I.R.A. Talks
The most influential mainstream Catholic leader in Northern Ireland today dismissed charges that he and Prime Minister Albert Reynolds of Ireland were in too much of a hurry to open formal talks with political leaders of the Irish Republican Army.
The leader, John Hume, head of the Social Democratic and Labor Party and a member of the British Parliament, welcomed steps taken on Friday by Prime Minister John Major of Britain toward opening talks on peace for the Protestant-dominated British province of Ulster.


Julia P. Pistor, David P. Eisenman
Julia Pollard Pistor, the daughter of Shirley and Michael Pistor of Washington, was married yesterday to Dr.
David Paul Eisenman, a son of Katherine I. and Dr.
Sheldon Eisenman of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert MacLennan performed the Episcopal ceremony at Chesterwood, a historic home in Stockbridge, Mass.
Rabbi Roy Rosenberg took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 33, is a vice president for program development and production at Viacom International, the media company, in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father, a former counselor of the United States Information Agency in Washington, was until recently the United States Ambassador to Malawi, in Lilongwe.


Inspiration, Frustration, You're in Business!
INSIDE a rumbling, clanking factory in a rundown quarter of Greenpoint, Brooklyn, the air is fragrant with peanut oil as Dana Sinkler runs through the creation of a typical Terra Chip.
In the hushed refrigeration room, crates of earth-dusted parsnips and well-traveled taro roots await their trip to the slicer.
Once sliced, they are bathed in boiling fat, tossed about the salting and seasoning division, and sent through a series of mixing and measuring points before being sealed inside colorful foil bags that will be trucked as far away as California or as nearby as Balducci's to satisfy the public's craving for non-potato chips -- a market that Mr.
Sinkler and his partner, Alex Dzieduszycki, seem to have created with their own hands.
This quick walk down the line is about as close as the proud but fearful partners will let an outsider get to the production cycle of the Terra Chip itself (trade secrets, hypercompetitive market and all that).
But they are eager to talk in detail about the development of the Terra Chip business, and about their journey through the tangle of inspiration and frustration that New York bestows on companies that come to life here.


Slice of Old Broadway (Make It Thin)
On the eve of Yom Kippur last week, the block of West 72d Street between Broadway and West End Avenue was crowded with patrons.
"What, the order isn't ready yet?" was one common lament.
Another: "I want a roasted chicken."
"Dahling," said Ben Wigder, the owner of the Royale Kosher Bake Shop, to a woman cranky about the price of several loaves of challah.
"I told you, $12. How many times do I have to tell you, dahling."


The Electric Car Debate Continues
To the Editor:
S.
David Freeman argues persuasively that apologists for the limitations of electric vehicles miss the point that the vehicles are practical for some applications and do not need to be just as good as conventional vehicles to serve many needs.
But he ignores his own advice when he writes, "Soon a recharge will take no longer than the time to fill 'er up."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN South Africa Comes To Grand Central
From Tuesday to Saturday next week, the waiting room at Grand Central Terminal will take on the look of a South African market.
More than 35 booths will sell colored bead bracelets; dolls; belts made by Zulus; bushmen rock paintings on silk, and painted ostrich eggs, ceramics and wood carvings from the Ndebele, Kangwane and Gazunkulu tribes. (Samples pictured above.) Prices will range from $1 to $5,000.


Emily J. Yoffe, John D. Mintz
Emily Joy Yoffe, a writer based in Los Angeles, was married there on Friday to John Douglas Mintz, a business reporter for The Washington Post.
Rabbi Shlomo Schwartz performed the ceremony at his home.
The bride, 38, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wellesley College and was a Knight Fellow in journalism at Stanford University.
She is a daughter of Amelia Moffie, an artist in Newton, Mass., and Franklin Yoffe, a real estate developer who lives in Belleair Beach, Fla.


In the Land of Market-Leninism
CHINA WAKES The Struggle for the Soul of a Rising Power.
By Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn.
Illustrated. 501 pp.
New York:  Times Books/Random House. $25.


Queens West Begins With a Park
MOST major construction projects begin by digging a large hole in the ground.
The Queens West project in Hunters Point began by filling one in.
Earlier this month, in the middle of his campaign for a fourth term, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo formally inaugurated Queens West, which was authorized by the State Legislature during Mr.
Cuomo's first term.
He was joined by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Star-Crossed Coyote Staves Off Legal Delay
Misfortune tried to revisit the yacht Coyote today, but this time the sailboat came away unscathed.
In a last-minute legal wrangle with lawyers, the 60-foot ocean racer was spared from an eleventh-hour threat of having to miss the BOC round-the-world race.
Owners of a Canadian fishing vessel, which Coyote had collided with last month during a BOC qualifying sail, filed papers on Friday in the United States District Court here to seize Coyote.
The fishing boat was the 65-foot Lady Olive Marie from Yarmouth, Nova Scotia.


Upside-Down Holiday
To the Editor:
Anne Raver's essay "Black-Eyed Susans in May? (Who Wrote This Script?)"  [ Sept. 4 ]  reminded me of "House of the Spirits," which supposedly takes place in Chile.
In one scene, Jeremy Irons returns to his home just before Christmas.
The trees are bare, the flowers are dead, and it is snowing.
When I was in Santiago several Christmases ago, the temperature was in the 80's, the trees were in full bloom, and flowers were everywhere.
I guess the film makers forgot that Christmas in the Southern Hemisphere takes place in the summer.
NATHANIEL ALTMAN  Brooklyn


Festivity To Introduce A Fragrance
On Liberty Island, a celebration for a Saint Laurent perfume, called Champagne, Sept. 12.


Carter, in Haiti, Pursues Peaceful Shift
Opening a fresh diplomatic effort to avert an American invasion of Haiti, former President Jimmy Carter, Gen.
Colin L. Powell and Senator Sam Nunn flew here Saturday and met with Haitian military officials who seized power in a coup three years ago.
The American delegation refused to comment immediately after the first round of talks, which were held at the military headquarters in downtown Port-au-Prince Saturday afternoon.
Late Saturday night the American delegation left its hotel in the Petionville suburb of the Haitian capital for another meeting with military leaders.
As he was leaving for that meeting, General Powell told reporters, "We're having good discussions." The unscheduled talks continued early into this morning.


Sept. 11-17; Texas Is Back, Without the Gusher
THE Texas boom of the mid-1990's is taking shape in the streets of North Dallas, crowded with construction machinery and flowing with mud.
Homes selling for less than $1 million are being torn down to make way for homes often selling for millions more.
Inside one $4.5 million Georgian mansion going up to replace a $700,000 shack, scrollwork, friezes, acanthus leaves and rosettes march along endless moldings.
The Christmas-gift-wrapping room and decoration storage closet await their annual visits.
The movie theater and the surround-sound system throughout the house have the same designer who wired Steven Spielberg's place.
The closets, with their own Beaux Arts trim and automated inventory systems, offer enough space maybe for a Neiman Marcus branch or two.


The Nation; In Trouble: Five Who Sit With Reason to Squirm
NO fewer than five sitting members of Congress -- or almost 1 percent of the 535 members of the House and Senate -- are under indictment.
They are: Representatives Joseph M. McDade, Republican of Pennsylvania (on charges of accepting illegal gratuities); Mel Reynolds, Democrat of Illinois (statutory rape, child pornography and obstruction of justice); Dan Rostenkowski, also a Democrat of Illinois (17 counts including fraud, embezzlement and obstruction of justice); Walter R. Tucker 3d, Democrat of California (extortion and tax evasion) and Senator David F. Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota (abuse of his Senate expense account).
All have maintained their innocence.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  SISTERS &amp; LOVERS  By Connie Briscoe. HarperCollins, $22.


DEFIANTLY DEAF
As a professional in the field of deafness, I find that portrayals of deaf people in the news media are often superficial.
Andrew Solomon, however, did his homework and was able to describe the tough issues facing the deaf.
His sensitivity is not often found in an "outsider." RANDOLPH L. MOWRY New York University Program in Deafness Rehabilitation New York, N.Y.


HOW TO GIVE ORDERS LIKE A MAN
I enjoyed Deborah Tannen's comment on direct and indirect questions ("How to Give Orders Like a Man," Aug. 28).
Thankfully, she cast her linguistic observations in constructive terms that don't pit the sexes against each other.
The editors should not have misled the reader with a sexy headline.
MICHAEL ALCAMO New York, N.Y.


On a Stroll in the Park, A Brush With the Law
To the Editor:
I am not a drug dealer. Neither is my friend Nora.
Nora works in the mind-altering, but legal, field of public relations.
I used to prosecute drug dealers and other assorted misdemeanants and felons during a stint as an assistant district attorney in the Bronx.
Though I no longer practice law, my income is derived from entirely lawful endeavors -- voice-overs for radio and TV commercials.
And Nora and I are far too timorous ever to make a living from criminality.
We were therefore abashed to be confronted by a park ranger in Washington Square Park on a recent Sunday afternoon.
Our offense: walking Nora's dog Velcro off the leash.


FRAME OF MIND
We should all try to speak and write clearly.
But we also ought to try to understand what is being said rather than indulging our superficial misreadings.
Your anecdote about The Times Magazine cover is a case in point.
"When Whites Flee" may have satisfied some black staffers, but it doesn't at all mean the same thing as "When Whites Give Up." Fleeing suggests hysteria and panic: refugees flee from a pillaging army; area residents from a hurricane -- they don't wait around to think things over or see how it all turns out.
But you can only give up if first you tried; you may even have tried very hard.
The term certainly connotes making a good-faith effort, and that, I think, is what many of the people mentioned in the article did.
ROBERT J. MILCH Stony Brook, L.I.


Deals and Discounts
TOURS FOR THE YOUNG Contiki Holidays, which runs trips for travelers aged 18 to 35, has announced a "Costcutter" promotion for departures through December that offers special air fares to the first 500 passengers to make reservations; as of early September, there was plenty of space available, a spokeswoman said.


Jackson's Downhill Road: The Drive to the Bench
When you think of football legends, Mark Jackson is not a name that comes to mind.
Namath.
Mean Joe Greene.
Butkus.
Taylor.
Montana.
Those are legendary names.
Jackson is not.
Yet, his is a name that is firmly established in the Denver Broncos' history books.
In Denver, he is part of a legendary moment.
Jackson's fondest memory of football may be The Drive.
As a Denver Bronco, Jackson was one of the best wide receivers in the league.
John Elway went to him on The Drive, one of the best scoring drives in National Football League post-season history.
Trailing by a touchdown to the Cleveland Browns in the 1986 American Football Conference title game, Elway engineered a 98-yard, 15-play drive to tie the game.
The touchdown came on a 5-yard pass to Jackson.
Elway then took the team 60 yards down the field in the overtime period and the Broncos won on a field goal.


Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler
Magazine Part 2


Gangs: Machiavelli's Descendants
Street gangs, a fact of life in this city since before the Tommy gun, don't forgive mistakes easily.
Losing even a $10 bag of dope can land a gang "brother" in the hospital.
Mama will listen to a sad story about anything.
But the gang's enforcer does not want excuses.
No matter whether it was the police who took the dope or a holdup man with a .357, nobody messes with the gang's money, rules or reputation.
Nobody.
Neighborhood legend has it that one Black Disciples leader beat his own brother to the ground for violating the rules.


Scent of Quiz Scandal
To the Editor:
Frank Rich describes the contest in the 1950's quiz show scandal between "the patrician Columbia University instructor Van Doren" and "the Jewish, nerdy Stempel of C.C.N.Y." (column, Sept. 11).
For our family, it was something else.


Autumn Leaves From Another Perspective
SO HERE'S the first problem with your usual foliage trip: One of you has to do the driving.
And for even the worst driver, that means at least some road-watching cutting into the leaf-watching.
But it's difficult to avoid putting in some serious leaf time, for all the usual reasons -- passage of the seasons, one last burst of glory before winter, compensation for all the raking you'll be doing, and so on.
Still, if that annual foliage weekend is becoming a cliche -- the expeditionary equivalent of repeated playings (or even one playing) of "Autumn Leaves" -- try shifting your perspective.
Get above the trees on a balloon or a ski lift.
Drop down below the river bank and climb aboard a canoe.
Just park the car.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Spare Barn, Anyone?
IN polo, players change horses like golfers change clubs.
So when Long Island became the site this month of the U.S.
Open polo championships it was not just the riders and owners of teams that had to find housing.
It was the ponies, as well.
"These horses are great athletes," said Al Bianco of Old Brookville, president of the Meadowbrook Polo Club, which is the host of the tournament.
"The first question that an overseas team asked when they called was about accommodations -- for their horses."


After Half a Century, the U.N. Tries to Redefine Itself for a New World
The United Nations, which opens its 49th General Assembly session on Tuesday, is heading into a year of unusual scrutiny as diplomats, bureaucrats, scholars and a throng of increasingly powerful nongovernmental pressure groups are prodding the vast organization to reinvent itself for a world very different than the one it has known in its first half-century of life.
The task lurks behind the celebratory hoopla planned for the coming months, when symphony orchestras and rock groups will play, thinkers will think aloud at countless seminars, dancers will dance, and children all over the world will collectively write and illustrate a book about how the United Nations looks to them.
A roster of special events that have already begun and will continue into 1996 is already nine pages long.


D. L. Auchincloss, C. G. Cunningham
Diana Luise Auchincloss, the daughter of Mrs.
Francis A. Shields of Palm Beach, Fla., and Thomas Gore Auchincloss of Eagle Bridge, N.Y., was married on Friday to Christopher Gale Cunningham, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Foster Sutton Cunningham of Garrison, N.Y.
The Rev.
Alan Neale performed the ceremony at St.
Columba's Episcopal Chapel in Middletown, R.I.
Mrs.
Cunningham, 30, and her husband, 34, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a design associate at Charlotte Moss &amp; Company, an interior-design firm and retail shop in New York.
Her father owns a farm in Eagle Bridge.
Her mother, Diana Shields, owns Johnnie Brown's, a gift and accessories store in Palm Beach.
The bride is a granddaughter of Mrs.
Arthur B. Schoen of Palm Beach and the late Bernhard G. Lippert, and of the late Nina Gore Olds and the late Hugh D. Auchincloss.


SOUTHERN BELLE WITH A COUNTRY TWANG
NASHVILLE is like a big-haired old-country girl all dressed up for a night out on the town -- she's wearing red lipstick and snakeskin boots, she's got a Bible and a pint of Jack Daniel's stashed in her purse.
She looks so good, you'd never guess how smart she is.
You'd never know she's got that M.B.A.
But, in fact, she's just as contradictory as her famous music.
Country music is all about contradiction.
It tells a story, and since it is above all else a profoundly American music, that story is the story of conflict and change.
The music chronicles our lives as we move from the farm to the city ("Last night I went to sleep in Detroit City/And I dreamed about the cotton fields and home," Danny Dill and Mel Tillis); as our roles change ("Oh we've burned our bras and we've burned our dinners/And we've burned our candles at both ends," K. T. Oslin); as we fall on hard times (Clint Black's "One More Payment"), and even as our language changes ("Call me Cleopatra everybody/'Cause I'm the Queen of Denial," Pam Tillis).
If you want to know what's on people's minds in this country's heartland, listen to country music.
And if you want a close-up look at that heartland, make a date with Nashville.


Can't Get on a Golf Course? Just Build Your Own
NOW and then, golfers playing the new Putnam Country Club golf course ask Sally Donovan, the proprietor, just who designed and built the tree-lined course in the northeastern corner of the state.
"I did, along with my husband, Mike," Mrs.
Donovan will reply.
"But then they'll say, 'No, I mean who actually built it, who was the designer and who was the contractor.' And I'll tell them, 'There wasn't any designer or contractor. We did it ourselves.' And I can tell by the looks on their faces that they still don't believe me." In an interview at the Dutch Colonial house that now serves as clubhouse and pro shop, she added: "I can understand why they're skeptical. It's hard to grasp the concept that Mike and I did it ourselves."


The Granddaddy Of Disorder
THE SUMMER HAS BEEN STIFLING, too hot, Cy Twombly said, for painting, too full of distraction and diversion.
For this American artist, long viewed as a reclusive and elusive self-exile, has been preparing for a major retrospective in New York with what, for him, is a star burst of publicity.
"You know, this really isn't a thing I do," the 66-year-old Mr.
Twombly said in his slow, Southern drawl, gesturing vaguely toward a reporter's notebook and a photographer's lights during one of a series of interviews he has given recently.
It was not a grumble or a rebuke.
Rather, it was more a shrugging acceptance of the way things seem to be done these days.
The preparations were for Mr.
Twombly's largest American retrospective ever, opening next Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art.
It will include 50 paintings, 37 works on paper and 10 sculptures, embracing his entire career, from 1946 to a few weeks ago.
Twombly's is not a household name in the United States, although he gained a certain notoriety when one of his works was singled out by Morley Safer during an attack on modern art on "60 Minutes" last year as a "canvas of scrawls done with the wrong end of a paintbrush." On the other hand, those deceptively childlike scrawls have earned him many devoted followers among artists, critics and collectors.


Rebecca Jackson, R. W. Cavenagh 3d
Rebecca Ellen Jackson, an assistant in the promotion department at Island Records in New York, and Robert William Cavenagh 3d, the coordinator of music-video production for Atlantic Records in New York, were married yesterday in Carlisle, Pa.
The Rev.
John Norman performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.


On Sunday; Behind a Bar, A Mellow Eye On the World
THE Fox was at the door, opening up the neighborhood bar in Queens Village where the previous night's dankness hovered within like a brooding, boozy ghost.
Those days, the morning light cut rudely into years and years of cumulative dankness permanently soaked into the wood of the bartender's plank walk upon which the Fox -- the oldest friends and drinkers know Raymond Fox simply as the Fox, or Fox -- first trod 35 years ago as the day bartender in his first ball-and-beer joint.
"The jury would gather early," says the Fox, still bartending after all these years in a far different, far brighter tavern world.
The jury: Fox's term for the morning regulars who would convene on shaky cat's feet and down whisky shots and beer chasers in anonymous, ponderous quiet as if in contemplation of the guilt or innocence of some accused soul.


Kelly J. Finkral, John Renwick 4th
Kelly Jean Finkral, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Keith C. Finkral of Pennington, N.J., was married yesterday to John Phillip Renwick 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Renwick 3d of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peter Vanderveen performed the ceremony at St.
Christopher's Episcopal Church in Chatham, Mass.
Mrs.
Renwick, 27, is an assistant broadcast producer at Tarlow Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is a professor of industrial technology and engineering at Trenton State College.
Her mother, Linda M. Finkral, teaches computer and business education at South Hunterdon High School in Lambertville, N.J.


Harper Slips Past Knicks To Join Bulls
Ron Harper, who had been pursued by the Knicks, signed with the Chicago Bulls on Friday night.
The free agent signed for $19.2 million over five years, with a salary of $2.4 million in the first year.
The Knicks, who felt they had a good chance of signing the 6-foot-6-inch guard, had offered $1.25 million to Harper, a salary slot that was created when they did not re-sign Rolando Blackman.


New Wave of Immigrants Changes a Once-Italian Bastion
James Paternoster remembers a time not long ago when all his neighbors on Hart Street in Bushwick were Italians.
Some would gather at one of the many outdoor coffee shops that dotted Knickerbocker Avenue; others would play boccie at Maria Hernandez Park.
Even when Bushwick's Italians began moving out en masse during the late 1970's, this small sliver on Hart Street between Cypress and St.
Nicholas Avenues remained a bastion of the old neighborhood.


Rutgers Goes for the Victory and Falls Short by a Yard
Rutgers made it close, exciting and interesting against Syracuse.
Too close, too exciting and too interesting.
The Scarlet Knights, chronic losers to Syracuse and in the Carrier Dome, probably should have won and probably should have ended their hex tonight.
But, instead, the Knights absorbed a wild and aggravating 37-36 loss after failing on a final-minute 2-point conversion.
The Knights were 39 seconds from a frustrating setback when Ray Lucas unveiled one more miraculous play and connected with Reggie Funderburk on a 40-yard touchdown that made the score 37-36.
Coach Doug Graber elected to go for the 2-point conversion and Lucas rolled to his right and hit Funderburk with another pass.
But the receiver was shackled at the 1-yard line by Bryce Bevill, his former high school teammate, and the frustration returned for Rutgers.


Korea Talks: Hint of Thaw
On the surface, it was not a good week for the barely thawed relationship between the United States and North Korea.
In response to America's offer of economic assistance if North Korea halts its suspected nuclear weapons program, Pyongyang set its price so high that the once promising talks appeared to have gone into reverse.
The North asked for a modern, $4 billion nuclear reactor of Pyongyang's choosing, an energy supply until the new reactor is completed and a few billion dollars in cash.
"It is ludicrous on the face of it that the D.P.R.K. suggests that they will decide the architecture and the United States will pay," Robert L. Gallucci, America's top negotiator, said at a news conference in Seoul.
"I don't take it seriously." He was referring to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, North Korea's official name.


Charlotte Shutler, Pat O'Connell
Charlotte Katherine Shutler, an American Airlines pilot in Dallas, is to be married today to Daniel Patrick O'Connell, the president of Evergreen Capital Advisers, a public finance consultant in Harvey Cedars, N.J.
The Rev.
James A. Casciotti is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at Old St.
Joseph's Church in Philadelphia.
The bride, 35, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and was a captain in the Air Force.
She is a daughter of Charlotte and Philip Shutler of Annandale, Va.
Her father, a retired lieutenant general in the Marine Corps, was the director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Her mother is a docent at Gunston Hall in Lorton, Va.


Sept. 11-17: Cuba's Boat People; Castro, As Promised, Turns Off the Spigot
After a month in which Cuba threw open its coasts to people desperate enough to flee the island on such vessels as they could make themselves, the shoreline took on an almost ghostly emptiness last week.
The United States Coast Guard, which picked up more than 3,200 Cubans from rafts in the Florida Straits one day in August, was finding only handfuls by Wednesday.
The point, Cuban officials argued, was that Americans could trust them to keep their word.


Carolyn A. Bain, K. G. Ottenbreit
Carolyn Ann Bain, a vice president in the investment banking division of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York, was married yesterday to Kenneth George Ottenbreit, a partner in the New York office of Stikeman, Elliott, a Montreal law firm.
The Rev.
Jefferson Hatch performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Branchville, N.J.
Mrs.
Ottenbreit, 33, graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Thomas and Ann Bain of Augusta, N.J.
The bride's father is the senior partner in Morris, Downing &amp; Sherred, a law firm in Newton, N.J.
Her mother is the head tennis professional at the Spa at Great Gorge in Vernon, N.J.


It's Time to Order Bulbs
Plant daffodils and small bulbs like grape hyacinths as soon as they arrive, but wait until early November to plant tulips.
If you haven't ordered your bulbs, waste no time. A lot of the best ones sell out.


Churlish?
To the Editor:
What a churlish article Richard Taruskin wrote  [ "Sex and Race, Russian Style," Sept. 4 ] !
Igor, like Ulysses, left his homeland to fight for his country.
He left a faithful wife who, like Penelope, tried to keep her integrity.
When Igor returned, he did not, like Ulysses, slay the miscreants but forgave them.
Mythic stories have much in common.
However, it is a disservice to accent the negative and not to report the positive.
SARAH RYDER  Hewlett, N.Y.


Ms. Shivers, Mr. Rothschild
Lottchen Gossler Shivers, the director of publicity at the Henry Holt publishing company in New York, was married yesterday to Donald Joseph Rothschild, a playwright and screenwriter in New York.
Town Justice Robert Moore of Livingston, N.Y., officiated at the couple's country house in Germantown, N.Y.
Ms.
Shivers, who is keeping her name, graduated from Wellesley College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank R. Shivers Jr. of Baltimore.
The bride's father is a writer and teaches English at Johns Hopkins University.
Her mother, Lottchen V. Shivers, is the president of Baltimore-Washington Guides, a coordinator of promotional tours.


Mirror Lake to Undergo Slow Metamorphosis
Mirror Lake, one of the most visited sites in Yosemite Valley, is the focus of a restoration project to transform the lake into a meadow and eventually a forest, as well as let the area recuperate from a century of overuse.
Once a 20-foot-deep, eight-acre expanse of water, Mirror Lake is naturally turning into a marsh.
Now it is a lake only in spring, when a foot of water from melted snow covers several acres.
The $200,000 restoration was developed by national park officials and the nonprofit Yosemite Fund.
The Chevron Corporation contributed the funds and arranged for 500 of its employees to participate in the restoration of the lake and the surrounding 100 acres.
The first stage will begin this fall with the gathering of seeds and cuttings for propagation, and the rebuilding of a loop trail round the lake.
During the project, the area will not be closed but the trail system will be redirected to minimize foot traffic in some areas.
One of the main goals of the project, said Frank Dean, assistant to the park superintendent, "is to remove a spider web of trails that crisscrosses the lake bed."


No Parking? Hold Your Horses
Sandi Kahn, the president of the co-op board at the Mayfair Towers on West 72d Street near Central Park West, was one of the first to notice the new signs, in late June.
"I just walked out one morning and there they were," said Ms.
Kahn, a social worker.
"I couldn't believe it."


Florence Nightingale's Nile
To the Editor:
Annette Kobak, reviewing "A Passage to Egypt: The Life of Lucie Duff Gordon," by Katherine Frank (Aug. 14), speaks of "Letters From Egypt" (1865), a book of correspondence that Duff Gordon sent to her family from the banks of the Nile.


Sound Bytes; Where Hipness is On-Line
IT was in 1985, during his sophomore year at Stuyvesant High School in Brooklyn that Omar Wasow began to associate technology with community: He attended a party in Manhattan's East Village, where a wildly diverse group of computer aficionados, drawn together by their common interest in populist computing, swapped stories and bootlegged software.
Leaving New York to study race relations at Stanford, travel internationally and work as a voter-registration activist around the country, Mr.
Wasow never forgot the intimacy of that gathering.
He returned home in February to found New York Online, a kind of cyberspace Greenwich Village.


Once a Hotel, Again a Hotel
The New Yorker Hotel, since 1976 the mission headquarters of the Unification Church, has embarked on a new life with an old twist: it's a hotel again.
Since renovations began this year, the lobby's crystal chandeliers have been polished to an elegant glitter, and old yellow paint has been scraped off to reveal green marble beneath.
Rooms are being booked as they are finished.
Permanent rates have not been set but are expected to be in the moderate and economy range.


The Electric Car Debate Continues
To the Editor:
"Electric Vehicles: They're Practical Now," (Viewpoints, Aug. 28) could have been subtitled "And Have Been for More Than 15 Years."


Kristina Perkin, Harry Davison
Kristina Talmage Perkin, the daughter of Marianne Perkin and Richard T. Perkin, both of New York, was married yesterday to Henry Pomeroy Davison 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Pomeroy Davison of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Davison, 27, is an associate in the global investment management division of Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father is the founder and chairman of the V.Z.V.
Research Foundation, a medical fund in New York.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HOLLYWOOD MEMOIR  THE KID STAYS  IN THE PICTURE  By Robert Evans. Hyperion, $24.95.


A Visual Feast as the Trees Bear Fruit
LEAVES are on the minds of many travelers these days as they await the annual fall color spectacular.
Meanwhile trees can be appreciated for other showy qualities, particularly their often-interesting fruits.
After all, where would we be if there were not apples, pears, peaches, cherries and plums?
But there is no point in limiting enjoyment to on-the-table displays, or even to fruit that has nutritive use to humans.


Wall Street; Topps Slides and Makes a Second Out on Wall Street
NO baseball doesn't necessarily mean no strike-outs.
The Topps Company said Friday that the 1994 baseball strike "could affect the company's future financial performance." It was not welcome news to shareholders of Topps, which produces and markets baseball and other sports cards.
The stock fell 75 cents to close at $6.375 on Friday.
Volume was 3.2 million shares, up from a more leisurely 131,400 the day before.


Venison and Other Hearty Fare for a Cooler Time of Year
IT'S beginning to feel like fall at dinnertime.
A simple tomato salad followed by grilled or roasted fish served at room temperature with a cool salsa and a couscous salad no longer satisfies.
Warming soup, red meat, earthy grains, mushrooms and the like are starting to whet the appetite.
The following is a good dinner party plan for now through the holiday season.
It begins with a chowder rich with corn, potatoes and spice.
At this time of year there is still good fresh corn to use.
Later, frozen or canned corn or whatever fresh corn is still in the market makes good substitutes.


In America; The Reluctant Rescue
If the United States is the cavalry on its way to rescue the Haitian people from their internal oppressors, it's a cavalry that is approaching its destination on the slowest, most sluggish horses imaginable.
From the beginning Bill Clinton's response to events in Haiti has been a kind of wacky, stumbling, indecisive, mixed-signal, no-policy policy that ultimately can make people crazy and get people killed.
Mr.
Clinton bounces indiscriminately and sometimes farcically from one option to another.
Is it a cruel hoax or smart politics to lock up the refugees?
Do we support Father Aristide as the embodiment of democracy or trash him as an unstable, homicidal, mystical malcontent?
Is Randall Robinson fasting to protest our policy?
Good, it's a lousy policy.
Should we impose an embargo?
A real one?
I tell you what, we're going in, we're going in, we're going in . . .
No, wait.
Where's Jimmy Carter?
Can he go down and talk to these guys?


MERYL STREEP
MERYL STREEP IS SITTING IN A hotel suite in New York, slowly picking at a fruit salad.
She looks like a hip, scrubbed, well-to-do farm girl, far younger than 45.
Her blonde hair is knotted in two shoulder-length pigtails; she's wearing a loose, casually sleek dark green dress.
Her fingers toy with the stone and glass necklace around her throat.
Streep is distant but friendly and, at 5 foot 6, surprisingly slight.
While not glamorous, she is quite beautiful.
She hates interviews.
"I hate seeing myself pontificating," she says flatly.
"I can't bear it, as if I'm an expert on anything. I'm barely in control of my own life. And there's the pressure to be articulate. With motherhood, you can barely put the subject before the predicate and make a sentence."


Bounty Hunter
Michael Chiarello is very serious about his "product." By this, he means the raw ingredients by which the 32-year-old chef and owner of the Tra Vigne restaurant in the Napa Valley, fashions his soulful, vibrant cuisine.
He means, to begin, "gleaming, exquisite, unblemished" eggplant, zucchini, peppers and tomatoes.
He means pungent herbs and crisp lettuce.
He means hand-fed, free-range chicken and elegant extra-virgin olive oil, which the seemingly endless California sky coaxes from the landscape.
He also means the milky balls of fresh mozzarella, gently dried fruits and vegetables and cured prosciutto, which he hangs from the rafters in his basement and serves up, this time of year, sliced in wafers alongside "the perfect fig."


Artwork Inspired By 'I Feel Good!'
THE artist's name is Pnina Ramati.
She's a portrait painter whose special twist is that she paints at great speed while moving to the music of James Brown.
She is very smart and not a nut.
She has found, she says, that Mr.
Brown's music helps center and focus her, so that she can direct all her energies to the canvas.
She stands -- dances, really -- as she paints while Mr.
Brown's music fills the room.
Some subjects like the music; others don't.
How they react, she said, definitely affects how the painting comes out.
Mr.
Brown was so important to her that she wrote to him from her home in Israel and was eventually invited to his place in Augusta, Ga., to paint him.
Ms.
Ramati, the daughter of an Israeli diplomat, lived in Thailand and Sri Lanka as a child.


Susan L. Valente, Eric J. Marandett
Susan Lynn Valente, the daughter of Peter and Judith Valente of New York, was married yesterday to Eric John Marandett, the son of Paul F. Marandett of Dover, Mass., and Judy H. Hennessy of Natick, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated in the Pegasus Suites at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from Duke University, and she and her husband received law degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is to become an associate at Hale &amp; Dorr, a Boston law firm, next month.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Tenzer, Greenblatt, Fallon &amp; Kaplan in New York.
Her mother is a retired elementary school teacher.


A Message to Gooden: Drugs Can Take It All
Three years ago yesterday, when Yankees were still playing September baseball in the Bronx, one player, Pascual Perez, sat in the dugout mourning the drug relapse of a former teammate, Otis Nixon.
"I've been there before, I took the dollars that should have been for school, for my family," Perez said.
"I hurt my family. I hurt my five brothers who played this game. I almost lost everything. I know what it did to me."


Claudia Hanlin, Alvin Rodolfo
Claudia Luise Hanlin, a telecommunications management consultant in New York, was married yesterday to Alvin Rodolfo, a vice president in New York of Kleinwort Benson, a British merchant bank.
Town Justice Michael J. Tighe of Cold Spring, N.Y., officiated at the Three Rock Inn in Cold Spring.
Ms.
Hanlin, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles and received a Master of Laws degree from the University of Exeter in England.
She is a daughter of Hanna Hanlin and Robert Hanlin, both of San Diego.


Q. &amp; A.
Landlord's Access To a Co-op Q I sublet an apartment in a co-op building and have lived there for a year now.
While going through our renewal lease, I found a term I completely disagreed with.
Although I have tried to discuss this with the landlord, she keeps stressing that it is perfectly legal for her to do what she is doing.


County in Push to Cut Trash-Collection Need
WHILE public and private organizations have advocated recycling in recent years, a campaign this fall will stress waste reduction.
Three meetings and conferences will be held to help individuals and businesses reduce the amount of waste they put on the curb for collection.
"There has been a terrific response to recycling and conservation efforts," said James J. Hogan, director of the County Recycling Office.
"People are cooperating when they have the opportunity, but we have to move to the next level of effort and that involves an understanding of waste-generation reduction."


Allison Herbst, Lewis Marchant
Dr.
Allison Beth Herbst, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Herbst of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married there today to Dr.
Lewis Keith Marchant, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Marchant of East Northport, L.I.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl is to officiate at Beth El Synagogue.


In the 19th, A Family Seat Vs. First Woman
THERE may be another Hamilton Fish in Congress after all, albeit the first Democrat to fill what has become a Republican family seat in the Hudson Valley district, the 19th.
Mr.
Fish, son of the incumbent United States Representative, showed broad strength in defeating two competitors in last week's Democratic primary.
Alternatively, the district might remain in Republican control, presided over by the first woman to represent the Congressional District, if Sue W. Kelly of Katonah can extend her Republican primary victory to the general election.


Idiosyncrasy Under Glass; Moscow's Dr. Chekhov
ANTON P. Chekhov spent only four years in the pokey town house known as the Chekhov House on what is now Moscow's congested Garden Ring Road.
But, in Russia, that is more than enough time to justify a literary museum.
When Chekhov was living there with his parents, brothers and sister, from 1886 to 1890, the house was known as the Korneyev House, after the doctor who had rented it to his young colleague, fresh out of medical school and just making his name in Moscow's literary circles.
Literary museums are a Moscow specialty.
Pushkin, Lermontov, Tolstoy -- all the great Russian writers -- have one, no matter how much or how little time they spent here.
More than most, Chekhov's literary career was Moscow based: his early short stories were first published in Moscow magazines, and his later plays were first staged at the Moscow Art Theater.


With Jessica Tandy, the Glory Was in the Details
I DON'T PRETEND TO KNOW exactly what makes great actors great.
But they say that truth lies in the details.
And Jessica Tandy, who died last week at 85, was certainly one of the theater's most truthful practitioners.
Perhaps that's why, when I learned of her death, details popped into my mind first.
Not critical generalities.
Not sweeping praise, although in a career that spanned 60 years, she merited it time and again.
Instead, I pictured a mouth.
I heard a whoop of triumph.
I recalled a skip.
Her acting always transcended specifics, of course, but specifics made it memorable.


Coca-Cola Monopoly Is Protested at Rutgers
A university's effort to soften the impact of budget cuts by awarding a $10 million, 10-year exclusive contract to Coca-Cola has not only angered Snapple and Pepsi fans, it has also raised suspicions about the corporate presence on campus.
When Rutgers University announced its intention to provide Coca-Cola with exclusive rights to sell its products on campus, administrators heralded the plan as "a creative solution to long-term problems.


Presidential Support and the Military Option
The debate may last for days or weeks and the polls may be overwhelmingly against military intervention.
But once troops are sent abroad in a crisis, Americans almost invariably rally around their President.
This support is seen even when the use of force fails, as in the Bay of Pigs or the attempt to free the hostages in Iran.
And Presidential ratings improve even after military actions the public said it opposed, as was the case before the start of teh ground war in the Persian Gulf.


A Visual Feast as the Trees Bear Fruit
LEAVES are on the minds of many travelers these days as they await the annual fall color spectacular.
Meanwhile trees can be appreciated for other showy qualities, particularly their often-interesting fruits.
After all, where would we be if there were not apples, pears, peaches, cherries and plums?
But there is no point in limiting enjoyment to on-the-table displays, or even to fruit that has nutritive use to humans.


Maria P. Horn, Thomas Quinn 3d
Maria Patricia Horn, a lawyer in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Sydney Quinn 3d, a managing director of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas's Church in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Richard O. Horn of Moreland Hills, Ohio.
She is a clerk for Judge Denise Cote of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York.
Ms.
Horn graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received her law degree from the University of Chicago.
Her father is an administrative judge for the Social Security Administration, in Cleveland.


Isles Win (Sorry, Four Months Too Late)
Though it was just a preseason game and the Rangers didn't dress their marquee players, the Islanders tonight showed they haven't forgotten that the Rangers manhandled them in the playoffs last season on the way to the Stanley Cup.
The Rangers played without Mark Messier, Aleksei Kovalev, Brian Leetch, Sergei Zubov, Petr Nedved, Sergei Nemchinov and Stephane Matteau.
But the Islanders played as though they didn't notice.
When Benoit Hogue scored with 3 seconds left in the game for a 3-2 victory, they had a personal, moral victory.
It may have been a confidence-builder for a rebuilt Islander team.


WHERE AM I?


Penn State's Point Machine Still Humming in Overdrive
Even on a waterlogged afternoon in Happy Valley, Joe Paterno stood on the sideline today in a pair of prescription sunglasses.
The future's so bright, he's gotta wear shades.
The polls insist there are better college football teams than Penn State, but no contender has proved more ruthlessly efficient or ravenously businesslike in its dismantling of early-season opponents.
If the uniforms are from another era, so is Paterno's newly fuel-injected offense -- from the Paul Westhead era of Loyola-Marymount basketball.


A 'Dynasty' Scenario for the Harriman Clan
In wartime England, Kathleen Harriman, the 23-year-old daughter of W. Averell Harriman, the American statesman and financier, wrote home to her sister Mary about a dazzling young woman named Pamela, a new friend of her father's and hers who was married to Winston Churchill's son Randolph.
Pamela Churchill, wrote Kathleen, was "one of the wisest young girls I've ever met -- knows everything about everything, political and otherwise."
Mrs.
Churchill eventually married Kathleen Harriman's father in 1971, when he was 79 and she was 51.
She inherited most of his estate in 1986, and was a big Democratic fund-raiser, rewarded by President Clinton with the ambassadorship to France.


Karin G. I. Price, Mark J. Mueller
Karin Grace Inga Price, a daughter of Stanley and Inga Price of Valley Stream, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Joerg Mueller, a son of Joerg E. and Rose Mueller of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles Magistro, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Harbor Club in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
Mueller, 24, is a producer for NBC Desktop Video, a computer-delivered news service, in Fort Lee, N.J.
She graduated from New York University, as did her husband.
Her father is an administrator at N.Y.U.
Medical Center.
Her mother is a nurse at Franklin Hospital Medical Center in Valley Stream.


Elizabeth Pennino And A.H. Daecher
Elizabeth Lynn Pennino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Pennino of Holmdel, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Henry Daecher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Henry Daecher of Temple, Pa.
Msgr.
Frederick A. Valentino performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Bonaventure in Lavallette, N.J.
Mrs.
Daecher, 30, is a product marketing manager at Octel Communications, a manufacturer of voice-mail equipment in Milpitas, Calif.
She graduated from Cornell University, from which she and her husband received master's degrees in electrical engineering.
Her father is the division head of engineering for computer-aided design at Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, where her mother, Blanche Pennino, is a financial analyst.


Wendy Ponte and Robert Usdin
Wendy Ponte, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ponte of Manhattan, Kan., was married yesterday to Robert Usdin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Usdin of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Dennis Math officiated at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


IN SHORT: FICTION
WARTIME NOVEL  BRIDIE AND FINN  By Harry Cauley. Harcourt Brace, $22.95.


Arboretum's Treasures Are Flourishing Anew
HURRICANE warnings do not scare Dan Tompkins.Even though he is responsible for nearly 700 acres of trees on the South Shore, Mr.
Tompkins, director of the Bayard Cutting Arboretum, said he was prepared for devastating winds and lashing rains.
He has used that destruction to advantage.
When Hurricane Gloria struck on Sept. 27, 1985, destroying the most valuable collection at his arboretum in Oakdale, Mr.
Tompkins saw an opportunity to return the park to its original design.
After restoring the collection of unusual conifers, the arboretum features stronger plants better prepared to withstand hurricanes.


Idiosyncrasy Under Glass; LOS ANGELES: RATHER ODD SCIENCE
WHAT'S going on here?
This small, odd, Los Angeles museum, "dedicated to the advancement of knowledge and the public appreciation of the Lower Jurassic," has nothing to do with archeology or dinosaurs or, indeed, anything identifiably Jurassic or technological.
A private institution that opened in 1988, the Museum of Jurassic Technology offers a deadpan jumble that could have come from the Mad Hatter's attic: "Protective Auditory Mimicry" (a green beetle and a green gemstone hum together); a model of Noah's ark ("scale: 1 inch = 125 cubits"); a bizarre self-impaling stink ant ("one of the very few to produce a cry audible to the human ear"); a miniature video of a man who barks like a dog; an enigmatic exhibit titled "Purification through Sublimation."


Bridge-Widening Plan In Tinton Falls
Re: "Tinton Falls Journal: Bridge- Widening Plan Is Stirring Discord" (Aug. 7), which concerned a Monmouth County proposal to improve an intersection and reconstruct a bridge in the Tinton Falls Historic District.
In my opinion as Monmouth County Engineer, the article was a misrepresentation of the facts.
Focusing on the emotional issues inherent to constructing an improvement of this nature in a historic area ties in with local project opponents and historic special-interest groups in ignoring the technical issues that directly affect public safety.
This type of myopic point of view is the reason that the county's deteriorating bridge remains in service, and why safety problems at this intersection remain uncorrected.


Andrew B. Cohen and Sandra L. Tsang
Sandra Lynn Tsang, an associate in the White Plains office of the New York law firm of Thacher Proffitt &amp; Wood, and Andrew Blair Cohen, a prosecuting attorney in the Queens County District Attorney's office in Kew Gardens, were married yesterday in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Joseph C. Williamson, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
Ms.
Tsang, who is keeping her name, and her husband graduated from Princeton.
She received her law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Annie C. and Harry C. Tsang of Waldwick, N.J.
Her father is a computer specialist in the New York City Human Resources Administration.
Her mother teaches English at New Town High School in Elmhurst, Queens.


Megan Carroll, Timothy Shea 2d
Megan Elizabeth Carroll, the owner of Carroll Associates, a law and consulting firm in Boston, was married yesterday to Timothy Joseph Shea 2d, a patent attorney at the Boston law firm of Lorusso &amp; Loud.
Msgr.
Robert B. Davern, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Barat College Chapel in Lake Forest, Ill.
Mrs.
Shea, 27, graduated cum laude from Boston College, from which she and her husband received law degrees.
She is a daughter of Barbara P. and Barry J. Carroll of Lake Forest.
The bride's father is the chairman of Carroll International, a conglomerate in Des Plaines, Ill.
Her grandfather, the late Wallace E. Carroll, was an industrialist and a major benefactor of Boston College.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Want a U.S. Car? Read the Label
"WHAT else would you expect from the country that invented rock-and-roll?" asks the General Motors Corporation in plugging its Camaro muscle car.
Well, since the Camaro is made in Canada, one might easily infer that G.M. is confused about the origins of rock-and-roll.
G.M. is just trying to sell its goods by wrapping them in the American flag.
That is a time-honored practice, but as car makers, like other corporations, become more and more global, "American" and "foreign" are becoming much fuzzier than stars and stripes.
G.M., Ford and Chrysler import many vehicles.
And their Japanese competitors have built assembly plants in places like Kentucky and Tennessee.


Apartheid's Grisly Aftermath: 'Witch Burning'
On the April Sunday when South Africa was counting the votes of its first free elections, residents of this town with the self-effacing name accosted Sinna Mankwane in front of her home and pinioned her arms with three gasoline-splashed tires.
According to witnesses' accounts compiled by the police and local officials, the mob summoned her husband, Johannes, from the house, and handed him a box of matches.
With the couple's son and daughter looking on, Johannes was forced to burn his wife alive.


Sept. 11-17; Scroll Me Up
French scientists have produced an all-plastic transistor that could give new meaning to the expression "scrolling up" a computer screen.
The flexible plastic transistors, which can be made in sheets using simple paper-printing technology, may one day be the basis of such new products as car windshields that display information or flat television or computer screens.
Researchers at France's National Center for Scientific Research said the paper-thin transistors have no metallic electrodes or wires, and work after being bent, twisted or rolled up.
Made of layers of semiconducting polymers and insulating film, they use graphite ink as electrodes.
One day, the result may be TV or computer screens that can be rolled up like a scroll or window shade.
WARREN E. LEARY


Prince May Be Too Musical For the Music Business
Prince Rogers Nelson doesn't care who thinks he's weird.
He dresses like a millionaire bellhop; his hair looks as if it contains more chemical residues than the Cuyahoga River.
When he's on stage or in a video clip, his every move seems stylized, as if already slowed down for instant replay.
And if his presence alone hasn't been peculiar enough, this year he managed to amuse and flabbergast large segments of the pop public by dropping the name that has carried his career since the 1970's -- Prince -- in favor of an unpronounceable symbol that merges male and female symbols with a horn.


Karen Johnson, Peter Orphanos
Karen Louise Johnson, the daughter of Janet L. Johnson of Wilton, Conn., and Daniel R. Johnson of West Redding, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Pericles Orphanos, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James P. Orphanos of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
B.
Whitman Dennison officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Chapel in Manchester, Vt.


5 on U.N. Aid Mission in Egypt Are Killed; Militants Suspected
Gunmen believed to be Muslim militants opened fire today on United Nations aid officials and their police escort on a road in southern Egypt, killing five people.
The attack, the deadliest attributed to militants since March, came as the United Nations officials and four police officers were traveling north from Luxor in separate cars to open a clinic near the town of Qena.
Both cars were hit, and the four officers and an Egyptian worker for Unicef were killed.


Tiered Stores And the Disabled
To the Editor:
For commercial landlords and retailers, cramming more selling space into stores by adding many levels may seem like the greatest new idea since someone first stacked stuff on shelves ("New Stores Making Shopping a Many Tiered Experience," Aug. 28).


Time Off Before Going at It Alone
Solo sailors rarely have the luxury of time before a major ocean competition.
But Christophe Auguin, of France, champion of the last BOC round-the-world race, recently did the unthinkable.
Auguin took off for the wilds of Idaho when everyone else was preoccupied with getting ready to sail.
"I needed to see green," said Auguin in halting English after he got back.
"Now I am ready to go in the blue. I needed to forget the pressure, to not think about the race. The BOC is long -- nine months. It is not possible to have concentration all that time."


Birds Fare No Better
To the Editor:
As a dedicated bird watcher, I heartily second Anne Raver's botanically correct plaint about the often inappropriate flora in films.
It is no better with regard to birds.
I have learned to tune out the call of that denizen of the Pacific Coast, the wren tit, from supposedly eastern locales, or the song of mockingbirds from sites well north of their range.


Famous for Being Einstein
EINSTEIN LIVED HERE By Abraham Pais.
Illustrated. 282 pp.
New York: The Clarendon Press/Oxford University Press. $25.
EINSTEIN  A Life in Science.
By Michael White and John Gribbin.  279 pp.
New York: Dutton. $21.95.
THE PRIVATE LIVES OF ALBERT EINSTEIN By Roger Highfield and Paul Carter.
Illustrated. 353 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.


Bustles and Bows
Bergdorf Goodman premieres Vivienne Westwood's fall collection, a sendup of Victorian style, Sept. 13.


Any Additional Delay for Health Bill Means Death for Proposal This Year
This week could be the death of significant health care legislation in 1994, and developments in Haiti might mean the end before the week begins.
Unless Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, and the bipartisan group known as the Mainstream Coalition, which supports some change in health care, can agree on a plan and start selling it to their colleagues in the week ahead, there will not be enough time, even optimists concede, to pass a bill before Congress adjourns in mid-October.


A Renewed Sense of Mission Is Rousing the U.N.
A fresh sense of optimism is seeping through the bureaucracy here, a feeling that the end of the cold war is belatedly goading the United Nations into a unity of purpose.
At the same time, however, American critics contend that change is still slow and that constant pressure is needed to keep the world body lumbering in the right direction.
Discussions with middle-level administrators over the last month found a consensus that the staff is renewing the idealism on which the United Nations was founded and that there has been a drop in the cynicism that gripped the headquarters building for years.


Rebels Say Mexican Army Is Breaking Terms of Truce
The rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army has accused the Mexican Army of doubling the number of its troops in the southern state of Chiapas in an attempt to provoke a final confrontation.
The rebels warned that they were prepared to fight "days, months, years, entire decades" if hostilities were restarted.
The Mexican Department of Defense denied today that it had increased its troops in Chiapas beyond the 20,000 stationed there since January or had ordered any change in patrols.
At an Independence Day military parade on Friday in Mexico City, the head of the federal forces, Gen.
Antonio Riviello Bazan, said nothing about increasing tension in the Chiapas war zone.


A Fashion Gallery
Fashion is a most amiable muse, yet many artists tend to be rather wary of it.
If one allows that immortality is the artist's ultimate goal, then it stands to reason that fashion, perishable by definition, must be its dread opposite.
Certainly, the artists invited here to address some aspect of the New York fall collections strike a multitude of attitudes -- from urban appreciation to a healthy disregard.
Working in a variety of media, including life drawing, photography, taxidermy and collage, they are as eclectic a lot stylistically as they are intellectually.
Beverley Semmes and Pat Oleszko habitually work with clothes, and might both be described as exaggerators.
Semmes elongates, in the manner of a latter-day Beardsley.
The Calvin Klein T-shirt dress that figures in her piece is cocooned within a characteristically distended, Semmesian garment resembling a Victorian nightgown.
Knotted as it is, the gauzy pinafore also suggests some jerry-built means of escape -- in a symbolist fairy tale involving, say, a princess in a tower -- and the little dress inside evokes the dream of liberation.


Lauren J. Ruskin, Edward R. Hobart
Lauren Jill Ruskin, a daughter of Nancy B. and Steven A. Ruskin of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday to Edward Reeves Hobart, a son of Joan and Dr.
John H. Hobart of Easton, Pa.
The Rev.
Darrell Berger, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hobart, 26, is an assistant vice president of Wells Fargo Bank in San Francisco.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft.
Her mother is a vice president in Armonk of Walden Residential Properties.


Audio Books
To the Editor: Re "Freewheeling in a Station Wagon" by Libby Lubin (Travel, July 24): Ms.
Lubin on her lengthy car trip with her family missed the best entertainment ever devised for car-bound travelers: audio books.
Thanks to tape decks, whole families are now listening together to books being read aloud.


Driving in Spain
To the Editor: We read with great interest the letter of Logan Geeslin on "Driving in Spain" (Letters to the Editor, July 10), which reminded us of a similar experience with the formidable Guardia Civil.
Ours was a more harrowing encounter, yet with more luck in the end.
On a recent trip in Extremadura, we were also stopped by a Guardia Civil trooper outside of the town of Coria (near Caceres).
It was a setup.
He nabbed us for not switching from an interior lane to an exterior one before exiting from an impossibly complex rotary.
The fine was an outrageous 50,000 pesetas, about $380 -- more money than we had.
And he showed no inclination to bargain.
The next 45 minutes were exceedingly uncomfortable.
In rapid Spanish and with dramatic hand gestures, he offered us two options: produce the money or relinquish the car.
Only after reducing us nearly to tears did he relent and salute us off.
Never once did he take off his mirrored aviator sunglasses.


HOW TO GIVE ORDERS LIKE A MAN
Tannen discusses a study that shows how a tragic airline crash might have been avoided had it not been for the miscommunication between the pilot and co-pilot.
She notes optimistically that some airlines are now training crew members to speak directly to one another.


LaFontaine Now a $22.5 Million Man
PAT LaFONTAINE didn't have any trouble convincing the Buffalo Sabres that he is worth $22.5 million.
Convincing the team's insurance carrier proved a little more difficult.
LaFontaine became the fourth highest-paid player in the National Hockey League when he signed a five-year contract extension yesterday about two weeks after he first agreed to terms.
In the meantime, the Sabres were trying to insure the deal in case he suffered another injury like the one that caused him to miss all but 16 games last season.


Swissair Plies the Unfriendly Skies of United Europe
For Swissair, based in this trim city in the heart of Europe, the biggest problem these days seems to be how to become a European airline.
And its European dilemma helps explain why, despite a stellar reputation for punctuality, service and tasteful cuisine, Swissair is losing money in its airline business.
Even though its flights are often filled, Swissair had a pretax loss of about $50 million during the first half of this year on its air service, analysts estimate.
Only Swissair's profitable hotels and catering divisions enable the company as a whole to remain profitable.
Last year, it reported earnings of $46 million on operating revenues of $4.9 billion.


FRAME OF MIND
Rosenthal's remarks about adverbs that overemphasize were just right.
I chuckled at his closing sentence, but how did he overlook abundantly, the adverb with which clear has became a Siamese twin?
THOMPSON WEBB Waunakee, Wis.


TV Ready for Battle, With High-Tech Access
However brief it turns out to be, any United States invasion of Haiti is likely to be the most minutely documented military action in history.
Several hundred reporters and photographers from television networks, newspapers and magazines are already in Haiti, with the most advanced equipment ever brought to a potential combat zone.


When Rap Meets The Undead
THE VIDEO FOR "DIARY OF A MADMAN" BY the rap band the Gravediggaz includes a warning that the clip does not condone Satanism or blasphemy; the video for "Live Evil" by the Flatlinerz depicts members of the hip-hop band rapping from the inside of a grave, and the video for "Hellbound" by the Almighty RSO takes the deaths of the band members as a starting point and climaxes when the rapper E. Devious is shown with the mark of the Devil, 666, shaved into his head.
With gangster rap having exhausted nearly every imaginable murder scenario, a new breed of rappers is taking hip-hop beyond the grave.
Some call this development horror-core because it uses horror films as metaphors for ghetto life.
Others prefer the term death rap because the genre takes hip-hop to musical and lyrical extremes in the same way that death-metal bands like Obituary and Carcass bring rock to a boiling point.


Oldham's New Playground
THERE has always been a Tom Sawyer quality to Todd Oldham, with his mussed hair and chipped front tooth, and his picket-fence approach to decorating his new SoHo fashion boutique seemed to confirm the notion.
As anyone who has witnessed Mr.
Oldham's appearances on the MTV show "House of Style" knows, he has a gift for making do-it-yourself decorating seem fun.
So when it came time to paste thousands of book pages to the floor, tack broken tile mosaics on counter tops and construct teetering shelves from stacks of footstools, he called on his friends.
There was Angel Dormer, his design assistant; Billy Beyond, his muse and cross-dressing model; Princess Zoriah, a jewelry designer; the hair dresser Danilo; Joshua Jordan, a photographer, and Tony Longoria, Mr.
Oldham's partner.
"It was a pretty nontraditional construction crew," Mr.
Oldham said.


Simpsonese
Watching NBC's live coverage of the O. J. Simpson pretrial proceedings, I was startled to hear one witness identify himself as having worked "for 16 years as a criminalist in the city of Los Angeles." I asked myself: when is Tom Brokaw, with the vast research facilities at his disposal, going to tell us how to differentiate among a criminal, a criminalist and a criminologist?
The phone rang. It was Tom Brokaw. "You're the word maven. What's a criminalist?"


Schroeder Knew Who Counted
To the Editor:
Alex Ross missed one reason Beethoven was once considered the world's greatest composer.
Schroeder, the piano-playing Peanut, worshiped Beethoven.
He only played Beethoven, Beethoven's bust sat on his piano, and Schroeder once played baseball for a team sponsored by "Beeth Oven." The cartoonist Charles Schulz obviously thinks highly of Beethoven.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Trade with services, July, deficit, billions
$9.4
$9.4
Wednesday
Housing starts, August, millions, annual rate
1.42
1.40
Housing permits, August, mils., annual rate
1.34
1.30
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
327
330
Treasury statement, August, $ billions
-33.2
-23.0
This Week's Developments
Monday
Greenspan, Rubin, Tyson and Reich to speak at
*4*Boston College conference on financial markets and the economy
Results of Swedish general election
Tuesday
Johnson Redbook report released
Wednesday
Danish general election


A Visual Feast as the Trees Bear Fruit
LEAVES are on the minds of many travelers these days as they await the annual fall color spectacular.
Meanwhile trees can be appreciated for other showy qualities, particularly their often-interesting fruits.
After all, where would we be if there were not apples, pears, peaches, cherries and plums?
But there is no point in limiting enjoyment to on-the-table displays, or even to fruit that has nutritive use to humans.


Concert Season Is Gaining Momentum
THE concert season is by no means at full throttle, but a number of enticing events are on the calendar this week.
At the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck, "Pump Boys and Dinettes" is playing Wednesdays through Sundays through the end of the month, so Richard Goode has chosen 8 P.M.
Tuesday for a recital of the "Appassionata" and four other Beethoven sonatas.
Mr.
Goode has said that he will begin a sabbatical in the spring, so this may be his only appearance in the county for a couple of years.
For reservations, or a brochure listing dozens of other events at the Emelin, call 698-0098.


Trials on Home Ground
When William L. Murphy was growing up on Staten Island, he used to shoot hoops in the backyard of his grandfather's clapboard house on Bowen Street.
His grandfather was a retired New York City police sergeant, and he lived across the street from a field where a dozen red-brick apartment buildings went up in the 1960's.
It was in that federally subsidized housing complex, the Park Hill Houses, that Ernest Sayon, a 22-year-old black man, died in April in a struggle with police officers, touching off a week of protests and allegations of police brutality.
Now, Mr.
Murphy is conducting a grand jury investigation to determine whether the police officers behaved properly or exerted undue force and should be charged with a crime.
The case is the biggest test Mr.
Murphy has faced in his 11 years in the post, historically the least prominent of the five district attorneys' offices in the city.
As a sign of the tensions surrounding the case, he has been accused of delaying the grand jury proceedings to prevent a decision during the hot days of the summer.
Mr.
Murphy said that he expected to hear from about 100 witnesses, altogether, and that a conclusion is still weeks away.
Although the proceedings are secret, many witnesses have publicly given conficting accounts of what happened, and Mr.
Murphy said that so far the jury did not appear to be leaning one way or the other.
"We're all over the lot," he said in his office overlooking New York Harbor and the Statue of Liberty.
The case is being played out on an unlikely terrain.
Quieter, smaller and more bucolic than the other boroughs, Staten Island has the city's smallest percentage of minority residents -- although it is growing -- and the highest percentage of police officers.
Crime has been rising, and some old-timers blame the growing minority population for the deterioration.
Although the two main figures in the fatal struggle, Mr.
Sayon and Officer Donald Brown, are black, the death of Mr.
Sayon has taken on racial overtones, and some Park Hill residents urged that a special prosecutor be appointed.
State law required that the 23-member grand jury hearing the Sayon case be drawn from a pool that reflects the population mix of the community.
And for many people, that suggests a fundamental bias on Staten Island.
"This is a white borough,"' said Jerome X. O'Donovan, one of Staten Island's three City Council members, all of whom are white.
"There are also lots of cops out here, and there's a perception that, for those reasons, the process won't be fair," added Mr.
O'Donovan, whose district includes the Park Hill Houses.
"Bill Murphy understands the perception and, if anything, he's going to do a very thorough job because of that."
Others are not so sure.
Chrisida Howard, the president of the Park Hill Tenants' Association, said her affection for the borough had been tempered by searing experiences of racial prejudice, and she said she was far from certain that the grand jury would render an impartial decision.
"My hope, my dream," she said, "is that we do get justice."
But she added: "I can't know that we will. It is just my hope and my dream."
Mr.
Murphy's experience with grand juries goes back to his youth, when his father, an accountant, was repeatedly called as a grand juror.
It was his father's dinner-table accounts of the proceedings, Mr.
Murphy said, that first gave him the idea that he might find satisfaction in a career in the law.
Over the years, Mr.
Murphy has become such an authority on grand juries that he conducts classes on them for young lawyers.
He acknowledges that prosecutors greatly influence grand juries because they conduct the proceeding, question all witnesses and explain the legal choices, all without the participation of lawyers with opposing arguments.
But he says the courthouse cliche that a prosecutor could persuade a grand jury to indict a ham sandwich is ridiculous.
"We don't seek a conclusion nor direct a conclusion." Mr.
Murphy said.
"We tell the grand jury what they may consider and what their options are. But what they do is their decision."
Although Mr.
Murphy is directing the grand jury investigation, evidence is being presented to the panel by the chief of his investigations bureau, Mario Mattei.
Mr.
Sayon, whom neighbors described as a small-time drug dealer, died on the balmy evening of April 29 after members of a special drug unit forced him to the ground, face down, and cuffed his hands behind his back.
The police had gone to the Park Hill Houses looking for another man wanted on drug charges.
They were startled by an explosion, which later turned out to have been caused by a firecracker, and confronted Mr.
Sayon, who was then on probation on charges of drug possession and resisting arrest.
Mr.
Murphy heard the widely divergent accounts as to whether Mr.
Sayon struggled with the officers and decided that a grand jury would have to sort out what had happened.
The New York City Medical Examiner, Dr.
Charles S. Hirsch, ruled that Mr.
Sayon's death was a homicide caused by pressure on his neck and chest.
The central question for the grand jury is whether the officers' action was justified.
Trying to ease the tensions caused by the killing, Guy V. Molinari, the borough president, has been meeting on Thursday nights with leaders from the Park Hill Houses in a group that calls itself Ambassadors for Peace.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton have met with the Ambassadors several times, and through the group Mr.
Molinari has been reaching out to the thousands of Park Hill residents.
Hattie Smith-Davis, a registered nurse and Pentecostal minister in her late 60's who is one of the Ambassadors, said the meetings have shown good faith and have helped bring the community together.
"I don't believe they would be meeting with us if they did not really and truly want peace," Ms.
Smith-Davis said.
Mr.
Murphy has been criticized by Park Hill residents and civil libertarians for permitting the long summer recess for the grand jury.
Some charged that he deliberately delayed the proceedings to avoid any possible confrontation over a conclusion reached during the summer.
Others said the reason was that witnesses' memories would fade as time passed, to the benefit of the police.
But Mr.
Murphy said he had no choice because many jurors had previously scheduled vacations.
"There was no design to delay the grand jury's determination," he said.
"We simply couldn't get them together during the period of the summer."
Victoria Shuford, a member of a Park Hill Tenants' Association who came to Staten Island as a child in the early 1970's from Newark, N.J., said many are concerned about the composition of the grand jury, which, citing the secrecy of the proceedings, Mr.
Murphy refused to discuss.
Some of those who have testified say the grand jury is nearly all white.
"The people here don't feel the grand jury can make the proper decisions," Ms.
Shuford said, "because they don't really know what goes on in Park Hill," where nearly everyone is black.
Christine Lee, a 22-year-old former cashier and photographer's assistant who has been disabled since her back was accidentally broken by police officers who knocked her off her feet as they were chasing a suspect in the Park Hill Houses three years ago, testified before the grand jury in June.
She said she felt that both the prosecutor and at least one of the jurors, a white woman, were hostile and tried to intimidate her.
"He was twisting words around," Ms.
Lee said of the prosecutor.
She said she saw only one black person among the grand jurors and was not sure if there were any Hispanic jurors or members of other minority groups.
Over the years, Staten Island has been a magnet for New York City police officers, including Mr.
Murphy's grandfather, William L. Murphy Sr.
The District Attorney said that before he was born his grandfather had retired from the police force, so he never saw him in uniform and they never talked about the force.
He is proud of his grandfather's work as a police officer, Mr.
Murphy said, but he said it would not affect his attitude toward the officers before the grand jury.
"My pride in the police in my background means that all I'm looking for is someone who can measure up to what I picture my grandfather to be," Mr.
Murphy said, "and that was a good and honest cop."
The Police Department says 3,785 officers live on Staten Island, and Mr.
Murphy says they are a substantial factor in Staten Island's tranquillity.
It is also a reason that some Park Hill residents feel a Staten Island grand jury is likely to look at a police officer's problems with a great deal of understanding.
But Mr. Murphy has confidence in the grand jury process.
"It is virtually impossible to thwart the grand jury's ability to reach a fair conclusion," he said.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
DECOY AND GUNNING SHOW
The Old Time Barnegat Bay Decoy and Gunning Show will be held Saturday and next Sunday in Tuckerton, with a variety of contests that will produce extensive displays of indigenous boats, decoys and art as well as entertainment recalling the heyday of South Jersey waterfowling.
The entertainment will begin at 7 A.M. each day, as competitors set out to shoot skeet from sneak boxes -- the broad-beamed, shallow draft boats about 10 to 20 feet long that were developed by baymen to sneak up on unsuspecting waterfowl while withstanding the bay's rough winters.
There will be separate competitions for men, women and children.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Reaches Final in Romania  Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic defeated Renzo Furlan, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday to move into the final of the Romanian Open, a clay-court tournament in Bucharest.
Furlan, who beat Sergi Bruguera in the first round, twice broke his opponent's serve, but it was not enough to get the best of Ivanisevic, the defending champion.
In the other semifinal, Franco Davin downed Alberto Costa, 7-5, 6-3, with his accurate passing shots and deft placements. (AP)


Flatiron Map: Jigsaw Puzzle of Competing Claims
Six months ago the Flatiron district -- named for its 22-story, triangular skyscraper -- was relatively low-profile.
Now, it is the newest -- and one of the better publicized -- of the city's up-and-coming business districts.
Problem is, the area the district claims is already home to all or parts of three associations (including a Flatiron District Neighborhood Association) and one business improvement district.
And some of their leaders are not at all pleased by the new territorial claims.


Melissa M. Royds, Peter C. Cook
Melissa Mable Royds, an account executive at V Magazine, was married yesterday to Peter Chamberlain Cook, a reporter for WSLS-TV, an NBC affiliate.
Both work in Roanoke, Va.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mr. and Mrs.
Cook, both 27, graduated from Duke University, where the bride was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bridegroom received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
P.S.A.L.
LUCKY LEHMAN: LEHMAN linebacker Lucky Mehmeti came up with the game-saving tackle on a NEW DORP two-point conversion attempt with just over four minutes remaining in the fourth period to preserve Lehman's 7-6 victory.
Lehman (1-0) got on the board first when Adam Ramos scored on an 8-yard run early in the third quarter.
Matthew Kimble added the extra point.
New Dorp (0-2) got its only score after Anthony Brandefine hit Ken Brooks with a 43-yard touchdown pass.


PURSUING THE BONEFISH ACROSS A WATERY DESERT
FISHERMEN love a certain amount of chaos and we will travel far and pay a lot to find it.
This thought occurred to me one day last spring in the territorial waters of the Central Pacific nation of Kiribati.
The swells were running about 10 to 12 feet.
I was in an 18-foot boat with no life preservers or running lights and no other craft in sight.


FRAME OF MIND
Rosenthal's points in his On Language column were absolutely, totally, unquestionably clear.
VINCENT FOY Boynton Beach, Fla.


The Only Choice In Haiti
The only honest positions left on Haiti are a willingness to drive out its military rulers or a willingness to tolerate them in power indefinitely, perhaps for a very long time.
The population, battered and demoralized, has no appetite for an insurrection that would cause a terrible bloodbath with little chance for success.
The embargo, in place for almost three years, all but total for several months, has not succeeded and offers no realistic hope of succeeding before the country itself is destroyed.
It isn't possible to arrange sanctions that spare the poor but squeeze the military and elite who control whatever humanitarian or smuggled goods enter the country.
Embargo has become the thin answer for uneasy consciences who are justly wary of military action -- but it isn't clear why the slow use of military blockade to strangle a country is preferable to quick invasion.


Flying to Barbados In Half the Time
This winter, a trip to Barbados can be a two-hour flight from New York.
A company called the European Travel Management Group has put together a charter that includes a round-trip supersonic flight to Barbados on a British Airways Concorde and seven nights in one of 15 luxury hotels.
Departing and returning Saturdays, Dec. 10 to Mar. 4, the package also includes airport transfers in Barbados and breakfast daily.
Rates are $2,950 to $5,500 a person, double occupancy, depending on the hotel.
The flight will take about two hours; regular flying time is up to five hours.
Call European Travel Management Group, (800) 992-7700, or the Barbados Tourism Authority (800) 221-9831.


Fireworks Light Up More Than Skies
ON Long Island, as elsewhere, one expects the summer season to start off with a bang.
What's the Fourth of July without fireworks?
This summer the night skies over Long Island were alight not just at the start of the season but at the end and on countless occasions in between.
Fireworks are not just for the Fourth of July any more, at least not on Long Island, where organizers of everything from classical music concerts to carnivals have been taking advantage of their universal appeal to bring people in and send them home happy.


Janine Brown, Peter Weinbach
Janine Kay Brown, the daughter of Elaine Brown of Mason City, Iowa, and the late James S. Brown, was married last evening to Peter Adam Weinbach, a son of Patricia and Lawrence Weinbach of New York.
The Rev.
Phillip Clark, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Lotos Club in New York.
Rabbi Martin Zion took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, graduated from Iowa State University and the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She is a clothing designer for the American Merchandising Corporation in New York.
Her mother owns a farm in Mason City.


Autumn Leaves From Another Perspective: VERMONT; View from a Ski Lift High Above Stowe
A trip up the eight-passenger ski gondola at Vermont's Stowe Mountain Resort takes only 10 minutes, but feels longer as one travels serenely, suspended high above the mountainside, gazing at the ski slope below and the mountains beyond.
Despite a slight haze on the day we chose for our trip, the views of the Green Mountains were still dazzling, a patchwork of dark green evergreens and vibrant maples, birches and poplars.
On a clear day, we were told, one can see the White Mountains of New Hampshire, including Mount Washington, 107 miles to the east.
The ride proved thrilling, but not frightening, to my children and their friends, who ranged in age from 6 to 10.
We packed a picnic lunch and ate at one of the six outdoor picnic tables arranged with an eye toward the spectacular views at the gondola's mountainside terminal, which provides toilets, a gift shop, snack bar and restaurant (the restaurant is open only weekends in the fall, for dinner, by reservation).


To Kindergarten, by The Book
THESE nippy September mornings, which are such a sharp contrast to the languid summer days, cast a chill on more than the tomato plants in the backyard.
For many of the county's 5-year-olds, September signals the start of "real school," or kindergarten, and triggers anxiety in even the most confident youngsters.
Those same preschoolers who succesfully separated from their parents in nursery school or marched off blithely to day care may worry about the vast realm that kindergarten represents.
Such concerns as negotiating the school bus, navigating long hallways and finding one's way to the gymnasium, cafeteria, nurse's or principal's offices loom large.


Charity Welcomes Gifts But Reaps Junk Instead
Maj.
Henry F. Tempel of the Salvation Army is grateful for the clothing and furniture donations that he sells to finance an adult rehabilitation center.
But last month alone, he was forced to spend some $8,000 on dump fees to dispose of decrepit furniture and refuse left in collection boxes.
He also often gets broken refrigerators that, under Federal guidelines, must have their coolant removed at a cost of $15 apiece.
While scrap dealers will pay him $2 for the appliances, he ends up losing $13 every time someone uses the Salvation Army to discard a broken refrigerator.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
ROAD SCHOLAR: Coast to Coast Late in the Century By Andrei Codrescu.
Photographs by David Graham.
Hyperion, $12.95.
A Romanian-born poet without a driver's license might seem like an unlikely person to chronicle a highway trip across America.
But the author, a naturalized United States citizen, uncovered both his own past and the country's once he had the legal means to take the wheel.
His book is "a fine trick bag of wit, discovery and self-deprecation," Francis X. Clines said here last year.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Corrections
A picture caption in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday about the musical "Sunset Boulevard" misidentified the theater at which it will open on Nov. 1.
It is the Minskoff, not the Gershwin.


Another Day of Fear
Many in Haiti who believe that the killing there will not stop until the United States invades found scant comfort in the arrival of a diplomatic delegation.
Page 12.


The Electric Car Debate Continues
To the Editor:
Typical American motorists will not be satisfied with propulsion and range alone; they demand safety and comfort as well.
This means heating and defrosting in winter, air-conditioning in summer, lighting for night driving.
Does S. David Freeman expect to power these items from the battery pack?
If so, his vehicle range will be drastically reduced.
MAURICE SHAYESON  Cincinnati, Aug. 30


Sept. 11-17: A Near Miss; A Suicidal Pilot Sets Off Alarms At the White House
Call it the curse of Blair House.
The Clintons became the first First Family in more than 40 years to move temporarily to Blair House, the official guest quarters across the street from the White House, so that the executive mansion could be renovated.
The last Presidential occupant was Harry S. Truman, and while he was at the guest residence in 1950 a pair of Puerto Rican nationalists tried unsuccessfully to shoot their way in to assassinate him.
In the shootout, a bodyguard and an assailant were killed.


BENEFITS
Mayor to Be Honored  TONIGHT -- Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is to be honored at the Sheraton New York along with two retired State Supreme Court justices, Moses M. Weinstein and John A. Monteleone, at a dinner-dance for the Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn.
The event begins with cocktails at 5:45.
Tickets, $250, from (718) 604-5000.
'My Fair Lady' Screening  MONDAY -- The Audrey Hepburn Hollywood for Children Fund and the American Film Institute will benefit from the American premiere of the film "My Fair Lady" in its newly restored form.
The 6:30 P.M. screening at the Ziegfeld Theater, 141 West 54th Street, is to be followed by supper at 10 at the Plaza Hotel.
Tickets, $500, or $50 for the screening alone, from (212) 975-4545.
Harlem Dowling Auction  MONDAY -- The Harlem Dowling West Side Center for Children and Family Services will benefit from an auction of art, antiques, trips and sports memorabilia at Sotheby's.
The evening begins at 6 with cocktails and a preview of the items, followed by the auction at 8.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 749-3656, extension 544, or at the door.
Rose Garden Dinner  TUESDAY -- The New York Botanical Garden's dinner-dance in the Peggy Rockefeller Rose Garden begins with a cocktail reception at 6:30.
Tickets, $300, from (718) 817-8552.
Gotham Awards  TUESDAY -- The Independent Feature Project, a nonprofit association of independent film makers, will honor the talent agent Sam Cohn, the film-making team of Joel and Ethan Coen and others at the fourth annual Gotham Awards at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner, the awards ceremony and dancing.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 838-6033.
For Casita Maria  TUESDAY -- The junior committee of the Casita Maria settlement house, which has centers in the South Bronx and East Harlem, will hold a cocktail party and dance beginning at 10 P.M. at Patria restaurant, 225 Park Avenue South (20th Street).
Tickets, $100, from (212) 807-7535 or at the door.
The Philharmonic's Opener  WEDNESDAY -- The New York Philharmonic opens its season with a cocktail reception at 6 P.M. and a concert at 7:30 at Avery Fisher Hall.
A black-tie dinner-dance will follow the performance in Damrosch Park.
Tickets, $1,000, or $150 for the preconcert reception and concert alone, from (212) 875-5757.
Medical Charity Ball  WEDNESDAY -- Our Lady of Mercy Medical Center in the Bronx will hold its 11th annual charity ball at the Waldorf-Astoria, at which Eunice Kennedy Shriver will be honored.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $450, from (800) 628-1008.
Kaitz Foundation Dinner  WEDNESDAY -- The Walter Kaitz Foundation, which provides career opportunities in cable television for members of minorities, will hold a black-tie dinner at the New York Hilton beginning with cocktails at 6:30.
Gerald Levin, the chairman and chief executive of Time Warner, will be honored.
Tickets, $500, from (510) 451-9000.
For Suicide Prevention  THURSDAY -- The Junior Life League of the Rodd D. Brickell Foundation, which devotes its activities to suicide prevention, will benefit from a cocktail party at the Copacabana, 619 West 57th Street, from 8 until midnight.
There will be a buffet dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 935-0894, or $90 at the door.
Children's Aid Party  THURSDAY -- The programs of the Children's Aid Society will benefit from a dance party at Metronome, a restaurant at 915 Broadway (21st Street), beginning at 7 P.M.
There will be an open bar, and hors d'oeuvres will be served.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 949-4934 or at the door.
At the Renwick Ruin  THURSDAY -- Kitty Carlisle Hart and Arnold Scaasi will lead an evening of dance featuring a performance by the choreographer Meredith Monk and her vocal ensemble.
The event will benefit the House Foundation for the Arts, which supports Ms.
Monk's artistic work, as well as Dancing in the Streets, a nonprofit dance program in New York, and the Friends of Roosevelt Island Landmarks Inc.
The evening begins with a champagne reception at 6:15 at the Renwick ruin, the former Smallpox Hospital on the southern tip of Roosevelt Island.
A buffet supper will follow the 7 o'clock performance.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 989-6830.
To Stop Truancy  FRIDAY -- Cities in Schools, which seeks to keep students from dropping out of the New York City schools, will hold a fund-raiser at the Six Flags Great Adventure amusement park in Jackson, N.J., from 6 to 11 P.M.
A bus departs from 45th Street and Vanderbilt Avenue at 4 sharp and returns to the same location.
Tickets, $135, or $85 for children 12 and under, from (212) 245-6570.  'Show Boat' Preview  FRIDAY -- The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation will benefit from a preview performance of "Show Boat" at the Gershwin Theater.
A 6 P.M. cocktail buffet party at the Symphony Cafe, 950 Eighth Avenue (56th Street), will precede the 8 P.M. show.
Tickets, $250, or $125 for the performance alone, from (212) 986-8783.
Music for All Seasons  SATURDAY -- A benefit performance at Carnegie Hall of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's will feature the soprano Roberta Peters, with Dudley Moore as the evening's host.
The event is to raise money for Music for All Seasons, which provides live musical performances at residential treatment centers in New York and New Jersey.
A preconcert reception will begin at 6:30 at the nearby Steinway Hall.
A champagne buffet supper will follow the 8 o'clock concert.
Tickets, $500, or $250 for the performance and post-concert supper, or $150 for the preconcert reception and the performance.
Tickets, (908) 755-5753.
Housing the Homeless  NEXT SUNDAY -- Paul Newman and Hal Prince will be the hosts of a special 4 P.M. preview performance of Mr.
Prince's production of "Show Boat" at the Gershwin Theater.
A buffet dinner will follow at 7 at the New York Hilton.
The event raises money for Partnership for the Homeless.
Tickets, $500, or $40 to $150 for the performance alone, from (212) 735-0744.
Pediatric AIDS Fair  NEXT SUNDAY -- Hillary Rodham Clinton will be the honorary chairwoman of the second annual Kids for Kids carnival, benefiting the Pediatric AIDS Foundation.
The street fair will run from 3 to 6 P.M. in front of Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street (12th Street), featuring games, jugglers, clowns, artists, a silent auction and live entertainment.
Tickets, $750, or $1,500 for a family of four, from (212) 545-2435.
Auction for Child Care Action  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Child Care Action Campaign, a national group that promotes better child care, is sponsoring an auction evening at Sotheby's at which a walk-on appearance on the "Murphy Brown" television show will be offered, as will day trips with members of the New York Mets, the Jets and the Giants and a 15-day tour of Singapore, Hong Kong and Beijing.
The event begins at 6 with a cocktail reception.
Tickets, $150, or $50 for those 35 and under, from (212) 239-0138
For Big Brothers and Sisters  SEPT. 26 -- The Pointer Sisters and BeBe and CeCe Winans, the gospel singers, will perform at the sixth annual National Hero Awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria, benefiting Big Brothers/Big Sisters of America.
Mark Harmon and Pam Dawber will lead the black-tie evening, which begins with cocktails at 7, followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 832-1937.
Uptown Jazz Evening  SEPT. 26 -- The Abingdon Theater Company will benefit from an evening of jazz that will feature the Howard Alden Quintet with Warren Vache.
The event begins with a dinner buffet at 8 at La Cave, a club at 1125 First Avenue (62d Street).
Tickets, $100, from (212) 724-4520.


Popular Performers For a New Season
CAFE DES ARTISTES *** (212) 877-3500; 1 West 67th Street; $$$; all major credit cards


DEFIANTLY DEAF
As a child of deaf parents who has spent many years serving as an interpreter for people who happen to be deaf, I wish to commend Andrew Solomon for his article "Defiantly Deaf" (Aug. 28).
It is one of the most insightful and understanding pieces on the subject of the language and viewpoint of the deaf, and on the history and legacy of deaf culture, I have yet to read.
RICHARD W. COOKE New York, N.Y.


President Doesn't Need Approval of Congress for Haiti Action
To the Editor:
"Congress Must Vote on Haiti" (editorial, Sept. 13) makes the worthy point that for President Clinton to go forward with an invasion of Haiti without Congressional approval could endanger both the mission and his Presidency.
But the contention that such an action would "short-circuit the United States Constitution" is unfounded and repeats self-serving Congressional claims.


How Cairo Conference Echoed Health Debate; Postpone a Vote
To the Editor:
When considering legislation of such magnitude as national health care, members of Congress no longer represent just their districts or states but all Americans.


Wall Street; Salomon's Hong Kong Hangover
THE derivatives meltdown of 1994 hasn't been much fun for any of the small investors who got caught in the whirlwind of what should have been solely a big players' game.
Just ask the buyers of short-term bond funds who have lined up to sue managements of their "safe" mutual funds.
Better yet, talk to the investors who would never have imagined that their ultra-safe money market funds could fall below $1 a share -- "breaking the buck" in Wall Streetspeak.
But bad as those debacles may have been, few individuals felt the sting of derivatives as badly as those who used brokers in a Hong Kong office of Salomon Brothers Inc.


Corrections
A front-page picture in the Travel section today, of a dwelling in Troo, France, carries an erroneous credit in some copies.
The photographer is Jean-Marc Charles.


A Turnaround on 34th Street


Colleen Coffey and John M. Shanks
IT was difficult to tell whether the bride's tears were those of joy or sadness.
Twelve days before her wedding on Sept. 10, Colleen Coffey's grandfather Alfonso Albrizio, 79, who was supposed to walk her down the aisle, was slain in his Greenwich Village jewelry store.


From Japan, Butoh And Beyond
BY HAPPY COINCIDENCE, THREE PHASES OF JAPANESE dance will be on display in New York over the next few weeks.
A trio of Tokyo's most influential and adventurous artists will perform in what constitutes an unofficial, if serendipitous, mini-festival of contemporary Japanese dance.
Taken together, they offer a concise look at the depth and variety of dance in Japan and its evolution over the last 30 years.
As one of the premiere exponents of Butoh, Japan's dominant experimental dance style, Hakutobo flaunts the slow movements, grotesque grimaces and underlying sense of desolation associated with that form.
But in the troupe's current production of "Renyo" ("Far From the Lotus"), the artistic director Tomoe Shizune tweaks Butoh's classic formula.
Gone is the characteristic white body paint -- "too Japanese," Mr.
Shizune says.
And Hakutobo, at the Joyce Theater from Wednesday through Sunday, sidesteps the more sensational Butoh antics, like peeling back the eyelids and sticking out the tongue like a lizard.


The Nation: New Cops Need Help; The Perils of Police Hiring
ANTICIPATING 100,000 new cops on their streets, city officials from across the country praised Congress for passing the $30 billion anti-crime package.
But even before President Clinton signed the bill on Tuesday, criminologists warned that while quick hiring of police officers could make a dent in crime, it could also lead to more police brutality and corruption.
In one city after another -- New York, Washington, Miami, Philadelphia, Houston and Detroit -- quick expansions of the police forces have led to careless screening and hasty training.
Criminal justice experts say that the rush to hire contributed to an increase in incidents like high-speed traffic accidents during chases, perjury by police officers and sloppy handling of evidence -- not to mention behavior that is outright criminal.


Polish Secrets Law, Assailed by Press, Passes
The lower house of Parliament has approved a measure calling for prison terms of up to 10 years for anyone disclosing information interpreted as vital to Poland's interests.
The measure, known as the Official State Secrets Act, would prohibit the news media from reporting on 71 areas of Government activity ranging from military to economic policy.
It was approved by a vote of 268 to 75 with 19 abstentions on Thursday and is expected to win passage in the upper house this month.


Back to School, and School Boards
MANHATTAN  DISTRICT 1: Next meeting: Oct. 13, 7 P.M.; Location: TBA.
Superintendent: Dori Collazo-Baker; President/Chairwoman: Dolores Schaefer; (212) 602-9765.
DISTRICT 2: Next meeting: Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M.; I.S. 131, 100 Hester Street.
Superintendent: Anthony Alvarado; President/Chairwoman: Karen Feyer; (212) 330-9400.
DISTRICT 3: Next meeting: Sept. 28, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 75, 735 West End Avenue, at 96th Street.
Superintendent: James Mazza; President/Chairwoman: Judith Moore; (212) 678-2845.
DISTRICT 4: Next meeting: Sept. 21, 6:30 P.M.; P.S. 155, 319 East 117th Street.
Superintendent: Marcelino Rodriguez; President/ Chairwoman: Shirley Stroud; (212) 860-5910.
DISTRICT 5: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 7:00 P.M.; P.S. 129, 130th Street and Convent Avenue.
Superintendent: Dr.
Bertrand Brown; President/Chairwoman: Wynola Glenn; (212) 769-7600.
DISTRICT 6: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 7:30 P.M.; I.S. 218, 4600 Broadway, at 196th Street.
Superintendent: Anthony Amato; President/Chairman: Robert Jackson; (212) 795-9549.
THE BRONX  DISTRICT 7: Next meeting: TBA.
Superintendent: Pedro Crispo; President/Chairwoman: Feliciano Ramirez Jr.; (718) 292-0164.
DISTRICT 8: Next meeting: Sept. 21, 7 P.M.; P.S. 182, 650 White Plains Road.
Superintendent: Max Messer; President/Chairman: Ciro Guerra; (718) 409-8801.
DISTRICT 9: Next meeting: Sept. 28, 6 P.M.; Community Elementary School 53, 360 East 168th Street.
Acting Superintendent: Arthur Aronstein; President/Chairman: Carmelo Saez; (718) 681-8558.
DISTRICT 10: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 7:30 P.M.; Middle School 80, 149 East Mosholu Parkway.
Superintendent: Irma Zardoya: President/Chairman: Charles Williams; (718) 584-8338.
DISTRICT 11: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 121, 1250 Arnow Avenue, corner Throop Avenue.
Superintendent: Joseph Kovaly; President/Chairwoman: Loretta Y. Jones; (718) 519-2647.
DISTRICT 12: Next meeting: Sept. 28, 7 P.M.; C.S. 44, 1825 Prospect Avenue, off of East Tremont Avenue.
Superintendent: Robert Henry; President/Chairman: Israel Cruz; (718) 328-2310.
BROOKLYN  DISTRICT 13: Next meeting: Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 287, 50 Navy Street, off of Park Avenue.
Superintendent: Dr.
Lester Young; President/Chairman: Albert C. Wiltshire; (718) 636-3204.
DISTRICT 14: Next meeting: Sept. 21, 7:30 P.M.; I.S. 71, 215 Hayward Street, between Marcy and Harrison Avenues.
Superintendent: Mario DeStephano; President/Chairman: Joseph Stefanizzi; (718) 963-4800.
DISTRICT 15: Next meeting: Not available. (718) 330-9283.
DISTRICT 16: Next meeting: Sept. 28, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 28, 1001 Herkimer Street.
Superintendent: Leonard A. Clarke; President/Chairman: David R. Miller; (718) 919-0323.
DISTRICT 17: Next meeting: Sept. 28, 7 P.M.; P.S. 167, 1025 Eastern Parkway.
Superintendent: Bernice Wiley; President/Chairman: Sylvester Leaks; (718) 604-4302.
DISTRICT 18: Next meeting: Oct. 4, 8:30 P.M.; Early Childhood Center, East 101st Street at Flatland Avenue.
Superintendent: Dr.
Harvey Garner; President/Chairman: Jack Zimmer; (718) 927-5152.
DISTRICT 19: Next meeting: Sept. 27, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 13, 557 Pennsylvania Avenue.
Superintendent: Levander Lilly; President/Chairwoman: Monica Moseley; (718) 272-8033.
DISTRICT 20: Next meeting: Oct. 26; P.S. 105, 1031 59th Street.
Superintendent: Vincent Grippo; President/Chairman: Charles Capetanakis; (718) 692-5231.
DISTRICT 21: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 8 P.M.: P.S. 95, 345 Van Sicklen Street.
Superintendent: Donald Weber; President/Chairman: Domenic Recchia; (718) 714-2523.
DISTRICT 22: Next meeting: Oct. 5, 8 P.M.; P.S. 255, 1866 East 17th Street.
Superintendent: John T. Comer; President/Chairwoman: Barbara Simmons; (718) 368-8048.
DISTRICT 23: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 7 P.M.; P.S. 178, 2163 Dean Street.
Superintendent: Michael Vega; President/Chairwoman: Alicia Poncedeleon; (718) 270-8636.
DISTRICT 32: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 145, 100 Noll Street, between Central and Evergreen Avenues, Brooklyn.
Superintendent: Felix Vasquez; President/Chairman: Tito Velez; (718) 574-1203.
QUEENS  DISTRICT 24: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 8 P.M.; P.S. 49, 79-15 Penelope Avenue, at 80th Street Middle Village.
Superintendent: Joseph Quinn; President/Chairwoman: Mary P. Crowley; (718) 417-2693.
DISTRICT 25: Next meeting: Sept. 21, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 200, 70-30 164th Street.
Superintendent: Dr.
Arthur Greenburg; President/ Chairwoman: Arlene Fleishman; (718) 480-4200.
DISTRICT 26: Next meeting: Sept. 29, 8:30 P.M., I.S. 74, 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside.
Superintendent: Dr.
Aaron Friedman; President/Chairwoman: Arlene Pino; (718) 631-6981.
DISTRICT 27: Next meeting: Sept. 29, 8 P.M; P.S. 64, 82-01 101st Avenue, Ozone Park.
Superintendent: Brenda Isaacs; President/Chairman: James Egan; (718) 642-5805.
DISTRICT 28: Next meeting: Oct. 3, 8:15 P.M.; P.S. 80, 137th Avenue and 173rd Street, Jamaica.
Superintendent: C. Raseh Nagi; President/Chairwoman: Lynn Gross; (718) 830-5775.
DISTRICT 29: Next meeting: Sept. 22, 8:30 P.M.; I.S. 231, 145-00 Springfield Boulevard, Laurelton.
Superintendent: Celestine Miller; President/Chairwoman: Claudette M. Webb; (718) 978-5961.
DISTRICT 30: Next meeting: Oct. 11, P.S. 148, 89-02 32d Avenue, East Elmhurst.
Superintendent: Dr.
Angelo Gimondo; President/Chairman: Donald Stewart; (718) 777-4680.
STATEN ISLAND  DISTRICT 31: Next meeting: Sept. 19, 7:30 P.M.; I.S. 72, 33 Ferndale Avenue.
Superintendent: Christy Cugini; President/Chairwoman: Eleanor T. Conforti; (718) 273-9559.


FRAME OF MIND
Jack Rosenthal credits the great Mel Brooks with a "classic example of framing humor" in his movie "Young Frankenstein." "Walk this way," Marty Feldman says to Gene Wilder, who proceeds to mimic Feldman's heavy limp.


The Executive Computer; Having a Network Nightmare? Let the Software Take Over
NO one can say exactly when it happened, but at some point in the last decade computer networks became too complex for their human creators to understand, behaving in unpredictable ways that often defied rational explanation.
As with other systems whose complexity has grown almost exponentially -- large aircraft or tiny computer chips, for example -- the solution in retrospect seems obvious: let the software figure it out.
While automated design software is commonplace in such disciplines as automobiles, aerospace and integrated circuits, there has been a dearth of such programs in computer networking.
The programs that did exist were anything but user friendly, spitting out reams of data, status reports and warnings in arcane computer language.
Many companies came to rely on "wetware" -- an in-house network guru, whose years of experience could make up for the lack of tools (as long as he or she didn't go on vacation or call in sick).


F.Y.I.
The Sculptured Word Q.  On the west side of Greenwich Street north of Canal, there is an old strip of three residential buildings.
The first has a slogan above the door: "Water Spilled From Source to Use." What does this mean?
A.
It looks like an old sign, doesn't it?
But no, said Lawrence Weiner: it is a 1984 sculpture, and the words indicate a way of thinking about sculpture.
Mr.
Weiner, the conceptual artist who created the sign, was kind enough to explain his work.
Several times.
"It's a sculpture whose materials are language plus the materials referred to," he said.
Eh?


Where Tokyo's Young Crowd Likes to Eat
TWENTY is the age of majority throughout Japan; the age at which it's legal to drink, and to vote.
Twenty-something in Japan means eclectic eating: Members of Japan's newest generation of business people and bureaucrats are as likely to gobble down a burger as they are to savor sushi.
Most grab quick but filling lunches at midday, then join their co-workers and classmates for leisurely, though casual, eating and drinking in the evening.
The more ambitious among the young professionals often return to the office after dinner, or accompany their superiors entertainingclients at fancy restaurants.
Of course, dining at elegant, fashionable spots is very much a part of the dating scene.
As in industralized societies throughout the world, in Japan the daily diet of young professionals includes ample quantities of fast food.
No doubt McDonald's, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Denny's have changed the face of casual eating in Japan forever.
But in the past year or so, a gentrified version of traditional Japanese street fare, called yatai mura (literally, "village of street stalls"), has also sprung up in Tokyo, and it is particularly popular with young people.


Polly J. Matthews, David O. Evans
Polly Jackson Matthews, a photo editor for Time Inc., and David Oliver Evans, a rancher and agronomist in Visalia, Calif., were married yesterday at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
The Rev.
Kenneth Brown, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Evans, 36, is a daughter of Mortimer J. Matthews and Lydia S. Matthews, both of Pasadena.
She was until recently the West Coast photo editor in Los Angeles for Entertainment Weekly magazine.


Berlin on Alert After Report That Abu Nidal Will Attack Jews
The police here are on high alert after a report that a Palestinian terrorist group is planning to attack Jewish leaders, businesses and community centers.
For more than a week, police officers wearing bulletproof vests and armed with automatic weapons have been conspicuously standing guard along a stretch of the Kurfurstendamm, Berlin's main shopping boulevard, where several Jewish-owned businesses are located.
People entering shops and parking lots have been subject to random identity checks.


Starry Skies, Wings and Death on the Freeway
BORN OF FIRE AND MOLTEN metal, the hefty bronze helmets of the ancient Greeks were worn as shimmering symbols of valor and vanity.
The Japanese in the 16th century transformed samurai headgear into theatrical surprises.
And today, artists on five continents are using the plastic crash helmet of warrior-bikers as a canvas for creativity.
Some impressive expressions of the trends in helmet design -- wings, skulls, targets and trash -- can be found in "Art Is Life," an exhibition that originated in Turin, Italy, and features works by 148 artists from 14 countries.
After touring automobile museums in Italy, Belgium and Luxembourg, the collection was shown in London at Sotheby's, which will auction the helmets in Milan on Oct. 12.
Bidding on each helmet will open at $300, but the action will probably not stop there -- especially on the more unusual offerings or those by prominent artists like Carl Andre, Stephen Antonakos, Alex Katz, Mimmo Paladino, Arnaldo Pomodoro, Kenny Scharf and William Wegman.


French Grace Note
To the Editor: My wife and I travel quite a bit, and spend three weeks each summer in France; we have always found the French to be extremely friendly and hospitable.


Data Bank/September 18, 1994
Data Bank/September 18, 1994
Consumer Prices
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.3
0.3
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
0.8
0.0
0.9
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.3
0.6
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
84.7
84.3
84.2
Business Inventories
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.4
1.2
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Sept. 16
Sept. 9
Sept. 2
Friday spot price, per barrel
$16.83
$17.53
$17.52
Gold
Friday A.M. London fix, per ounce
$391.00
$391.95
$387.50
Weekly Jobless Claims
Sept. 9
Sept. 2
Aug. 26
In thousands
327
330
333


Water Parks
To the Editor: We were thrilled with the coverage provided on July 17 about the water parks industry ("All Across America, Plunging Into Summer").
However, while you did a fine job of highlighting a few of the larger water parks around the country, information on the water parks available here in New York State was absent.


In Rwanda, Government Goes Hungry
Most of the Government ministries have no desks, chairs or telephones.
Ministers hitch rides and ask the United Nations to loan them typewriters and send their telexes and faxes.
The World Food Program hands out food rations to the civil servants, and no official or soldier has been paid in months.
In the last two months, millions of dollars of international aid has poured into Rwanda to meet food and medical needs, but none of it has gone to the fledgling Government that is trying to organize after a civil war.
Though Western donors have praised the new administration, Rwandan Government officials are so frustrated by the lack of direct aid that they suspect some donors of wanting to see them fail.


Annika Sunden, Rafi Mohammed
Dr.
Annika Elisabeth Sunden, the daughter of Drs.
Catherine and Bengt Sunden of Malmo, Sweden, was married yesterday to Dr.
Rafi Akio Mohammed, the son of Drs.
Shakil and Sachiko Mohammed of Cincinnati.
Judge John L. Treanor Jr. of the Superior Court for the District of Columbia officiated at the Park Hyatt Hotel in Washington.
The bride, 30, is to begin work as an economist at the Federal Reserve Board in Washington in October.
She graduated from the Stockholm School of Economics.
She and the bridegroom recently received doctorates in economics from Cornell University.
Her father retired as an otolaryngologist at Trelleborg Hospital in Sweden.
Her mother is a psychiatrist at the University of Lund in Sweden.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CULTURAL HISTORY  THE DEATHS  OF SYBIL BOLTON  An American History.
By Dennis McAuliffe Jr.
Times Books/Random House, $23.


Sarah E. Morton And Scott Driscoll
Sarah Ellsworth Morton, a daughter of William G. Morton Jr. of Boston and Susan M. Morton of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Scott David MacPherson Driscoll, the son of David B. Driscoll of New York and Christie C. Love of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas M. Richard performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Driscoll, 27, is an institutional sales trader at Fidelity Capital Markets in Boston.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Boston Stock Exchange.
Her mother is a caterer in Greenwich.


A Fashion Gallery
Fashion is a most amiable muse, yet many artists tend to be rather wary of it.
If one allows that immortality is the artist's ultimate goal, then it stands to reason that fashion, perishable by definition, must be its dread opposite.
Certainly, the artists invited here to address some aspect of the New York fall collections strike a multitude of attitudes -- from urban appreciation to a healthy disregard.
Working in a variety of media, including life drawing, photography, taxidermy and collage, they are as eclectic a lot stylistically as they are intellectually.
Beverley Semmes and Pat Oleszko habitually work with clothes, and might both be described as exaggerators.
Semmes elongates, in the manner of a latter-day Beardsley.
The Calvin Klein T-shirt dress that figures in her piece is cocooned within a characteristically distended, Semmesian garment resembling a Victorian nightgown.
Knotted as it is, the gauzy pinafore also suggests some jerry-built means of escape -- in a symbolist fairy tale involving, say, a princess in a tower -- and the little dress inside evokes the dream of liberation.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  FINAL EFFORT ON HAITI  An American delegation began talks with Haitian military leaders in a final diplomatic effort to avert an invasion, and there were signs that the United States was shifting its positions.  1  WHO IS THE REAL ARISTIDE?
The United States takes the position that the exiled President of Haiti has grown into a statesman in exile, but it remains uneasy and unsure about how he would govern.  1  Returning to diplomacy, but maintaining a strong stance.  12


K. A. Halliday, Stephen Langan
Katherine Ann Halliday, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Halliday of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Charles Langan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Langan of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas Nicoll performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
Mrs.
Langan, 29, graduated from Hollins College and is an associate at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.


Remember Baseball?
BASEBALL An Illustrated History.
Narrative by Geoffrey C. Ward.
Based on a documentary film script by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. 486 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $60.


Kristin Hock, John W. Davie
Mary Kristin Hock, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Fletcher Hock Jr. of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to John Williams Davie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Davie of Kiawah Island, S.C., and Hong Kong.
The Rev.
John R. O'Connell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nativity in Midland Park, N.J.
Mrs.
Davie, 26, is known as Kristin.
She is a portfolio assistant at the Zweig Companies, mutual fund managers in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Colby College.
Her father is a senior partner in Evans, Hand, a law firm in West Paterson, N.J.
Her mother, Diana Hock, is an interior designer in Ridgewood.


The Trials of William Kunstler
MY LIFE AS A RADICAL LAWYER By William M. Kunstler with Sheila Isenberg.
Illustrated. 414 pp.
New York:  Birch Lane Press/ Carol Publishing Group. $22.50.


Emily Rosenberg, Jacob W. Roth
Emily Jeanne Rosenberg and Jacob Walton Roth, medical students at Yale University, were married yesterday evening at Gedney Farm in New Marlborough, Mass.
Cantor Jim Levinson performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
Hugh B. Wire, a Presbyterian minister who is an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in it.
Mrs.
Roth, 26, graduated from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Judith O. Noveck and Michael J. Rosenberg, both of New York.
Her father is the executive vice president of Rosenthal &amp; Rosenthal, a commercial banking firm in New York.
Her mother is the head of the New York investor-relations office of British Telecommunications.


Martin Evans and Elizabeth Murphy
Elizabeth Drew Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Murphy of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Martin Dylan David Evans, the son of Gerald D. C. Evans of Avon, England, and the late Zita M. Evans.
The Rev.
Steven Yagerman officiated at All Saints Episcopal Church in New York.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, Dean of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Evans, a graduate of the University of Chicago, until recently was the director of subsidiary rights at Harcourt Brace, the publishing house, in New York.
Her father, a senior fellow for the Middle East at the Council on Foreign Relations, is the president of Richard Murphy Associates, a private consulting firm in New York.


Present Arms; Clinton Corners Himself, Along With His Quarry
WHEREVER he is, the late Lyndon Baines Johnson surely is shaking his head in wonderment at the current plight of his onetime critic, Bill Clinton, who is now President.
No, Haiti is hardly Vietnam, not as a foe; not as a moral dilemma; probably not as a military quagmire.
Yet 26 years after Mr.
Clinton took to the streets to assail Mr.
Johnson's war, he now finds himself, eerily, starring in its revival on the small stage: the principled President, drawn ever deeper into an unpopular battle by his own policies and a fear that retreat equals humiliation.
So it was that a superpower threat to invade one of the world's weakest nations ballooned last week into a do-or-die test of the President's political manhood and diplomatic respect.
It is not that Mr.
Clinton lacks for intelligent arguments that his course, morally and historically, is right.
But even many of those Democrats who believe Mr.
Clinton is right to threaten military action suspect that he has arrived at that choice not by design, but by default.
After repeated bluster in Bosnia, Somalia and Haiti -- followed by repeated retreat in each instance -- Mr.
Clinton simply cannot afford to rattle another empty scabbard if he is to maintain the status of a world leader, they say.


Tricia Murray, George W. Olvany
Mary Patricia Murray, a specialist at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York, was married on Friday to George William Olvany, a managing director at Cedar Street Securities, a bond brokerage in New York.
Msgr.
Joseph Murphy performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Olvany, 29, is known as Tricia.
She graduated from Trinity College in Washington.
She is the daughter of Mary Louise Murray of Barrington, Ill., and Dr.
Thomas M. Murray of Milton, N.Y.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in New York.
Her mother is a broker at Barrington Realty.


Idiosyncrasy Under Glass; DEEP BENEATH LONDON
AFTER Big Ben and Buckingham Palace, there are probably few London landmarks more instantly recognizable than the city's red double-decker buses and Underground trains.
Now, beneath the arched cast-iron and glazed glass ceiling of a converted Victorian flower market in Covent Garden, visitors can learn all there is to know about the sprawling rail and bus network that has welded London together for more than 80 years.


The Hard Fall of a Super Salesman
His places in Malibu and Park City, Utah, have been sold.
So have the Los Angeles Kings hockey team he made a symbol of modern sports marketing, the Toronto Argonauts football team and the prize-winning race horses.
The New York apartment and the Boeing 727 are in foreclosure, and the coin company that brought him a fortune in the 1970's went broke in May.
Bruce P. McNall's fall has come fast and hard, mystifying his Hollywood friends, leaving bankruptcy lawyers and Federal investigators to sort through a tangle of assets and ending a tale of international intrigue and empire building as grand as any from the 1980's.


Editorial Notebook; Marion Barry in Your Face
Four years ago, the Justice Department showed America a videotape of Marion Barry, then Mayor of the nation's capital, smoking crack furnished at Federal expense and making advances toward a woman whom Justice had coerced into serving as a sexual lure.
As my colleague William Safire wrote at the time, the United States Government "should never stoop to acting like a pimp." The jury agreed.
Mr.
Barry was exonerated of all but one misdemeanor charge; he spent a mere six months in jail.
Consternation is spreading now that Marion Barry has won the Democratic primary and seems almost certain to win a fourth term as mayor.
White Washingtonians are in virtual shock.
Americans elsewhere wonder how a drug-infested city could elect a former crack user.


For Child Medicare
To the Editor:
At this late stage, many in Congress apparently think it would be better to wait until next year to try again for a health plan.
There may be one improvement still worth considering this year: improved health care coverage for children.
Too often, children get short shrift in health coverage.
The child-rearing time is often difficult financially for parents, and the health needs of children are not met.


'Superman' Foils Rape And Captures Suspect
A 35-year-old jogger was assaulted yesterday morning in Central Park by a man who attempted to rape her, the police said, but she was saved by a male jogger who scared the suspect off, chased him and then subdued him until officers arrived.
The victim, described as an accountant who jogs eight miles a day, was shaken up but not seriously injured.
She was taken to New York Hospital, where she was treated for cuts and bruises and released.


Remember Unions?
To the Editor:
"Workers, Unite!" by Bob Herbert (column, Sept. 14), about the degenerating conditions of American workers, is on the mark.
The problem is what is to be done.
Mr.
Herbert seems to endorse Herbert J. Gans's advice that workers form a "lobby." How does a worker at I.B.M. or Chrysler form a "lobby"?
What happened to advising workers to organize unions or strengthen existing ones?
IRVING SOHN  Ozone Park, Queens, Sept. 14, 1994


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Banco Wiese Limitado, Lima, Peru, an initial public offering of 2.35 million American depository shares (each representing 4 shares), 1.76 million in the U.S. and Canada.
J.
P.
Morgan.


Matsushita, in Lab Test, Reduces Disk to a Dot
Japan's largest consumer electronics company has demonstrated the basic principles of a computer memory with a storage capacity more than a thousand times that of magnetic or optical disks.
Using the technique, the contents of a compact disk could be stored on a small dot.
But the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company said it would take until early in the next century to make a practical storage system from its technology, which uses a sophisticated microscope.


Starry 7 Dwarfs in Camp For Fun and a Good Cause
It is not likely that the performance of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" at the Hole in the Wall Gang camp here on Saturday night will soon be forgotten.
Think of an irreverent modernized script by A. E. Hotchner, narration by Joan Rivers and a dual Wicked Queen role played by Melanie Griffith and Ann Reinking.


On Haiti's Streets, an Eerie Silence
The announcement that Haiti's military rulers have agreed to give up power after three years of increasingly brutal repression was greeted here tonight not with joy or protests, but with silence and a few gunshots.
Minutes after President Clinton told Americans that Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras had promised to step down within four weeks, the news was broadcast over radio stations here.


CHRONICLE
A happy confluence of events: CARLOS MOSELEY , who has worn numerous hats with the New York Philharmonic, including those of managing director, president and chairman, is to turn 80 on Wednesday, opening night of the 1994-95 concert season.
What better way to honor him than to dedicate the concert to him?
"It will be the first time we can find that we've ever dedicated any concert to any living person," BARBARA HAWS , the orchestra's archivist and historian, said recently.


Accounts
*
Nickelodeon, New York, to Grey Entertainment, New York, to handle advertising and promotion for "A Christmas Carol," a musical opening Nov. 23 at the Paramount auditorium at Madison Square Garden.
Billings were not disclosed.


Paramount Network's Target: Male Viewers
Lucie S. Salhany believes she knows how to get the still-untested United/Paramount television network on its feet: attract young males.
"Men from 18 to 49, and we'd like to try to bring that down more to 18 to 34," Ms.
Salhany, the first and so far only woman to head an American broadcast network, said during a telephone interview on Thursday, her first full day on the job as president and chief executive of the United/Paramount network.


Meditation in Movement From Tibet
When the Namgyal Monks offered examples of sacred Tibetan music and dance on Friday night, their presentation appeared to emanate from a timeless realm.
But the songs and dances they presented at Eisner and Lubin Auditorium at New York University have had to survive some storms of history.
The Namgyal Monastery, a center of Tantric Buddhism, was founded in 1574 and is the personal monastery of the Dalai Lama.
The Chinese Communists outlawed Buddhism after they took over Tibet in 1949.
A decade later, the Dalai Lama fled into exile and the monks followed him.
In 1961, they established a new Namgyal Monastery in Dharamsala in northern India.
This program by a troupe of eight monks was a benefit for both the monastery and the Namgyal Fund, a refugee aid organization.
09-19-94 The music was notable for its unusual sonorities.
Low roarings and rumblings produced by enormously long horns were contrasted with the high-pitched nasal piercing sounds of oboelike instruments.
There were also trumpets, cymbals, bells and drums.
The dances emphasized constant repetitions of a few basic steps, especially slow, careful raisings of the feet.
These works are not meant to dazzle or even entertain spectators, although they were always fascinating to watch.
Rather, they are religious rituals in which movement becomes a form of meditation and the performers can visualize themselves as deities as they dance.
Because the same steps occur so often, any dramatic hints of menace soon vanish.
The monks were costumed as skeletons and hopped grotesquely in the "Dance of the Cemetery Lords." But they never looked frightening, in part because what they did became so familiar through repetition that it no longer had the power to startle.
Death was thereby choreographically transfigured.
"Black Hat Dance" was also filled with hopping.
Yet this symbolic depiction of the overcoming of obstacles did not grow agitated.
Instead, it expressed faith in the ultimate power of goodness.
In "Deer Dance," the evening's most charming piece, a masked and antlered soloist did quick little bouncing steps.
But the solo was intended to do more than charm, for the deer was an image of a protective deity.
The Namgyal Monks made strong dancing a sign of spiritual strength.


Bridge
There was an interesting revelation at the World Bridge Championships opening ceremonies here Friday night.
According to Robert Wolff, the retiring president of the World Bridge Federation, it is very likely that bridge will soon be recognized as an official sport by the International Olympic Committee.
This does not mean that bridge will soon be part of the Olympic Games, although that is not out of the question.
The recognition will strengthen the position of bridge organization in countries where government approval, and perhaps financial support, are needed.
After the first day of qualifying play in the World Mixed Pair Championship, the leaders were: first, Thorlakur Jonsson and Jackie McGreal of Iceland, 5740 match points; second, Jim and Corinne Kirkham of San Bernardino, Calif., 5731.12; third, Bob Hamman of Dallas and Sabine Zenkel of Chicago, 5635.7.
The field of 480 pairs was to be cut to 180 for the final three sessions beginning this afternoon.


New Yorker Splits With Berlin Wright
The New Yorker and Berlin Wright Cameron Doyle in New York have decided to part company on the magazine's account after only eight months.
Thomas A. Florio, president of The New Yorker, said on Friday that he was "reviewing the future" of the account, which is considered prestigious because of The New Yorker's heritage and reputation, though billings are estimated at less than $1 million.


A Sore Arm? Hostetler Leaves Broncos at 0-3 and Hurting
Raiders 48, Broncos 16
Jeff Hostetler, the supposedly sore-armed quarterback, threw for 338 yards and 4 touchdowns as the Raiders routed the reeling Broncos, 48-16, yesterday in Denver.


In Race for California Chief No Candidate Is Favorite
The candidate to watch in the California governor's race, the most important state election in the country this year, is None of the Above.
Officially, the polls show that Pete Wilson, the stolid Republican incumbent, has taken the lead after a slow start, again demonstrating that he is the California master of the confound-the-experts political surge.


Abbreviated Farewell For Andretti at Home
Mario Andretti might be king of the road here in his hometown, but today that did not extend to what is, for him, the most important mile of asphalt in town.
The Bosch Spark Plug 200 was Andretti's last race in Nazareth, the eastern Pennsylvania town where his racing career began 36 years ago and his one and only hometown since he came to the United States in 1955.
The 54-year-old Andretti left with a bang -- as produced by race car against concrete.


U.S. Heavyweights Win Gold at the Wire
The American men's heavyweight eight almost gave away a big lead at the world rowing championships today, but held on to win a gold medal.
The favored United States crew, stroked by Jeff Klepacki, a Rutgers alumnus from Kearny, N.J., faltered in the final 500 meters after leading by almost a full boat length and won by six-tenths of a second over a surprising crew from the Netherlands.
Romania placed third, followed by Germany, the defending champion, and then France.
The winning time was a swift 5 minutes 24.50 seconds.


Making a Silk-Purse Weekend Out of Sow's Ear Sci-Fi Movies
The first "Mystery Science Theater 3000" convention would not officially begin for two hours, but already the line inching toward the merchandise room had hundreds of people.
Despite the squeeze, there was palpable joy among the devoted who gathered here this weekend to honor the cable-television show that cunningly repackages and presents the cheesiest science-fiction movies of all time.
With fitting hyperbole, the gathering was called the ConventioCon ExpoFest-A-Rama.
Snaked out over several corridors of the Radisson Hotel, the lovers of schlock films like "Women of the Prehistoric Planet" and "The Crawling Eye" patiently waited their turn to buy $15 coffee mugs and $40 sweatshirts emblazoned with daffy slogans and pictures culled from "Mystery Science Theater 3000," which is available in 31 million homes on the Comedy Central channel.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Balance of Trade . . .
July  Wednesday  Housing Starts . . .
Aug.
Building Permits . . .
Aug.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Federal Budget . . .
Aug.


Graham Dancers Issue Ultimatum Over Contract
Labor unrest at the Martha Graham Dance Company is threatening a two-week season in celebration of Graham's centenary, called "Radical Graham," which is to open the Next Wave Festival on Sept. 28 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The Graham dancers have been without a contract since June 1993.
Management and union negotiators met with a Federal mediator last week.


Art in Warsaw Still Vigorous, if Lean and Poor
A 17th-century royal residence that was bombed in World War II, then demolished and crudely rebuilt by the Communists has become the focus of some of the most energetic contemporary art in Eastern Europe.
Known around Warsaw simply as the Castle, the Center for Contemporary Art at the Ujazdowski Castle prides itself, says its director, Wojciech Krukowski, as a place for Polish and international artists to experiment.
The rough finish of the large rooms from the hasty reconstruction -- exposed brick in some places, uneven ceilings -- has made the center an ideal space for installation and site-specific art.


Minorities Seek More Action to Halt AIDS Spread
With AIDS becoming a leading killer of black and Hispanic Americans, leaders of advocacy groups at a meeting here this weekend urged the Clinton Administration to do more to stem the disease among minorities.
"We're tired of words; what we need is action," said Cornelius Baker, an official of the National Association of People With AIDS, a nonprofit group that is supported by the Department of Health and Human Services.
The four-day meeting, which ended today, was sponsored by the department.


Trash Routes to Grow 20% Longer and 2 Tons Heavier
If sanitation workers ratify the tentative contract accord with the city, they will almost immediately find their routes 20 percent longer, collect nearly two tons more material on each truck and have 600 fewer colleagues.
The administration says the accord will mean new efficiencies and substantial savings.
And the president of the Uniformed Sanitationmen's Association took pains yesterday to characterize the agreement as offering some gains for his 7,400 members, as well as some setbacks.


Ideology Contrast Adds Some Flavor to Comptroller Race
Campaigning in an era of fuzzy images and vague visions, H. Carl McCall and Herbert London may offer New York voters as sharp a contrast in philosophy, politics and personality as any statewide candidates in November as they jockey for the largely nonideological job of comptroller.
In a campaign that has largely shunned the numbing comptrollerese of budgets, bond issues and audits, each defines his rival as a political extremist.
And each has been playing an unusually large -- but problematic -- role for his gubernatorial running-mate.


HAITI'S MILITARY LEADERS AGREE TO RESIGN; CLINTON HALTS ASSAULT, RECALLS 61 PLANES: TROOPS IN TODAY
President Clinton said tonight that the United States and Haiti's military leaders had reached a last-minute agreement to allow the ruling junta to step down voluntarily by Oct. 15 and then restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President.
"This is a good agreement for the United States and for Haiti," Mr.
Clinton said in a nationally televised address from the Oval Office at 9:30 P.M.


Simpson's Lawyers Set to Challenge the Evidence Again
Amid all the controversy and innuendo swirling around the O. J. Simpson case, the most significant legal issue now facing lawyers on both sides is this: Were bloodstains and other physical evidence discovered by the police at Mr.
Simpson's Brentwood home obtained in an illegal search?
In pretrial hearings that will provide a detailed look at some of the chief strategies in the case, lawyers for Mr.
Simpson are expected to argue this week that police investigators violated Mr.
Simpson's constitutional rights in searching his home and its grounds and then using what they found to obtain a search warrant.


HAITI'S MILITARY LEADERS AGREE TO RESIGN; CLINTON HALTS ASSAULT, RECALLS 61 PLANES: RESTORING ORDER
Even with the apparent success of 11th-hour diplomacy in Haiti, American troops are to enter the country to pave the way for what the Clinton Administration considers one of the most crucial jobs: stopping reprisals and assassinations that officials fear will take place whether the coup leaders are forced out in an invasion or step down in negotiations.
Loath to see American soldiers caught in a crossfire between supporters of the military and those of the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Administration officials hope to hand off responsibility for law and order to an international police force of at least 4,000.
The plan is to deploy the force just days after either an invasion or the voluntary resignation of Haiti's junta.


Internet Radio Station Plans to Broadcast Around the Clock
The first radio station on the Internet, the worldwide computer network, announced plans last week to begin broadcasting 24 hours a day in January, including live gavel-to-gavel audio broadcasts from the House and Senate floors.
The Internet Multicasting Company of Washington, a nonprofit enterprise formed to develop new uses for computer-based communications, plans to send out a round-the-clock stream of bits and bytes to satisfy the seemingly insatiable appetite for data of subscribers to Internet, which has millions of users around the world.
It will be, in essence, the digital equivalent of the C-Span cable network for people who would rather watch their computers than their television sets, except that unlike in conventional radio and television, all the broadcasts can be transmitted globally, stored, searched and augmented with text and picture files.
In some cases, listeners would be able to retrieve biographical data about the speakers and send them comments by electronic mail.


Lottery and Gambling
Many states, including New York and Connecticut, have been debating whether to legalize casino gambling to generate revenue.
But some gambling experts say tax revenues will eventually reach the point of diminishing returns as more and more forms of gambling are legalized.
Even with casino gambling, New Jersey has seen tax revenues that are derived from gaming shrink as a percentage of the state's budget.
In other states, some officials fear that tax receipts from lotteries and parimutuel betting will be hurt if they legalize casino gambling.
Parimutuel receipts are already falling across the region.
In New York, legalizing casino gambling would require an amendment to the state's Constitution and voter approval in a referendum.


Mexican Independence in New York
All over New York on Saturday the Mexican and Central American workers who supply the muscle power for restaurants, delis, carwashes and other less desirable houses of labor, were looking for a place to sit down and rest.
That's at least partly because on Friday night from 7,000 to 10,000 of them, depending on which official of the Jacob Javits Center one spoke to, spent six hours dancing at the center at an immense party celebrating Mexican Independence Day.
The show featured a handful of bands from Central America, all warmups for two of the biggest Spanish-language bands from Mexico and the United States, Los Tigres del Norte, originally from the state of Sinaloa, and Selena, from Corpus Christi, Tex.
The idea was elegance, and every band and all the audience members had their own ideas on how to achieve it.
Grupo Lora, from El Salvador, wore black uniforms flashing with gold epaulets and spangles.
Selena looked like a New York club kid, filtered through Texas, with cowboy boots and a studded belt and a bared belly button.
And Los Tigres del Norte had matching white suits with details featuring the colors of the Mexican flag, and cowboy boots.
The audience, dressed for Saturday night, wore everything from ponchos to cowboy outfits with hats, to the slick style found in provincial capitals across Mexico.
The party was a huge outburst of regional pride, a declaration that even in the North, the past wasn't going to be left behind, and that the finery of life was what counted.


Dividend Meetings


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about the departure of senior executives of R. H. Macy &amp; Company referred incorrectly to Herbert Hellman, the company's general counsel.
He has left the company.


Holy Bull Now Passing Horses Among Champions Past
Five hours after Holy Bull stopped the show at Belmont Park with a performance that may have won two championships, the telephone rang in Jimmy Croll's home on the Jersey Shore.
It was his old friend and mentor Jimmy Jones, calling from his farm in Missouri and offering congratulations from a man who trained eight champions in the empire days of Calumet Farm.
"I told him Holy Bull is the best horse in racing this year," Jones said yesterday.
"He's the horse to beat."


At Fort Bragg, A Sudden Rush To Get Ready
Suddenly, there was more running than walking.
At noon yesterday, the word reached the invasion force headquarters in the battlefield simulation building at Fort Bragg, N.C.: the invasion of Haiti was on.
Troops were summoned to the headquarters, briefed and given shots.
Blood samples were taken for DNA testing, for the identification of remains.
To protect against H.I.V. transmission, they were issued surgical gloves.
And for an action that was supposed to meet only minimal resistance, pepper spray was added to their usual arsenals.


War on Marijuana Draws Complaints in California
There is a bumper crop of marijuana this year, and that means war in Northern California's coastal mountains.
With the shiny green plants near harvesting, National Guard helicopters are scouting out remote gardens, unmarked police cars are cruising dirt roads and officers in camouflage are creeping through brush.
But for some residents, the authorities are not the good guys.
Homeowners in Humboldt, Trinity and Mendocino Counties -- an area known as the Emerald Triangle because of the quality and quantity of marijuana produced there -- said the forces trying to eradicate marijuana were more zealous than ever.
People have complained to the police about troops trampling gardens and low-flying helicopters startling sunbathers and frightening livestock.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A clever new TV spot for Estee Lauder is so quiet it shouts.
ESTEE LAUDER'S new perfume commercial is remarkable for what it does not have: fetching women, yes, but no languid poses, no serene music and no baffling advertising slogan.
Just a bit of bouncy British wit in a sunny Italian town.
How Estee Lauder is advertising its new women's fragrance, Tuscany Per Donna, says much about how a company can break out of modern advertising's cliche and din with an adroit whisper.


Ann Schreiber; Federal Administrator, 58
Ann Schreiber, a regional administrator in the Northeast United States and the Caribbean for the Department of Health and Human Services, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 58 and lived in Park Slope, Brooklyn.
The cause was ovarian cancer, said her husband, Sol Schreiber, a former Federal magistrate in Manhattan.


Dishing Out TV Menu to 'Dogpatch'; A Remote 3-Channel Town Suddenly Gets Oodles of Choices
Veronica O'Rourke said her family's television viewing choices have long been a simple matter.
"You've got three channels and you watch whatever one comes in that day," she said.
The place with almost no television suddenly had as much as just about anybody in the world, with the added bonus of perfect reception -- and all free for the first three months.
Arietta, a sprawling "town" of nearly 500 square miles peopled by 301 scattered souls, about 70 miles northwest of Albany, had become a company's demonstration site for a television technology that beams signals into individual homes by means of umbrella-sized satellite reception dishes.


Don't Blame Times Sq. For the X-Rated Shops
To the Editor:
I follow with interest your coverage of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposals to restrict sex-oriented businesses (news article, Sept.12).
There is an irony in all of this.


Market Place; Baby Superstore Is Ready for Its Wall Street Test
Baby Superstore Inc. is preparing to toddle onto Wall Street with a stock offering that will give investors a crack at investing in the latest exponent of the superstore craze.
The company is gearing up to sell 2.725 million shares at $17 apiece, perhaps as early as this week.


Police State Is Alive and Well in El Paso
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 14 article in the series on the Immigration and Naturalization Service praises the success of Silvestre Reyes, the Border Patrol chief in El Paso: "Mr. Reyes is dispelling the widely held belief that the nation's borders cannot be controlled without draconian, police-state tactics."


Jerry M. Tinker, 55, Senate Staff Official
Jerry M. Tinker, the staff director of the Senate Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugee Affairs and an authority in those fields, died on Friday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 55.
The cause was a gastrointestinal hemorrhage, The Associated Press reported.


Edward Patten, 89, Who Served Nine Terms as a Congressman
Edward J. Patten, who served nine terms as a Democratic Congressman from New Jersey and retired in 1981 after a political career of nearly five decades, died on Saturday at the John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Edison, N.J.
He was 89 and lived in Perth Amboy.
The cause was complications from surgery last week, said Brendan Flynn of the Flynn and Son Funeral Home in Perth Amboy.


Another Sellout On Bosnia
A year ago, we resigned as the State Department's desk officers for Bosnia and Croatia to protest the Clinton Administration's policies on Bosnia.
Since then, little has changed for the better and much has got worse.
Serbia's vicious assault on Bosnia and its non-Serb population continues, making it even more imperative that we end the arms embargo so that Bosnia can defend itself.


Carter's Diplomatic Mission Was a Last-Minute Gamble
That Jimmy Carter had a place on center stage in the final act of President Clinton's end game with Haitian leaders was a last-minute improvisation.
Mr.
Clinton had always intended to send one last emissary to persuade Haiti's military leaders to step down voluntarily, his aides said today.
But it was only late last week, as he stood on the brink of an unpopular military operation, that Mr.
Clinton decided to accept Mr.
Carter's offer that he head the team that would try one last time to find a peaceful way out.


President Tells Nation: A 3-Year Objective Has Been Attained
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's address to the nation on Haiti last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
My fellow Americans, I want to announce that the military leaders of Haiti have agreed to step down from power.
The dictators have recognized that it is in their best interest and in the best interest of the Haitian people to relinquish power peacefully, rather than to face imminent action by the forces of the multinational coalition we are leading.


Are Royals and Herzog Cooking Up Deal?
WHITEY HERZOG will be offered the job as manager of the Kansas City Royals in a deal that would reunite him with his close friend, GEORGE BRETT, currently a team vice president, The Los Angeles Times reported yesterday.
Herzog, who resigned in January as general manager of the California Angels, is scheduled to talk with the Royals this week, sources told the newspaper.
Herzog, 62, managed Brett and the Royals to three division titles from 1976-1978.


Ideology Contrast Adds Some Flavor to Comptroller Race
Campaigning in an era of fuzzy images and vague visions, H. Carl McCall and Herbert London may offer New York voters as sharp a contrast in philosophy, politics and personality as any statewide candidates in November as they jockey for the largely nonideological job of comptroller.
In a campaign that has largely shunned the numbing comptrollerese of budgets, bond issues and audits, each defines his rival as a political extremist.
And each has been playing an unusually large -- but problematic -- role for his gubernatorial running-mate.


Brady Bill 2 Would Overhaul Gun Business
To the Editor:
You call for more comprehensive gun control legislation, including a ban on Saturday night specials and limits on handgun purchases (editorial, Sept. 6).
Handgun Control Inc. is working for a comprehensive bill, dubbed Brady 2, including these measures and many more -- like licensing handgun owners, registering transfers, safety training for purchasers and installation of safety devices by producers.
The bill, introduced by Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum and Representative Charles E. Schumer, is the beginning of an overhaul of the way guns are bought and sold in this country.
More important, it represents an end to incrementalism.
The Brady law has proved a tremendous success in keeping guns out of criminal hands at the retail level.
And the recent ban on military-style assault weapons will have a similar impact.
The essence of Brady 2 is responsibility -- from gun makers, dealers and owners.
SARAH BRADY  Chairwoman, Handgun Control Inc.
Washington, Sept. 14, 1994


2 Candidates Eagerly Pursue Pivotal Blocs Among Jews
The two major gubernatorial candidates in New York, one wearing a personalized yarmulke and the other chomping a kosher pickle, set out yesterday in pursuit of Hasidic and Orthodox Jewish voters, groups that have become less reliably Democratic because of concerns about crime and deteriorating race relations.
For Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who toured the Lower East Side, and State Senator George E. Pataki, who campaigned in Borough Park in Brooklyn, it was a day for private meetings with rabbis followed by public shows of symbolic tribute.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Colombia filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $650 million of debt securities and warrants to purchase debt securities.
Merrill Lynch will be the lead underwriter. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 1995 at 100 to yield 5.70 percent through CS First Boston.
The issue is noncallable.


Building a Tabernacle in the Bronx


Sports of The Times; The Giants' Little Big Man Is Short, Not Small
SNEAKING into the end zone like a mouse among redwood trees, David Meggett had scored the touchdown that would assure the Giants' 31-23 victory over the Redskins and now, his shaved head high in a Throwback Weekend helmet with "NY" on it, he was returning to the sideline where linebacker Corey Miller embraced him.
"I love you," Miller said.


One of New York's Own and one of Its Favorites
All Vitas Gerulaitis ever wanted when he started his professional tennis career, he once told an interviewer, was for the world to love him.
But for most of his years as one of the world's most successful tennis pros, Gerulaitis could never quite match his comfort zones on and off the court.
And with his death yesterday at the age of 40, the contradictions over his life and career are likely to continue -- a symbol of either unfulfilled greatness or the squandered naivete of a roadrunner who never slowed for stop signs.


A Monumental Presidency and the Telling Details
No Ordinary Time Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II  By Doris Kearns Goodwin  Illustrated. 759 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.
When most of us who were alive during World War II recall what the home front was like, we think of gas rationing and air-raid drills and what we were doing when the news of Pearl Harbor was announced.
But Doris Kearns Goodwin ("Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream" and "The Fitzgeralds and the Kennedys") is after something grander in her enthralling new history, "No Ordinary Time: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II."


One to Throw Away On Throwback Day
It was Throwback Weekend in the National Football League, but the Jets weren't in the spirit of the occasion.
In the words of quarterback Boomer Esiason, they did not exactly look like the 1960 Packers or the 1975 Steelers yesterday.
They bore no resemblance to the 1968 Jets -- the team that went on to win Super Bowl III -- although they were wearing that team's uniforms.
They didn't even look like the 1993 Jets, a team that swept the Dolphins in two division games and made Miami look bad in the process.


POP REVIEWS Part Divas, Part Goddesses: 2 Women of Glamour and Music; Lena Horne At Carnegie Hall
One of the most astounding moments on a New York stage this year occurred at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening when Lena Horne stripped bare the Charles Aznavour-Herbert Kretzmer standard "Yesterday, When I Was Young."
As the stage lights dimmed, the 77-year-old singer, hunched on a stool, began murmuring the lyrics against the accompaniment of a single guitar.
The song's narrator is a performer who acknowledges with great bitterness the cost of a selfishly squandered youth.
In Ms.
Horne's hands, this unsparing self-assessment becomes a dark night of the soul that builds into the cry of a sinner facing Judgment Day.


Secondary Seizes a Second Chance
If at first you don't succeed, try something else.
That's what the Giants' secondary did in the second half today, and the change worked well enough to help the Giants struggle by the Washington Redskins, 31-23.
"In the first half," said Zaven Yaralian, the Giants' defensive backfield coach, "we played a lot of man defense and some deep zone. But they kept hitting out patterns. So in the second half, we went to a two-deep and took the outs away. We needed to give the corners some help."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  AGREEMENT ON HAITI
President Clinton said that the United States and Haiti's military leaders reached an agreement under which the ruling junta will step down next month and restore the exiled President to power.
A1


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Wallace Wins, Slowly  Rusty Wallace led a frustrated field of racers across the finish line at a virtual standstill pace yesterday to win the SplitFire 500 in Dover, Del.
With his Ford Thunderbird out of gas and a tire flattened, Wallace's car limped around the one-mile Dover Dover Downs International Speedway as the race finished under a caution flag.
Right behind him were Dale Earnhardt and Darrell Waltrip.
Earnhardt would have won had Wallace's car stopped at any time on the final lap.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH SHENKER , who has been president of the Bank Street College of Education since 1988, has announced that he will step down from the post at the end of this academic year.
"I think I have basically accomplished the agenda that I came to Bank Street to move forward," he said, "to create financial stability and to programmatically link the institution closely with public education."


Patents
THE familiar round-edged Gem paper clip, ubiquitous in offices around the world, has been around since at least the turn of the century.
Yet despite its enduring popularity, hundreds of inventors have tried to improve on it.
There is the Gothic paper clip, whose tip is peaked; the Niagara, which looks like an elaborately scripted "M"; the butterfly-shaped Ideal, and the Nifty, whose curlicue form is reminiscent of a pig's tail.
In recent years, the United States Patent Office has issued patents for paper clips attached to miniature clocks, clips that resemble clothespins and others shaped like sunglasses, stars, arrows and hearts.


School Reopens, Ever Changing and the Same; Dropout Prevention
To the Editor:
On the first day of high school, a 14-year-old New Yorker was sent home and told not to return for a week.
She had traveled from the Washington Heights section of Manhattan to a school in midtown, only to wait for five hours on three different lines.
She was told that there had been an administrative mistake and her name had been omitted from the school's roster.
The young woman's protestations that she did not want to miss the first week of classes were to no avail.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Since Borden agreed to be acquired by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts, the anger of shareholders has deepened.
Borden has had financial problems for years.
Shareholders have been critical of management, and news of the deal did little to change minds.  [ Page D1. ]


INSIDE
Surrounded in Sarajevo
Although the guns have quieted down, the Bosnian capital has entered a nightmarish twilight zone that is causing residents increasing psychological stress.
Page A3.
A Deal Under Fire
Borden shareholders say the board failed to represent them in the seemingly speedy talks to sell the company to a takeover firm.
Page D1.
Fight Looms on Fisheries
A major fight is shaping up in Congress over eight little-known committees that regulate commercial fishing.
Concerns focus on potential conflicts of interest.
Page B9.
Vitas Gerulaitis Dies
The former tennis star, 40, was found dead at a friend's home on Long Island.
He appeared to have suffered a heart attack.
Page D9.


In June, 'Commencement'; in September, It's Back to School
The band played "Pomp and Circumstance," the principal spoke about academic honor, and then 190 students in caps and gowns filed to the stage at a Brooklyn high school last June to receive their diplomas.
Or at least they looked like diplomas.
In fact, they were just cardboard blanks, and for a third of the students who received them, the entire ceremony was a masquerade.


Muhammad Ali Is Just a Regular Guy Here
MUHAMMAD ALI, Sports Illustrated's most influential sports figure of the last 40 years, is just another resident in the southwestern Michigan village of Berrien Springs.
He and the 2,000 citizens who live here like it like that.
Ali, 52, has lived since 1987 in the village 10 miles east of Lake Michigan.


Big TV Networks in Turmoil As the New Season Begins
Network television begins its most turbulent season tonight.
Prosperous though it is, the industry is shaken by upheaval at the local-station level, widespread changes in program schedules, intensifying competition for viewers and unnerving uncertainty about the ownership of at least one and perhaps more of the big three networks.
"Chaos is a word you can apply," David F. Poltrack, executive vice president of CBS, said.
"It is certainly going to be the most atypical season we've ever had."


Giuliani and the Unions
Unbeholden to municipal unions like few mayors before him, Rudolph W. Giuliani strode into office talking tough to labor.
He vowed to scale back New York City's municipal payroll and, perhaps most threatening of all to the unions, to put an end to work rules he derided as archaic.
Now, after nine months as Mayor, Mr.
Giuliani has put together a remarkable string of successes in his dealings with labor.
And yet he has done so less by confrontation than by a more subtle form of persuasion.


Treasury to Auction Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.58 percent, and a six-month bill was at 5.01 percent.


Cairo Policy On Economy Raises Fears
Defying demands by the International Monetary Fund to devalue its currency and institute stiff economic changes, the Egyptian Government is pursuing policies that many economists and Western diplomats say could lead to severe economic upheaval and social unrest.
These officials cite the experiences of Turkey and Greece, where artificially high exchange rates ultimately led to a crash in the value of the currency and galloping inflation.
They say such a crash would further erode the Government's authority and increase support for the violent campaign by Islamic militants to topple President Hosni Mubarak.


Montana Passes Chiefs Past Falcons and to a 3-0 Start
Maybe it was because the Kansas City Chiefs now have Joe Montana.
Maybe it was because Kansas City last week beat their longtime divisional front-runner and archrival, the San Francisco 49ers.
Maybe it was because they believe that the Chiefs are the best team in the American Conference this season.
On that last one, the Atlanta Falcons may, indeed, be right.


Vitas Gerulaitis, an Ex-Star Of Tennis Tour, Dies at 40
Vitas Gerulaitis, the garrulous New Yorker who rose from the public courts of Brooklyn and Queens to become the third-ranked men's tennis player in the world, was found dead yesterday at a friend's home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 40 years old and lived in Turnburry, Fla.
The Southampton village police said that Gerulaitis's body was found at a home on Meadow Lane shortly after 3 P.M.


Joby Messier Hurts Knee
Defenseman Joby Messier will be out three to five weeks because of a sprained medial collateral ligament in his left knee, the Rangers announced yesterday.
Messier injured his knee in the third period of the Islanders' 3-2 exhibition victory over the Rangers Saturday night.


Borden's Deal Draws the Ire of Shareholders
In the days since Borden Inc. agreed to be acquired for $2 billion by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, with payments to be made in the form of stock in the firm's RJR Nabisco, the anger of major Borden shareholders has risen far beyond the level of crying over spilt milk.
Wall Street jokes about the shotgun marriage of Elsie the Cow and Joe Camel have yielded to bitter charges that Borden's eight directors failed to represent shareholder interests in the negotiations with Kohlberg, Kravis.


Chavez Uses Left Hook To Pound Point Across
Meldrick Taylor used much of last week to expound on the virtues of vindication, to say how he would get even with Julio Cesar Chavez, to point out that his nemesis of four years ago had little left in the way of skills.
Predicting the end for Mexico's legendary champion while proclaiming the rebirth of his own career in their rematch, Taylor added, "Eighth-round knockout."


Ryan's Cardinals (0-3) Go Scoreless
Browns 32, Cardinals 0
No way, the Arizona Cardinals had promised.
No way would a team coached by the defensive mastermind Buddy Ryan go 0-3.
The Cardinals were so sure of themselves, their boastful prediction made it into a Cleveland newspaper that was tacked up on the Browns' bulletin board all week.
And the Browns clearly took offense.


Corrections
A news analysis article in Business Day on Sept. 10, about the Mexican Government's response to a bank scandal, misstated the year Mexico's banks were nationalized.
It was 1982, not 1981.


At Nebraska, a Significant Touchdown
Until last weekend, he was another name on a depth chart, a hard-working sophomore on a team capable of winning a national championship.
Brendan Holbein caught one pass last season.
This year, as a third-year sophomore, the split end whose college career had begun as a nonscholarship player was making more of a contribution.
On some other Saturday, the first touchdown reception of Holbein's college career would have been a footnote in a game decided long before his most memorable play.
Holbein's 9-yard score on a shovel pass from Tommie Frazier was the sixth of seven Nebraska touchdowns in the 49-21 victory over U.C.L.A., an overpowering outcome that still did not prevent the Huskers from losing ground at the top of the combined polls that determine bowl-game matchups.


13 Fire Chiefs Call for 'Fire-Safe' Cigarettes
Thirteen chiefs and commissioners of fire departments around the country, most representing major cities, have called on the tobacco industry to manufacture fire-safe cigarettes, making use of a simple technology that, they say, could save hundreds of lives each year.
The coalition, forged by New York's City's Fire Commissioner, Howard Safir, includes the chiefs of the Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Detroit, Houston and Miami departments.
Also joining the call is the International Association of Fire Chiefs, representing 32,000 departments.


Doctor Shows for the High-Tech 90's
Like westerns, cop shows and sitcoms, the combination of doctors and hospitals is a television staple.
From "Dr. Kildare" to "St. Elsewhere," diagnoses and treatments covering every ailment lurking in a medical encyclopedia have been meted out free in what could be considered a primitive form of universal health coverage.
After being under sedation for a few seasons, hospital dramas are back, taking the form of two quite promising weekly series: CBS's "Chicago Hope" and NBC's "E.R.," also set in Chicago.
This being network television, however, the competitive scheduling veers toward the suicidal.
After special previews -- last night for "Chicago Hope," tonight at 9 for "E.R." -- the shows will run against each other Thursdays at 10 P.M.


Corrections
A picture in Business Day on Thursday with an article about the sale of Meridien Hotels Inc. to Forte P.L.C. was published in error.
It showed the lobby of the Parker Meridien in Manhattan, which is managed by Meridien Hotels but is owned by the Jack Parker Corporation.
The Parker Meridien is not one of the 58 luxury hotels included in the sale.


Parking Rules
Because of Succoth, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Abroad at Home; Resolution Matters
The agreement of Gen.
Raoul Cedras to give up his tyrant's grip on Haiti shows what a difference decisive commitment can make in American foreign policy.
When at long last President Clinton made clear that he meant business, and former President Carter's mission underlined that determination, the game was over for the Haitian military.
"This agreement came," President Clinton said in announcing the news, "only because of the credible and imminent threat of the international force" that was about to invade Haiti.
The denouement is a critical victory for a politically battered Bill Clinton.
He came to the point of ordering an invasion of Haiti with evident reluctance, without asking Congress and against what polls said the public wanted.
It was a very large gamble and it worked.
The fact that Gen.
Colin Powell and Senator Sam Nunn were part of the Carter mission that Mr.
Clinton sent to Haiti makes the result even happier for him politically.
General Powell wears no party's label but has been eyed by Republicans as a potential candidate.
Senator Nunn is the most important Southern Democrat in Congress.
As the American and other forces go in, Haiti still remains a potential policy minefield.
But at least we are past the long, dismal example of classic failure in foreign policy: the failure to decide.
General Cedras and his colleagues overthrew Haiti's elected President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, on Sept. 30, 1991.
That posed a choice for American policy.
We could work vigorously to undo the coup and restore Haiti's legitimate Government, or we could decide that what happened in Haiti did not engage the deepest U.S. interests.
President Bush sounded as if he had chosen the former course.
He called the coup a threat to American security and said it would not stand.
He demanded "an immediate halt to violence and the restoration of democracy." But during the remaining 15 months of his Presidency Mr.
Bush made no real effort to oust the Haitian military regime.
President Clinton, after he took office, shifted to a policy of negotiating with General Cedras for a settlement that would bring President Aristide back but give the military guarantees of safety.
Negotiations took place on Governors Island in New York, and agreement was reached there on July 3, 1993.
The plan called for President Aristide to return to Haiti on Oct. 30.
In the months between the Governors Island agreement and the scheduled date of President Aristide's return, there were many signals that General Cedras had no intention of doing what he had promised.
The so-called "attaches," killers directed by the military, murdered numbers of civilians in Port-au-Prince and assassinated a leading Aristide supporter.
But the Clinton Administration proceeded as if it believed Governors Island would be carried out.
In October the Defense Department sent a U.S. ship, the Harlan County, to Haiti with 175 American and 25 Canadian soldiers who were supposed to train Haitian security forces for President Aristide's return.
On Oct. 11, 1993, as the Harlan County arrived in the harbor, armed goons and uniformed policemen demonstrated on the docks, beating civilians and shouting against the United States.
The Clinton Administration ordered the Harlan County to leave.
That, surely, was the moment for decision.
President Clinton could have ordered an immediate strike.
A small invasion force, entirely adequate to round up the military leaders and their thugs, could have been quickly assembled.
Congress and the public would have supported that response to the deliberate insulting of the United States.
But Mr.
Clinton did not act.
Nearly another year passed, with Americans unpersuaded that President Clinton had the determination or the power to act.
Then he made the decision to invade, and the drama quickly changed.
This is President Clinton's moment, without wanting to quibble at that one may express the hope that from this episode will arise a new decisiveness in American foreign policy.
The next best place to apply it is Bosnia.


SFM Media Names Head of Sports Unit
Jerry Solomon, a longtime sports media executive, has been hired by the SFM Media Corporation to start a sports marketing unit.
Mr.
Solomon, 56, will head the new division of SFM, the media-buying service in New York, as executive vice president, reporting to Bob Frank, president of the SFM media services division.
Mr.
Solomon spent 13 years directing the Busch Media Group, the in-house national media unit of Anheuser-Busch, after 19 years in sales and marketing positions at ABC.


Very Late Report Card Finds Iacocca Wanting
Henry Ford 2d was a blunt man.
But on the subject of the decision that caused the greatest uproar during his last years running the Ford Motor Company -- his dismissal of Lee A. Iacocca in 1978 -- Mr.
Ford mostly stayed mum.
By contrast, Mr.
Iacocca, who went on to success leading the Chrysler Corporation, in remarks to reporters and in a best-selling autobiography accused Mr.
Ford of being everything from a "spoiled brat" to a racist to a drunk.


A Go-Slow Strategy For Exxon
The 1990's have provided some special opportunities for oil companies.
Rich areas of the former Soviet Union, China and parts of Africa like Angola and Algeria -- which had long been coveted for exploration, but were off-limits -- suddenly began courting the companies, urging that they come in.
"The world changed," Jon L. Thompson, the president of the Exxon Exploration Company, a subsidiary of the Exxon Corporation, said in an interview yesterday.
And Exxon -- along with many other big companies like the Royal Dutch/ Shell Group, Mobil, Chevron and Amoco -- have seized the vast new opportunities.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Cuomo and Pataki Are Even in Poll
With seven weeks to go before Election Day, a poll released yesterday suggests that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his Republican challenger, George E. Pataki, are deadlocked.
The survey of 1,115 registered voters by Newsday and WABC-TV showed 41 percent backing Mr.
Pataki, 40 percent supporting Mr.
Cuomo, and 14 percent undecided.
The remaining 5 percent supported other candidates.


Sex Offender Due for Parole, But No Place Will Have Him
In a country grown weary of crime, where protecting children is becoming something of a public preoccupation, it is getting hard to imagine finding an acceptable home for the likes of Carl DeFlumer.
Mr.
DeFlumer has spent 42 of his 62 years in prison, for killing a boy when he was 14 and sodomizing another 29 years later.
Earlier this month, he was to have been released to live here with a sister who had not been born when he first went away.
She was given three weeks notice by state parole officials, who said they had nowhere else to send him.


School Reopens, Ever Changing and the Same
To the Editor:
Your article on the need to teach English as a second language (Sept. 11) in many schools brought to mind my first-grade days in 1938, when a number of classmates were recent refugees from what was becoming Hitler's Europe.


School Reopens, Ever Changing and the Same; Cut the Bureaucracy
To the Editor:
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani states in his blunt way that "when you don't see money getting to your classroom," it's "because of the bureaucracy," he is correct (news article, Sept. 13).


Felisa Rincon de Gautier, 97, Mayor of San Juan
Felisa Rincon de Gautier, Mayor of San Juan, P.R., from 1946 to 1969 and the only woman to hold that post, died on Friday in a nursing home in San Juan, where she had lived in recent months.
She was 97.
She died after suffering a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


How the Students Pay For 'Efficiency' Decrees
JERRY CIOFFI wonders sometimes about the people who run things in New York.
The Mayor says cut the school bureaucracy -- just the fat, he promises, nothing that touches instruction.
Yet Mr.
Cioffi, the principal at Prospect Heights High School in Brooklyn, is cutting teachers.
Which he cannot afford to do because he keeps getting more students, many of them recent immigrants who need special help.
What's more, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines just imposed tougher science and math standards.
That's a fine idea, Mr.
Cioffi said.
Except most of the students coming into his high school are so many years behind in those subjects that they need remedial help just to take the more demanding courses.
Which requires more instruction.
Which requires more teachers.


In 49er Debut, Sanders Performs a Cameo Role
Deion Sanders probably sweated more playing baseball.
Signed by the 49ers last Thursday as a secret weapon, he was only temporarily unveiled in San Francisco's 34-19 victory today over the Los Angeles Rams.
His afternoon consisted of 26 plays, all as an extra defensive back, and the opposing quarterbacks, Chris Miller and Chris Chandler, each displayed a high I.Q. -- they steered clear of him.


POP REVIEWS Part Divas, Part Goddesses: 2 Women of Glamour and Music; Whitney Houston At Radio City
Whitney Houston has always had a great big voice, a technical marvel from its velvety depths to its ballistic middle register to its ringing and airy heights.
In a string of hits since 1985, and in her concerts, Ms.
Houston's power and agility have always been exhilarating, although they didn't always connect with the shape of the songs.
But at Radio City Music Hall on Friday night, opening a seven-night engagement through Sept. 27, she harnessed her vocals to her material for a concert that was not just flamboyant but often moving.
Ms.
Houston sang two sets of love songs.
In the first, she was backed by her band and flanked by four athletic dancers; in the second, she was a diva backed by a small orchestra.
The two sets represented both sides of a successful career strategy that has kept her frisky enough for young pop fans yet respectable enough for their parents.
The first half was a tour de force.
Ms.
Houston had routines to run through: dance steps, a disco segment, and a denunciation of tabloid rumours about marital trouble (which followed two ardent kisses from her husband, the singer Bobby Brown).
But she could easily wing it; when her daughter toddled on stage, she sang "Old MacDonald" to her, with the sultriest "e-i-e-i-o" imaginable.
Ms.
Houston tore into her hits with a playful virtuosity.
In uptempo songs, her three female backup singers took care of the straightforward choruses while Ms.
Houston volleyed responses.
She tossed around syncopations, percussive or soaring, using every repeated lyric as a springboard for a new improvisation.
In a medley of ballads, she caressed and savored every line.
She sounded tenderly tremulous as she asked, "Where do broken hearts go?," affectionate and satisfied as she declared, "Nobody loves me like you do." "Love," a word that reappears countless times in her songs, could be an airy note, a voluptuous glide, a joyful cascade.
Where she once lavished ornaments at random, she now puts across sentiment as well as showiness.
For the second half, Ms.
Houston belted ballads, predictably bringing down the house with songs that moved from aching verses to surging choruses.
A medley of hits from Dionne Warwicke, Ms.
Houston's cousin, lacked Ms.
Warwicke's lightness, but Ms.
Houston made "Alfie" sound like the ethical wrangle it is.
Ms.
Houston dedicated "I Will Always Love You" to her father, who she said had gone to the hospital that afternoon.
Her tearful voice -- it even broke on one note -- gave the song more immediacy than the stentorian recorded version.
The concert's catalyst was gospel, the music Ms.
Houston grew up on.
Between ballads she broke into a gospel song, moving across the stage like a singer getting the spirit.
Her call-and-response arrangements, and some of her best improvised moments, also came directly from sanctified singing.
"Sometimes the church comes out and I can't help myself," Ms.
Houston said at one point.
Gospel links musical display to getting a message across, so Ms.
Houston shouldn't hold back: the more she lets loose her gospel heritage, the better she sounds.


A Boom in Latin Business Reading
Where can you find a report on Paraguay's new stock market, a three-page spread on Ecuador's Brady bond deal and a glowing Man of the Year cover article on Peru's President, Alberto K. Fujimori?
All this and more ran in recent issues of Latin Finance, a glossy magazine that fills the coffee-table niche in a rapidly expanding publishing industry devoted to covering business in Latin America.


U.S. Earns First Sip From Presidents Cup
The shot that won the inaugural Presidents Cup for the United States today was a shot that could one day come to symbolize the event itself.
It didn't look all that impressive when it started out.
Then it quickly got on the right line, took a fortunate bounce off the slope of the green and it wound up one foot from the hole for a birdie.
That it was hit by Fred Couples, one of America's favorite golfers, can only hasten its historic implications.
And when Couples walked up to the 18th green at the Robert Trent Jones Golf Club, bathed in loud roars of "Freddie, Freddie!" mingled with "USA! USA!" it was apparent that the birth of a significant event had just taken place.


Meggett Proves You Can Fool Some People (Redskins) All of the Time
If the Giants ever get in a crunch at quarterback, if Dave Brown for some reason gets knocked out of the game, the Giants should just line up little David Meggett and let him throw deep.
Why not?
In two seasons against the Washington Redskins, Meggett has thrown three passes -- all touchdowns.
Who is that Montana guy again?
The Redskins have been like that person who always falls for the practical joke no matter how obvious it is or how many times he's been suckered before.
Last season, Meggett threw two touchdown passes on two attempts -- both on trick plays, halfback options to be specific.
Then, today, the Giants, going for a 3-0 start, went back to the bag of tricks again.


Amid the Heat and the Interceptions, Jets Fall Back to Earth With a Thud
So they're not perfect.
In fact, the Jets, who had jumped off to a 2-0 season, gaining confidence and fan support, were a thoroughly beaten team today.
They bowed to the surprisingly strong and undefeated Dolphins, 28-14.


The Grittier 'Tosca,' With Nostalgia
Having basked in its 50-year history with special fervor and innovative purpose last season, the New York City Opera returned to nostalgia as usual on Friday evening with a staging of Puccini's "Tosca" that in its basic look spans more than half of those years.
Frank Corsaro, who directed the production when it was new, in 1987, retained set designs by Donald Oenslager that had already survived two productions, one dating back to 1966.
Unlike the "Tosca" next door, Franco Zeffirelli's extravaganza at the Metropolitan Opera, with its slick grandeur, technological wizardry and hyperrealistic detail, Mr.
Corsaro's intimate conception, with stage direction by Cynthia Edwards, stresses dark, gritty "realism" in its characterization.
It goes over the top at times, as in its suddenly bloodthirsty portrayal of the temperamental yet good-hearted prima donna Floria Tosca, who is driven to desperation and vengeful homicide by the depraved lust and cruelty of the Roman police chief Baron Scarpia.


Saudi Envoy Helps Expose a Thai Crime Group: The Police
The top Saudi Arabian diplomat in Thailand, Mohammed Said Khoja, reached across his desk to a zippered black bag, opened it and carefully removed his gun.
The chrome-plated .38-caliber Smith &amp; Wesson is always at his side.
Does he need protection from international terrorists?
No, Mr.
Khoja explained, cradling the pistol in one hand.
He needs protection from the national police of Thailand, a remarkable assertion that few people in Thailand would dispute.


Colon Campaign Reports Equipment Stolen
About $17,000 worth of computer and telephone equipment was reported stolen over the weekend from the campaign headquarters of Willie Colon, the salsa musician and former candidate in the Bronx.
The burglary occurred between 6 P.M. on Friday and 1:30 P.M. yesterday, said a spokesman for the police, Sgt.
James Coleman.
Campaign workers learned that the equipment was missing when they went to the office, at 542 East Fordham Road in the Fordham section, yesterday.


No Headline
"This is a good agreement for the United States and for Haiti. The military leaders will leave, the United States and coalition forces will arrive beginning tomorrow and they'll do so in conditions that are less dangerous, although still not without risk." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON  [ A8:1. ]


U.S. Has High Hopes for New Student Loan Plan
Rachel Fallert twisted a strand of long blonde hair, frowned and tried to tally up her debt.
In the four years she has been studying at the University of Colorado here, she has had to borrow money to study, eat and have a roof above her head.
"Maybe I owe $5,000," the 21-year-old creative-writing student said.
"I'm not sure. I have a pretty standoffish relationship with money."


Crisis of Bread and Land Afflicts Russia's Hard-Pressed Farmers
The fevered days of autumn have descended heavily upon the farmers of Russia.
An unusually cold summer stunted their crops and late rains nearly washed them away.
Now the frosts are only a few weeks off, and if they come any sooner the nation will suffer its worst harvest in three decades.
"A lot in our country depends on the weather this autumn," Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin told a German television reporter recently, voicing the common concern that a particularly poor harvest will hasten the effects of an already visible farm crisis.
"What happens in the fields also has its effect on the political climate."


Group Urges Pensacola Boycott
The board of the National Organization for Women voted today to allow its officers to call a boycott of Pensacola, Fla., where two doctors who performed abortions have been slain in the last two years, if the city does not set up buffer zones at abortion clinics there.
A boycott of the entire state was suggested, officials of the group said, but was rejected as being too difficult to carry out.
NOW wants Pensacola to enact an ordinance setting up an area in front of the clinics where abortion protesters will not be permitted to enter.
Courts have disagreed about the constitutionality of such buffer zones, although in July the United States Supreme Court upheld such a zone in Melbourne, Fla.


Scott Davis Says He Is Rejoining Raiders
Defensive end SCOTT DAVIS said he will rejoin the Los Angeles Raiders today, ending a two-week absence from the team, The Los Angeles Daily News reported in yesterday's editions.
Saying that he "just had some business I had to take care of," Davis told the newspaper he would be also able to reveal more today.


Milutinovic Wants to Remain U.S. Coach
BORA MILUTINOVIC wants to remain coach of the United States national team, and the United States Soccer Federation president, ALAN ROTHENBERG, hopes to sign him to a new contract within a month.
Rothenberg said yesterday that he was confident that Milutinovic would stay as the United States attempts to qualify for the 1998 World Cup in France.
Rothenberg said he was surprised by rumors that AS Monaco wants to hire Milutinovic and said the French League club hasn't approached him for permission to speak to the coach.


Victoria Falls Journal; Splat! Splat! This Elephant 'Kill' Is a Paint Job
Adrian Read, professional big-game hunter, raised his gun and took quick aim at three tons of wild elephant, startled from a nap in the shade 30 yards away.
Pop!
He hit an ear.
Pop!
A shot to the trunk.
Pop!
Just above the eyes -- a perfect kill shot with a .458-caliber elephant gun.
Fortunately for the elephant, Mr.
Read was not firing an elephant gun.
He was firing gumball-sized pellets of vegetable dye, which produced three bright splats of orange on the elephant's face.


How Mitterrand Aided Nazi Supporter
To the Editor:
"Mitterrand's 'Mistakes': Vichy Past Is Unveiled" (news article, Sept. 9) reports on the book "A French Youth: Francois Mitterrand 1934-47" by Pierre Pean, which details President Francois Mitterrand's contacts with the collaborationist Vichy Government, which awarded him Vichy's highest civilian medal, La Francisque.
It must be noted that Mr.
Mitterrand had other pro-fascist activities.


Georgia District Ruling Is Test for Racial Politics
When she ran for Congress two years ago, Cynthia McKinney used as the symbol of her campaign a statue on the grounds of the Georgia Capitol that commemorates the 33 black legislators expelled from the state Legislature in 1868 by whites opposed to Reconstruction.
Last week, she became a symbol of her own.
A panel of Federal district judges ruled her district unconstitutional, saying it was a racial gerrymander drawn for the sole purpose of electing a black.
The ruling was one of a series of court cases that are imperiling not just Ms.
McKinney's future in Congress but also the larger gains made by blacks in 1992, when 16 new black legislators were swept into Congress.


School Reopens, Ever Changing and the Same; Principals Should Teach
To the Editor:
The austerity budget for the New York City Board of Education severely exacerbates the classroom crisis that has confronted our public schools in recent decades.
There is little evidence that this crisis will abate.
Nevertheless, I can offer one possible remedy.


Jon Mensinger; Dancer, 37
Jon Mensinger, a principal dancer with the Mark Morris Dance Group, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
Mr.
Mensinger was 37 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Esther Rosenberg, a friend.


Press
PEOPLE like to complain about their newspapers.
But they rarely get the chance that San Francisco residents will have this Election Day to actually vote on them.
A proposition on the Nov. 8 ballot in San Francisco amounts to a newspaper popularity contest.
The contestants are one of the city's two big dailies, The San Francisco Examiner, and a three-day-a-week free community newspaper, The San Francisco Independent.


Bosnia's Cruelest Siege: Boredom, Stress, Anxiety
Six months after a NATO ultimatum stopped the Serbian shelling of Sarajevo, this city has entered a nightmarish twilight zone in which the horrors are less palpable than exploding shrapnel but more insidious and just as destructive.
Deprived of their freedom, surrounded by green hills that mock them with their inaccessibility, often without water and electricity, people complain of living in an agonizing limbo, where the adrenaline caused by terror has been replaced by mounting anxiety and a wave of depression.


Affirmative Action Without Fear
Two schoolteachers are equally qualified and equally experienced.
One must be laid off.
One is the only minority teacher in an otherwise all-white department; the other is white.
Is it permissible to make race the deciding factor, laying off the white teacher and retaining the minority teacher?
In a dramatic switch, the Clinton Administration's Justice Department is saying yes, arguing that in these circumstances, under the principles of affirmative action, a school system may lawfully decide which employee to retain on the basis of race.
The shift comes awkwardly in the middle of a court case, but it is a welcome correction of Federal job discrimination policy.


METRO DIGEST
NEGOTIATION IS KEY TO GIULIANI SUCCESS
Mayor Giuliani strode into office talking tough to labor.
He vowed to scale back New York City's municipal payroll and put an end to work rules he derided as archaic.
Now, after nine months as Mayor, Mr.
Giuliani has put together a remarkable string of successes in his dealings with labor.
And yet he has done so less by confrontation than by persuasion.
A1.


Policeman Dies In Gaza Clash With Militants
In the first fatal clash between the Palestinian security forces and Muslim militants in the Gaza Strip, a police officer was shot and killed Saturday night in the town of Rafah.
Each side blamed the other for the shooting, which was the most violent confrontation to occur between the militant Islamic group, Hamas, and the forces of the new Palestinian Authority.


Grass-Roots Tax Group Can Still Exert Muscle
On her first visit to the State House, four years ago, Pat Ralston arrived at the front of a group of thousands of protesters for a rally that started a taxpayers' revolt that helped Republicans win ironclad control of the Legislature for the first time in a century.
The effort also helped turn out of office one of the most powerful governors in the nation.
On Thursday, on her latest trip to Trenton, Mrs.
Ralston and two colleagues from the grass-roots tax-fighting group that she leads, Hands Across New Jersey, met reporters in a conference room reserved for her by Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian at the Capitol.


These Aren't Just Any Belts


Bus Supervisor Faces Drug and Gun Charges
A school-bus route supervisor employed by New York City was arrested in the South Bronx on Saturday evening after he was found carrying heroin and a loaded gun, the police said.
The supervisor, Jerome Black, 48, is assigned to the child welfare transportation unit in the Human Resources Administration, the police said.
The agency did not return calls yesterday, but the police said Mr.
Black had relatively minor responsibilities, overseeing a small number of bus routes.


A Hopeful Turn in Algeria
Very late in the game, Algeria's army-backed regime has just taken its first big step back from the brink of a catastrophic showdown with Islamic politics.
It has released top Islamic leaders from jail and invited them to talk about a compromise solution to the violent conflict that began when the army blocked an Islamic electoral victory in 1992.
Algiers is responding to a deteriorating security situation that has led many to predict that the present secular regime could fall as early as this year.
But it is also acting in accordance with the wise and consistent advice of the Clinton Administration.
Algeria is one case where the Administration has played an exemplary role, distancing itself from the rigid and uncompromising position of France, Algeria's former colonial master and the foreign country with the most to lose should Algeria violently collapse.


Fight Looming in Congress Over Panels That Regulate Commercial Fishing
A major fight is shaping up in Congress over the role of eight little-known committees created by Federal law two decades ago to protect American waters from overfishing by foreign vessels.
Critics of the committees, who include members of Congress, environmentalists and even some committee members, say that in some cases the panels have proved to be their own worst enemies by allowing overfishing of those same waters by American vessels.
Such overharvesting has helped to bring about the fishing industry's drastic decline.


Essay; Haiti: Much Ado About Something
President Clinton's expressed intention to use force in deposing the junta in Haiti -- despite the long-count ultimatum -- was good for the cause of freedom in the world.
The export of democracy was not the primary reason for his brinkmanship.
Mr.
Clinton expressed his central motivation as "to secure our borders," a way to avoid saying "to stop the flow of dirt-poor, often sick, mostly uneducated and definitely persecuted black people into the U.S."


A Hit in Miami: The Running Game
For much of his 10-year National Football League career, center Jeff Dellenbach has lived with the rap that the Miami Dolphins have little or no running game.
"It's hard for me to tell you how frustrating that has been," Dellenbach said today, flashing a smile after the Dolphins' 28-14 victory over the Jets at Joe Robbie Stadium.


Two Candidates, Sharply Drawn
One of the sharpest contrasts in philosophy, politics and personality in the New York election may be between the candidates for the job of comptroller, H. Carl McCall and Herbert London.
Article, page B4.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Alternative to Shootout to Be Tested  The English Football League announced yesterday a plan for overtime in games that it hopes will end the penalty-kick shootout.
The rule, subject to approval by the Football Association, will make its debut in November in cup competition featuring teams not in the Premier League.
Under the plan, players from both teams will be removed from the field after five-minute intervals in extra time if the score is tied after 90 minutes.
Each team will withdraw one player every five minutes for the first 20 minutes of overtime, down to a permitted minimum of seven per side.
If the game has not been settled by then, another 10 minutes of sudden-death will be played.
It has not been decided what will happen if the match is tied after the 10-minute, seven-per-side, sudden-death period.
Criticism of the shootout peaked when Brazil won the 1994 World Cup from Italy in the first final to be decided by penalty kicks. (AP)


Prudential Securities Settles Sales Charges in Idaho Case
Prudential Securities settled new charges of securities law violations with Idaho state regulators yesterday, agreeing to pay $1.1 million in fines and restitution for improperly selling securities and options to a number of state residents.
In settling the case, Prudential admitted that it had failed to supervise some of its brokers adequately, and thus was unable to stop a number of securities law violations in its Boise office from 1987 through 1993.


Occupation Dawns Quietly In Shadow of Ruling Junta
The restoration of democracy began quietly in the streets of the capital, without bloodshed and without widespread celebration.
Most people in Port-au-Prince watched quietly from the docks, unsure what the American occupation would bring, as the first dark green helicopters streaked across the sky.
As the day wore on and it became clear that the United States military was not going to hurt them, people started to wave and even cheer.


Judge's Ties to Jewish Leader Stir Debate in Crown Hts. Case
Experts in judicial ethics say the judge in the latest case stemming from the 1991 violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, need not step down in response to a defense charge that he has a conflict of interest.
But one expert also said last week that the judge should consider recusing himself because of the "public passion" surrounding the case.


New Look at Apocalypse: Dying Sun Will Boil Seas And Leave Orbiting Cinder
EVEN supposing that mankind one day stems the population explosion and finds ways to prevent famines, wars, epidemics, the impacts of asteroids and other global catastrophes, Earth will still confront its ultimate doom: a bloated, searing Sun is destined to scorch and melt the planet, wiping it clean of life.
But a new and highly detailed projection of the Sun's future behavior suggests that the Earth may escape being swallowed and annihilated by the Sun, as some astrophysicists had predicted.
The planet will still be melted and purged of life, but it will probably survive as a blob of matter and later as a frozen cinder.


Market Place; Losing Bond Investors Are Betting Again
This year is shaping up as the worst ever for bond market investors -- and yet there are signs that speculation in bonds is building again as investors who lost money betting on bonds decide to step up and place new bets.
It is that speculation -- which shows up as the heavy borrowing of money to buy bonds -- that alarms some bond market analysts and persuades them that bond prices might have farther to fall.


Thor Industries(THO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Tourism Rebounds in Affordable New York
Helped by favorable exchange rates and a growing domestic economy, New York City drew more tourists this summer than in any of the previous six years.
Not only did tourists visit traditional attractions like the Statue of Liberty and the Empire State Building in increasing numbers, but many, particularly those from overseas, ventured to less likely destinations, like Brooklyn and Harlem.


Kubek Goes Home, With the Last Word
Tony Kubek loves to talk.
He seems incapable of not talking -- pugnaciously and relentlessly -- to sharpen his sense that something is always happening on a baseball field.
When Kubek retired Friday as the MSG Network's Yankees announcer, he insisted that his decision to leave was simple -- it was time to go -- and needed no elaboration.
Then he elaborated for 30 minutes.
His style was not cuddly; his know-almost-all intensity probably cost him popularity.
It was his custom to explain because he was fascinated by everything on the field.
But did he explain more than Tim McCarver?
Hardly.
Explanation was Kubek's forte.
He did not traffic in Italian pastry.


Corrections
A report in the "On Stage, and Off" column on Friday about serious Off Broadway dramas misstated the addresses of two theaters.
The Variety Arts Theater is at 110 Third Avenue, near 14th Street; the Union Square Theater is at 100 East 17th Street.


INSIDE
Hopes for Health Agreement
Senator George Mitchell and a group backing a bill to extend coverage to half the uninsured said they hoped to reach a bargain today.
Page A20.
Six Stores to Be Closed
To facilitate its merger with R. H. Macy &amp; Company, Federated Department Stores Inc. agreed to close six New York area stores.
Page D1.
When the Sun Dies
A billion years from now, when the Earth meets its doom, a bloated Sun will expire in a series of helium flashes.
Science Times, page C1.


Patterns
Iss Zat a Man? Oui!
Jean-Paul Gaultier may be the only French bleached blond comfortable walking around Manhattan wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with "Bimbo." But Mr.
Gaultier, whose usual uniform is a signature Breton fisherman's striped shirt, is fearless when it comes to deflating stereotypes.
Particularly when it concerns the messages of clothing.


America's Meat Eaters Don't Get the Message
To the Editor:
A 2,000-page report published today by the Environmental Protection Agency concludes that dioxin levels in the fatty tissues of Americans who consume meat, fish, eggs and dairy products pose significant health risks.


Greenville Journal; Are Six Group Homes Too Many?
Earle Street, established in the early 1800's, is a study in cultural diversity, a mix of elegant mansions and rundown houses at the edge of the business district here.
In the city's oldest neighborhood, Earle Street is alive with children at play, joggers, gardeners and friends chatting on the large front porches.
There also are five group homes: three for the mentally ill, one for unwed mothers and one for the homeless.


Hospitals Swap Job Guarantees For Pay Limits
New York City's private hospitals have promised to protect more than 30,000 unionized workers from layoffs for the next four years, despite a major upheaval in the medical industry.
In return, the union has agreed to a one-year wage freeze and a cut in the hospitals' contributions to benefit funds.
The new agreement, both sides said, dramatized the seriousness with which each views the changes taking place in medical care, with hospitals struggling to survive and workers in fear of widespread layoffs.


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Transportation Workers Face More Frequent Tests for Drugs
Thousands of bus drivers, train engineers and other transportation workers in the region will face more frequent random testing for drugs and alcohol beginning in January under a Federal law that is expected to cost regional transit operators millions of dollars a year.
The New York Transit Authority expects its annual cost of testing to rise to $5 million from $1.5 million.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.68
3.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.61
4.58
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.05
5.01
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.48
7.49
5.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.75
7.77
6.09
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.60
7.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.50
6.52
5.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Cooper Industries Spins Off Its Oil and Equipment Units
In a move that Cooper Industries hopes will cure its split personality, the Houston-based company announced yesterday that it would spin off to stockholders its petroleum and industrial-equipment division, which over the years has been its core business.
The spinoff will result in a third-quarter charge against earnings of about $300 million.
Cooper said that shareholders could exchange some or all of their shares for stock in the new company, but exact terms of the exchange will not be announced until the second quarter of 1995.


An Unlikely Home for Ginsberg's Archive
Allen Ginsberg went to Columbia University and still lives in New York.
On its streets, and on the streets of San Francisco and Berkeley and Paris, he wrote many of his most famous poems, filled with gritty city imagery.
But in the latest twist in his extraordinary life, Mr.
Ginsberg's personal archives -- journals, tapes, letters, poems in progress, newspaper and beard clippings, even dried-up pieces of hallucinogenic vines and a pair of old tennis shoes -- will land at a place the Beats bypassed, a place so exurban it is called "the farm": balmy, palmy Stanford University.
For much of his 68 years, Mr.
Ginsberg has been a pack rat.
He began keeping a journal when he was 12, and, as he came to believe his life embodied the struggle for sexual, social and political liberation in the 1950's and 60's, he was soon saving everything.
The compulsive collecting took on new urgency in the Vietnam era as he saw counterrevolution and oppression approaching.


Chamber-Music Series At Symphony Space
Musicians from the San Juan Islands Chamber Music Festival in Washington State will present three chamber-music concerts this weekend at Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street.
These performances, called Camera Concerts, will feature premieres of three works by David Sanford, the composer in residence at Concert Artists Guild, one of the sponsors of the event, and video program notes by the film maker Allan Miller.
Among the artists who are to participate are Carol Wincenc, flutist; Maria Bachmann, violinist; Lauren Wagner, soprano, and Jon Klibonoff, pianist.


Crime Bill Should Make Women Feel Safer
To the Editor:
Except for one sentence in "Experts Doubt Effectiveness of the Newly Enacted Crime Bill" (news article, Sept. 14), you ignore the positive new programs designed to address the epidemic of rape, sexual assault and domestic violence.


Major Tokyo Quake Would Cost $1.2 Trillion, Study Says
THE economic damage that would be caused by a major earthquake in Tokyo could reach $1.2 trillion, enough to send tremors through global economic markets and disrupt the economies of other countries, a researcher says.
"The effect would be massive and worldwide," forcing Japan to withdraw its foreign investments and focus on rebuilding its capital city, said the researcher, Dr.
Haresh Shah, a professor of civil engineering at Stanford University.


Haitians Far From Home Find Skepticism Is Tinged With Despair
A record shop called L'An 2000 did not even bother to blare Haitian merengue music onto Nostrand Avenue yesterday; the only thing that mattered in that corner of Flatbush was the Cable News Network, and so CNN it was.
Inside the Brooklyn shop, a dozen men shouted at a color television set as American warships glided into Port-au-Prince harbor.
The bustle of their daily lives had virtually ground to a halt before the images of American troops landing in their homeland.


Observer; God And Man At Politics
Hark, ye spinmeisters, polling quacks, image consultants, tooth cappers, direct-mailers and all such agents of the new-time political religion!
Hark ye, and listen to the lesson of Marion Barry, who once committed sin and, yea, was even filmed in the commission thereof, and now repents.


Haiti: Relief, Not Victory
The negotiated end -- or intermission -- in the Haiti crisis lifted the nation's mood for a simple reason.
Few things are more dreadful than the death of American troops in military actions that are both unpopular and unnecessary to the nation's security.
So it was a welcome sight to see U.S. forces enter Port-au-Prince by agreement, rather than invasion.
But the White House should be celebrating its luck, not spinning the public about its diplomatic skill and the virtues of Presidential resolve.
President Clinton had reduced himself to the most dismal of foreign policy options: attack or lose face.


The Examined Life Is Not Worth Living Either
Prozac Nation  Young and Depressed in America  By Elizabeth Wurtzel  317 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.
At the age of 6, she wrote a series of books about pets.
At 7, she adapted "The Murders in the Rue Morgue" into a play.
She won the school Brochos bee, the Jewish equivalent of a spelling bee, five years in a row and regarded anything less than an A in school as a cause for embarrassment.


Serbs Step Up Violence Against Bosnian Muslim Civilians
In the largest incident of ethnic cleansing in Bosnia in almost two years, armed Serbs have in the last two days driven more than 3,000 Muslims, mostly women, children and older people, from their homes in the northern district of Bijeljina and herded them across the battlefront, United Nations and Red Cross officials said Sunday and today.
The expulsions began on Sunday, just a day after nationalist Serbs drove 700 other Muslims and Croats from northwestern Bosnia and a week after the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, promised to halt the wave of ethnic cleansing that has uprooted about 10,000 people from Serbian-held territory since July 17.


Hill Is Returning to the Williams Team
DAMON HILL will return next season for the Williams Formula One team.
The prospects for NIGEL MANSELL and DAVID COULTHARD are uncertain.
The team chairman, FRANK WILLIAMS, ended months of speculation by announcing that Hill would return in 1995 for his third season with the British-based team.


Franco Moschino, 44, Is Dead; Designer Known for Irreverence
Franco Moschino, the Italian designer known for bringing humor and irreverence to fashion, died on Sunday in a country house he had rented in Annone, Italy, outside Milan, where he lived and worked.
He was 44.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest associated with complications from an abdominal tumor, said Marco Gobbetti, the general manager of the Moschino fashion house.
His last show, in October 1993, was a 10-year retrospective that ended with a stage filled with men, women and children dressed in white and wearing AIDS ribbons.
It was followed by a retrospective exhibition in Milan's Museo della Permanente called "X Years of Kaos." A coffee-table book with the same title and featuring Moschino's clothing designs, paintings and advertising campaigns was published in Italy by Edizioni Lybra Immagine.


Federated to Close 6 Stores in Merger With Macy
Eliminating another potential obstacle to its merger with R. H. Macy &amp; Company, Federated Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to close six stores in the New York metropolitan region -- including its Abraham &amp; Straus store on Herald Square -- to ease the state Attorney General's concerns that the merger would reduce business competition.
Separately, Myron E. Ullman 3d, chairman and chief executive of Macy, surprised the retail industry by announcing he would resign from the merged company at the end of January.
"I felt it was important to make my intentions clear sooner rather than later so no one misunderstood my role at the company going forward," he said.


Brodeur and Sidorkiewicz to Face Islanders
MARTIN BRODEUR and PETER SIDORKIEWICZ will share the goaltending duties for the Devils when they visit the Islanders tonight for the first of two exhibition games between the teams.
CHRIS TERRERI missed practice again yesterday with a shoulder injury suffered in practice 10 days ago.
Terreri hasn't played in any of the team's first four exhibition games and is not expected to play tomorrow night, when the Philadelphia Flyers visit the Devils.


Stocks Mostly Flat but a Few Big Names Surge
The stock market closed little changed yesterday.
But the final figures masked some notable rises in stocks, like Coca-Cola and Eli Lilly, as well as trading heavily influenced by high-speed computer-aided transactions.
Stock traders largely ignored the peaceful resolution of the Haitian crisis, and international currency traders paid more attention to anticipating this morning's release of July trade-deficit figures than they did to peace in the Caribbean.
They bid down the value of the dollar in advance of the figures, which are expected to show a wider deficit and thus lead to a weakening of the dollar.


Hero in a Central Park Attack Shies From the Spotlight's Glare
The man who rescued a woman from an attempted rape in Central Park on Sunday morning and then chased and captured her suspected attacker, found himself in a new role yesterday at a City Hall news conference: that of the reticent hero.
The man, Jesse McCutchen Jr., 35, a sanitation worker who described himself as a retired miler with a best time of 4 minutes 1 second, was obviously uncomfortable as he sat beside Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, listening to himself being hailed as a hero, and staring at microphones and television cameras.


Hunt Manufacturing Co.(HUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Fierce Competition Marked Fervid Race For Cancer Gene
WITH the discovery of a gene that causes inherited breast cancer, the many competitors in this most impassioned and publicly visible of all genetic races find themselves blinking in the sun, still a bit shocked that the long hunt is over.
No one is more surprised, and gratified, than Dr.
Mark H. Skolnick of the University of Utah, whose team plucked the gene from a crowded stretch of chromosome 17, and out of the grasp of 12 other teams that had thrown hats and hopes into the ring.


Poll Gives Pataki His First Lead
For the first time, a poll on the New York State governor's race shows the challenger, George E. Pataki, with a statistically significant lead, although a modest one.
A Daily News / Harris Poll of 901 "probable" voters statewide, released yesterday, found a 10-point lead for Mr.
Pataki, including voters who said they were undecided but leaning toward a candidate.
Five percent of the voters said they were undecided with no leanings.
Neither Mr.
Pataki or Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo showed a statistically significant lead in polls taken before last week's primary.


Joy Technologies Inc.(JOY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26


Of Soaps and Computers: What Became of I.B.M and Apple?
THE Charles and Diana of computer companies, I.B.M. and Apple, are supposed to be married but rarely appear in public together any more.
Yesterday each company made a major appearance at which the other was conspicuously absent.
Apple unveiled its plan to allow the development of legal Macintosh clones, while I.B.M. unveiled a new family of personal computers to replace its PS/1 line.
On a practical level, there was no compelling reason for the two companies to work together on those announcements.
They are, after all, competitors in the marketplace.
But on another level, the one familiar to viewers of soap operas and readers of supermarket tabloids, there was a hint of Tom and Roseanne in the air.


Tennis Greats Call Gerulaitis A Friend First
For John McEnroe, Vitas Gerulaitis was "an inspiration," a kid from the old neighborhood who conquered the big time, a kid he "looked up to."
To Pete Sampras, who has found life lonely at the top, he became a best friend in a business where competition often prohibits friendship.


Seagram Narrows Review on 3 Brands
The Seagram Company said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on the United States account of three brands -- Crown Royal whisky, Captain Morgan rums and Myers's rum -- to three agencies from eight.
The brands, with billings estimated at $14 million to $16 million, were handled by DDB Needham Worldwide in New York until that agency was dismissed in June.


Cooper Industries Spins Off Its Oil and Equipment Units
In a move that Cooper Industries hopes will cure its split personality, the Houston-based company announced yesterday that it would spin off to stockholders its petroleum and industrial-equipment division, which over the years has been its core business.
The spinoff will result in a third-quarter charge against earnings of about $300 million.
Cooper said that shareholders could exchange some or all of their shares for stock in the new company, but exact terms of the exchange will not be announced until the second quarter of 1995.


Custody Fight in Capital: A Working Mother Loses
When Sharon Prost surrendered her two sons to her former husband's custody 11 days ago, it was the climactic act in a cautionary tale of two-career couples in the '90's.
To Ms.
Prost, 43, a counsel to Senator Orrin G. Hatch, and the feminist legal groups rallying around her, the decision by a Washington judge to remove the children is chilling evidence of a judicial backlash against professional women.


Clarcor Inc.(CLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Transportation Workers Face More Frequent Tests for Drugs
Thousands of bus drivers, train engineers and other transportation workers in the region will face more frequent random testing for drugs and alcohol beginning in January under a Federal law that is expected to cost regional transit operators millions of dollars a year.
The New York Transit Authority expects its annual cost of testing to rise to $5 million from $1.5 million.


Vitas Gerulaitis, 40, Former Tennis Star, Dies
Vitas Gerulaitis, the flamboyant former professional tennis player, was found dead in a guest cottage on Long Island Sunday afternoon.
He was 40.
An autopsy was performed yesterday by Suffolk County's acting chief medical examiner, Stuart L. Dawson, but the preliminary findings were described as inconclusive.
Late last night the police in Southampton, L.I., said that Gerulaitis apparently died of accidental carbon monoxide poisoning.


Now Release the Irish Prisoners of War
To the Editor:
I am exhilarated by the Irish Republican Army cease-fire, and the hope for peace in the centuries-old undeclared British-Irish war.
However, missing from all the hoopla is a call for the release of the political prisoners and prisoners of war in this conflict.
In South Africa, "Free Nelson Mandela" became both a popular song and political necessity.
No such urgency appears to exist with Joseph Patrick Thomas Doherty, who is perhaps the planet's most famous political prisoner with the freeing of Mr.
Mandela.


Senators Hope for a Deal on Health Today
Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, and a bipartisan group of senators trying to pass health insurance legislation that would extend coverage to more than half of those now uninsured met again today and said they hoped to strike a bargain on Tuesday.
In the session today, they discussed the issues that still divide them, like whether to provide the elderly with new benefits for prescription drugs or long-term care.
They also took up procedural questions of how to try to get a bill through the Senate and the House in the three or four weeks that remain before Congress adjourns in mid-October, discussing, for example, how much debate should be allowed before supporters try to force a vote.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Indiana  The Hoosiers sent a strong message on Sunday with a 4-0 triumph over St.
Louis, last week's top-ranked team.
The message: Indiana is a serious contender for the national title this year, a title the Hoosiers have captured three times, most recently in 1988.


New York Signals End to Incinerator Plan
Apparently ending nearly two years of litigation, the city yesterday informed opponents of an idle garbage incinerator in southwest Brooklyn that it would not move forward with a $75 million project to repair and reopen the incinerator without first completing an environmental impact statement.
In a letter to the State Supreme Court justice presiding over a lawsuit brought by the opponents, lawyers for the city said it no longer would contest the demand for an environmental impact statement.


A Day for Kicking Up Your Heels


Larry Klein, Sailor, Dies in Mishap at 42
Larry Klein, a world champion yachtsman from San Diego, died Saturday in a boating accident while competing in the Big Boat Series, an annual event in San Francisco Bay.
He was 42.
Mr.
Klein's mother, Diana Klein, said on Sunday that he might have died from hypothermia, but tests were incomplete.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies First Financial won the bidding for Western Union Financial Services in an unusual bankruptcy court auction after Forstmann Little and First Data withdrew.
First Financial, an Atlanta company in credit card processing and debt collection, offered $1.193 billion for the New Valley subsidiary.  [ Page D1. ]


Knicks Take Their Losses Like a Team
The Knicks failed to sign Ron Harper, they have not made an off-season trade and some of their rivals have clearly improved.
Pat Riley said neither he nor the players should look for excuses, with training camp less than three weeks away.
"We cannot carry any 'poor me' attitude into next season," Riley, the Knicks' coach, said yesterday in Manhattan after an autograph session for his book, "The Winner Within."


AT&amp;T Completes Deal To Buy McCaw Cellular
Hours after clearing the final regulatory hurdle, the AT&amp;T Corporation completed its $12.6 billion purchase of McCaw Cellular Communications today and formally began an industry-wide race to build a national wireless-communications network.
As had been expected, the Federal Communications Commission approved the deal, which will unite the world's largest telecommunications company with the world's largest cellular-telephone operator.
On balance, the agency said, those aspects of the deal that foster competition outweigh the anti-competitive aspects.


Transportation Workers Face More Frequent Tests for Drugs
Thousands of bus drivers, train engineers and other transportation workers in the region will face more frequent random testing for drugs and alcohol beginning in January under a Federal law that is expected to cost regional transit operators millions of dollars a year.
The New York Transit Authority expects its annual cost of testing to rise to $5 million from $1.5 million.


The Strike Hits Home: Mets Drop 28 From Front Office
Craig Sanders worked in media relations.
Bob O'Hara was the team traveling secretary, the person who made the hotel and plane reservations for the Mets.
Vinny Greco helped care for the team's equipment.
Randye Ringler worked in communications.
Today, they are all out of work.
Sanders, O'Hara, Greco and Ringler were among 28 members of the Mets' front-office staff who found themselves unemployed when the Mets pared their front-office staff yesterday as a result of the cancellation of the remainder of the season.


Polish Teams Lead Bridge Pair Event
Two Polish bridge experts led into the final day of play in the World Mixed Pair Championship, the opening event in two weeks of play under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation.
Three American partnerships were in close pursuit after the first of the three final sessions.


Transportation Workers Face More Frequent Tests for Drugs
Thousands of bus drivers, train engineers and other transportation workers in the region will face more frequent random testing for drugs and alcohol beginning in January under a Federal law that is expected to cost regional transit operators millions of dollars a year.
The New York Transit Authority expects its annual cost of testing to rise to $5 million from $1.5 million.


Lawyers in Rail Slayings File for Insanity Defense
Over the objections of their client, lawyers for Colin Ferguson filed notice in court today that they would pursue an insanity defense against charges that he killed 6 people and wounded 19 others on a Long Island Rail Road train last December.
The lawyers, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, filed a one-paragraph statement in Nassau County Court saying they would offer psychiatric evidence to show that Mr.
Ferguson, 36, was not criminally responsible "by reason of mental disease or defect" and that he was suffering from an "extreme emotional disturbance" at the time of the shootings.


Manor Care Inc.(MNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Major Growth Gene In Plants Is Isolated
SCIENTISTS have isolated a gene that regulates the major growth hormone in plants, taking what they say is the first step toward genetically manipulating plant size and shape.
Researchers say that having the gene in hand may make it possible to genetically engineer plants that grow to conveniently larger or smaller sizes, producing taller ponderosa pine for more timber or shorter banana plants for easier harvesting.
Scientists say the gene will also be a powerful tool for dissecting the complex process of plant development in which growth hormone is known to play many and diverse roles, including stimulating root growth and inhibiting branching.


Greenspan Wants Laws To Let Banks Expand
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, called today for Congress to expand banks' business options by allowing them to sell insurance and stocks.
Mr.
Greenspan also suggested that some limits could be placed on bank deposit insurance and seemed to imply that these limits might be imposed as part of a compromise that would allow banks into securities and insurance activities.


A Victor In Western Union Bids
The First Financial Management Corporation, a little-known Atlanta company in the credit card processing and debt collection businesses, emerged as the victor yesterday in the bankruptcy court auction for Western Union Financial Services.
Its $1.193 billion bid bested those of the leveraged buyout firm of Forstmann Little &amp; Company and the First Data Corporation, Western Union's main competitor in wire transfers of money.


Harman International Industries(HAR,N) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Gene Transplant Speeds Salmon Growth Rate
SCIENTISTS are using genetic engineering techniques to vastly speed the growth rate of Pacific salmon.
The technique is not meant to produce gigantic fish, although future experiments may lead to such creatures, the researchers said.
Rather it is intended to help commercial fish farmers grow market-size salmon in a fraction of the time it now takes.


A Time Warner Denial by G.E.
The General Electric Company denied a published report yesterday that it was considering the acquisition of Time Warner Inc.
The report, by the columnist Dan Dorfman in USA Today, cited an undisclosed "investment banker close to G.E."
Shares of Time Warner rose $1.375, to $37.625, with 2.8 million shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange, despite a statement by G.E. denying that it was in talks to acquire Time Warner.


New Charge Against Browns' Metcalf
Cleveland Browns running back ERIC METCALF was charged yesterday with carrying a loaded revolver in his car, a misdemeanor.


CHRONICLE
STEVE EARLE, a country rocker serving a jail term in Nashville for heroin possession, is trying to get into a drug treatment program, The Associated Press reported.
He has been doing without methadone since he went to jail on Sept. 12, A.P. said.
Federal rules do not permit jail officials to dispense the drug, which he was taking in an effort to end his addiction.
"Steve is experiencing some pain, but they are monitoring his medical condition pretty closely," said Lionel Barrett, his lawyer.
NADINE BROZAN


In 12 Hours, 6 Rooms With View


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Transparent 'Boheme' From a Pocket-Size Company  Amato Opera Theater
Opera America, an organization that keeps track of such matters, recently reported that Puccini's "Boheme" would have more productions this season than any other opera in the standard repertory.
The Amato Opera made its contribution in support of that statistic by opening its 47th season with a new production of the Puccini work.


What's in a Ranger Name? Just a Stanley Cup Dispute
When the Rangers get the Stanley Cup back on opening night at Madison Square Garden, the big, silver trophy will lack two names the team had hoped to have engraved among the members of its championship team of last June.
Missing will be Ed Olczyk and Mike Hartman, who spent the 1993-94 season with the team, but didn't play enough games at the right time to qualify for the engraving.


The G.I.'s Are in Haiti: Now for the Hard Part
The agreement he and his two fellow negotiators reached on Sunday night with the Haitian generals, Jimmy Carter told Congressional leaders yesterday, has "many imperfections." It is also full of ambiguities, some of which could easily prove its undoing.
But it has already had important substantive and political results, and it may eventually have more.
To state the most obvious first, the American troops who landed in Haiti yesterday morning faced no hostile fire.
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras of Haiti and Lieut.
Gen.
Henry H. Shelton of the United States confronted each other across a conference table, not in the streets of Port-au-Prince.
And the crowds gathered outside military headquarters there were docile, not hostile.


Latin America Breathes a Half-Sigh of Relief Over Haiti
Latin America breathed a half-sigh of relief today as the specter of a United States invasion of Haiti was replaced by television scenes of a largely peaceful occupation.
"President Clinton deserves credit for having listened to all the voices, for having challenged what seemed to be practically impossible negotiating conditions, and for having taken the peaceful path," Rodrigo Pardo, Colombia's Foreign Minister, said today.


Let's Try Cooperation In Japan Auto Talks
To the Editor:
As the United States Government heads down to the wire in trade negotiations with Japan (news article, Sept. 14), some analysts wrongly conclude that difficulties in the auto talks arise from fears in Japan that import sales may increase.
A bit of background might be enlightening.


What Deeds Lurk in the Heart of Crows?
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 14 news article on the crow invasion of New York City has aroused concern among bird lovers because they eat both "the eggs and young of popular song birds." This tendency to violence by crows, though it seems to be unknown today, was recognized long ago.


By Design; Molded Jackets
After seasons of easy-fitting jackets and loose tunics, the structured jacket is the thing to wear.
Taking a cue from the torso-molding shapes in Chanel's couture collection, the new jackets follow the curves of the body.
Macy's has Andrea Behar's short mohair jacket in hot pink, orange or periwinkle blue ($238); Atsuro Tayama's short black style in wool crepe that buttons up to a small collar ($465), and Mark Eisen's fingertip-length black wool ($415).


Hear the One About the Comics With a Cause?
"Comedy is in a sad state," say Aladdin and Santos, two young stand-up comedians.
That's one reason they founded Not in My Club Productions and conceived the idea for the multi-ethnic comedy show "Color Blind," which is being presented at Don't Tell Mama.
"If you go into most black comedy clubs all you hear are jokes about sex," says Aladdin, whose parents are from Bangladesh.
"The audience is geared to think that's all comedy is. Then, if you talk about anything of substance -- you know, social or political problems or just what you might feel as an individual -- they get restless. They've been brainwashed into thinking comedy is just about grabbing your crotch and talking about sex."


Ferrellgas Partners L.P.(FGP,N) reports earnings for Year to July 31


Harriman Heirs Ask for Assets To Be Frozen
Lawyers for some heirs of W. Averell Harriman asked a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday to freeze the New York assets of the former Governor's widow, Pamela C. Harriman, and a lawyer, Clark M. Clifford, who the heirs say squandered $30 million in trust funds.
In a civil suit filed last week, the heirs accused Mr.
Clifford, a former Secretary of Defense who is 87, of fraud, and accused Mrs.
Harriman, now the United States Ambassador to France, of violating her legal duties as a trustee of the funds.
The suit described the two as "faithless fiduciaries who betrayed a trust and squandered a family inheritance."


Sports of The Times; 'We've Lost Another of Our Kids'
YOU drove up looking for a rich man's tennis club, a leafy, campus-like sprawl.
Instead you inched past the town water pollution control plant, and rolled into the parking lot across the street from the Texaco diesel pump, a few hundred yards from the carpet warehouse in one direction and the automotive shops in the other.
Inside there was no showy photo gallery of stars, no overpriced restaurant, no parade of designer tennis wear.
In the lobby there was a gray-haired man named Dick Zausner, hunched over the main desk, rifling through papers.
The telephone lines kept ringing.


In Performance; DANCE
Star of 'Mahabharata' Brings Her Troupe From India  Fashion Institute of Technology
Mallika Sarabhai has performed in New York with her mother, the noted Indian dancer Mrinalini Sarabhai.
But a performance on Saturday night at the Haft Auditorium of the Fashion Institute of Technology was Miss Sarabhai's first outing on her own, with her Darpana Troupe from Ahmedabad, India.
The results were mixed but in large part intriguing.


Material Sciences Corp.(MSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Proudly Liberal, and Newly Powerful; Grass-Roots Coalition in Connecticut Sees Its Candidate Win and Its Influence Climb
Suggest to William E. Curry Jr. that he is a liberal, and he denies it with an immediacy that almost borders on panic.
"All of those old categories are defunct," he snapped in a recent interview.
Mr.
Curry, the Democratic candidate for governor, knows that he needs to reach voters across the political spectrum to be elected in November, and that he can ill afford to be identified too strongly with his longtime political base, the left wing of the Democratic Party.


An Easy Way to Take a Letter, Whether to France or Finland
ACCENT bills itself as the Word Processor for the World.
Well, maybe it is not for the whole world, but it is certainly for Europe and the Americas.
It is a Microsoft Windows program, so the opening screen, the one on which you write, has the usual menus across the top, eight of them from File to Help.
Click on one of those menus, Utilities, select French and the menus then range from Fichier to Aide.
Click on Outils, then Finnois, and the menus run from Tiedosto to Ohje, which I must assume is Finnish.
There are eight possible languages for the menus -- the others are German, Italian, Russian, Spanish and Portuguese -- and about 30 languages in the program's other options.


CHRONICLE
Her late husband's name was synonymous with the power of positive thinking.
So who better to receive the 1994 Norman Vincent Peale Award for Positive Thinking than RUTH STAFFORD PEALE, who was married to the Rev.
Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale him for 63 years and helped spread his beliefs.
"I was very much moved," Mrs.
Peale said after the luncheon yesterday at the Plaza Hotel, where she received the honor, given by the Institutes of Religion and Health, which was founded by her husband, and the Peale Center for Christian Living.
Dr.
Peale, the longtime leader of Marble Collegiate Church, died on Christmas Eve at age 95.


Premier Industrial Corp.(PRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Another Suit Is Filed in Haft Fight
Herbert H. Haft, patriarch of the feuding family that once controlled a vast empire of discount bookstores and drugstores, filed suit today against one of his sons, Ronald S. Haft, charging that he took part in a plan to misappropriate at least $7 million from him.
The suit, filed in Superior Court of the District of Columbia, names Ronald Haft and Donald Bourassa, an executive of Combined Properties Inc., the family's privately held land management company.


Giuliani Says Police Merger Won't Hurt Housing Safety
Addressing a concern that has threatened his plan to merge the city's police forces, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that anti-crime efforts would be maintained or increased in all public housing projects after the housing police are consolidated with the New York City Police Department on Oct. 1.
In the meantime, a City Council committee put off a vote on a bill that would delay the merger for weeks or even months.
Senior lawmakers said opposition appeared to be weakening as Mr.
Giuliani worked to quell widespread fears among community leaders that the merger would decrease police patrols in public housing developments.


Royals Say Herzog Won't Manage Them
Kansas City Royals officials are denying a report that the former manager WHITEY HERZOG will be offered their vacant managerial job.
General Manager HERK ROBINSON and the team vice president, GEORGE BRETT, said they have talked with Herzog about the job, but each said Herzog told them he was not interested.


Scrappy Arcade Owner Gives Up the Fight
For the first time in 12 years, Pac-Man and Turbo aren't working at Arnie's Place.
The arcade, which divided this wealthy suburb and led to repeated court battles, closed Sunday after customers played their last rounds of pinball, air hockey and shoot-'em-up video games like Revolution.
In the end, Arnie Kaye, the flamboyant owner, said he was worn out from his disputes with town officials.


Chess
Vasily Ivanchuk is flying as high as ever these days.
The 25-year-old Ukrainian grandmaster, who has frequently been mentioned as a possible challenger for Gary Kasparov's championship, won the Intel World Grand Prix tournament in London on Sept. 3 after having tied for first place with Kasparov in the Professional Chess Association Tournament in Novgorod, Russia, on Aug. 25.
The Intel event was run at the rate of 25 minutes per game for each player under a two-game knockout system.
In the final, Ivanchuk drew his two games with Vishwanathan Anand of India and then split two five-minute tiebreak games.
According to the rules, there was one more tiebreak game with the stipulation that White gets six minutes but must win the game, whereas Black gets five minutes but is declared the winner if he draws.
It was Ivanchuk's lot to have Black and he triumphed by making a draw.
Ivanchuk was awarded $30,000 and Anand $20,000.


Resolutions Abruptly Turn From Opposition to Praise
A wave of relief swept through Congress today on the news that a military invasion of Haiti had been averted.
For the most part, Democrats praised President Clinton's diplomatic prowess.
Republicans said they were grateful that bloodshed had been avoided, but they questioned the wisdom of an American occupation of Haiti.


An Honest Day's Garbage Collection
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's new labor agreement with New York City's sanitation union will finally end the archaic work rules that allowed some sanitation workers to collect a full day's pay for work that took only a few hours.
The new Mayor has thus moved to repair a scandalous lack of productivity that the Dinkins administration, dependent on labor support, tried and failed to correct.
Under the accord, which must still be ratified by members of the Uniformed Sanitationmen's Association, sanitation workers will be assigned routes that are 20 percent longer, and collect nearly two tons more material on each truck per day.
Thus, for example, a two-person sanitation crew working, say, a 20-block route of densely populated apartment houses, will now get a new route that stretches 24 to 25 blocks -- increasing the crew's daily collection from 8.5 tons to 10.1 tons, roughly the truck's capacity.
The new routes will be set unilaterally by the city, and not negotiated with the union, as in the past.


Gerrymandering Hurts Black Voters the Most
To the Editor:
As one of the plaintiffs in the Federal racial gerrymandering lawsuit recently decided in Texas, I was shocked at Elaine R. Jones's "In Peril: Black Lawmakers" (Op-Ed, Sept. 11).
The lawsuit was brought by multiracial, multiethnic and multireligious grass-roots activists who find her arguments and the accompanying drawing (a Ku Klux Klan ballot box eating the ballot of a black person) morally offensive.
Ms.
Jones approves the implication that Americans can only be represented properly by people of their own race.
This suggests that the best avenue for minorities to achieve political power is to remain segregated.


On the Brink of War, a Tense Battle of Wills
The talks in Haiti on Sunday dragged on past a noon deadline, then past a 3 o'clock extension.
By early evening, President Clinton was pacing the Oval Office, visibly impatient with his three envoys, who had not yet persuaded the military leaders to resign.
On an ordinary, unsecured telephone line from Port-au-Prince, former President Jimmy Carter, the chief emissary, begged over and over for more time, but Mr.
Clinton was insistent.
"We've been friends for a long time," he said, "but I'm going to have to order you out of there in 30 more minutes. You've got to get out."


Will Humbler Jets Now Win for Losing?
In this Jets season of new attitude and new hope, with old stereotypes challenged and seemingly defeated, they are still learning about themselves.
Now they confront another bugaboo in the wake of their poor performance against Miami -- "a major setback," was the way Coach Pete Carroll described it today.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  TROOPS LAND IN HAITI  More than 3,000 American troops arrived in Haiti by helicopter, meeting no resistance from Haitian troops, and began to secure airfields and ports in the first phase of the military operation.
A1


Somebody From Paris Says He Loves New York
It was a tough schedule for a neurasthenic, but Yves Saint Laurent sailed through it with aplomb and enthusiasm.
Visiting New York for the first time since 1983, he found himself caught up in a whirl of activities.
And he said he loved it.
Showing considerable modesty and some humility for a man recognized as one of the world's top fashion designers for more than 30 years, he said he was touched by the kindness he met everywhere he went.
"It has been too long since I've been here," he said.
"It is a beauty, this city. It has always been a beauty, but it looks so clean and bright now. The people, also, they look wonderful. I am so glad to be here."


Clinton Picks Brademas To Lead Arts Committee
President Clinton announced yesterday that he was revitalizing the President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities and appointed Dr.
John Brademas, a former president of New York University and a former Congressman from Indiana, as its chairman.
Mr.
Clinton named 32 other people to serve as members of the committee; among them were the violinist Isaac Stern, the musician Quincy Jones, the actress Rita Moreno and the playwright David Henry Hwang.
The President said his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, would be the honorary chairwoman.


Miss, Miss, Miss, Good! Hanson Finally Nails One
The Detroit Lions' players stood on their sideline and raised their helmets as Jason Hanson kicked a 44-yard field goal with 27 seconds left in overtime that lifted the Lions to an improbable 20-17 victory over the Dallas Cowboys before 64,102 stunned fans at Texas Stadium.
Hanson had missed his previous three field-goal attempts.
It was a seesaw battle all night.
And for Detroit, it was much more.
The Lions improved to 2-1.
But more important, they earned the measure of respect they have hungered for.
Broderick Thomas made the play that set up the winning score, sweeping around right end to sack Dallas quarterback Troy Aikman, strip the ball and recover it at the Dallas 43.


Giuliani Asks Agency Heads For More Cuts
In a series of meetings, senior members of the Giuliani administration instructed commissioners over the weekend to take a sweeping new look at their agencies and identify services they can stop performing and functions that could be consolidated or centralized in City Hall.
The meetings were part of the administration's search for measures to close a continuing budget gap.
The city's budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, said that before cutting services, the administration was searching for options that would reduce the city's bureaucracy.


CUNY Gives a Chance To Those Who Need It
To the Editor:
Sadly I read your Sept. 15 letters and the Op-Ed account Sept. 8 of attempts to discredit the City University of New York and to undercut its ability to provide a quality education to the community.
As a Jacob K. Javits fellow and doctoral candidate in Latin American history at Yale University, I feel I owe much of my academic success to Brooklyn College's remedial services and faculty.
I entered the college in 1986, eight years after graduating from high school.
After failing the writing aptitude exam, I received tutoring and noncredit writing classes that prepared me for college-level course work.
Four and a half years later I became the first person in my family to graduate from college.
After two years as a graduate student, I can say that the brightest, most engaged students at Brooklyn equal those at Yale.
Those who would defund CUNY, restrict enrollment and eliminate support services should stop draping their efforts to restrict higher education for the socially weak with the rhetoric of "standards." GREG GRANDIN  New Haven, Sept. 15, 1994


Thorsten Sellin, Criminology Expert, Dies at 97
Thorsten Sellin, an authority on criminology and opponent of the death penalty who taught at the University of Pennsylvania, died on Saturday at his home in Gilmanton, N.H.
He was 97.
The cause was heart failure, said Prof.
Marvin E. Wolfgang, the director of the university's Sellin Center for Studies in Criminology and Criminal Law.


3,000 U.S. TROOPS LAND WITHOUT OPPOSITION AND TAKE OVER PORTS AND AIRFIELDS IN HAITI
As Haitian soldiers watched impassively, more than 3,000 American troops landed here today, taking control of airfields and ports in the first phase of a military operation that has forced recent enemies to become reluctant partners in the restoration of the country's elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Descending from a fleet of Blackhawk helicopters just after 9:30 this morning, units of the United States Army's 10th Mountain Division landed at the same civilian airport where about 12 hours earlier a diplomatic delegation led by former President Jimmy Carter had departed after averting an American invasion.


Accounts
*
TNT, Atlanta, a cable television network of Turner Broadcasting System, to Houston, Effler &amp; Partners, Boston, to handle an image campaign for "NBA on TNT," the network's coverage of National Basketball Association games.
Billings on the account, previously handled in-house, have not been determined.


Runaway Car Kills Pedestrian


So Who Took the Air Out of the Buddy Ball?
Buddy Ryan brought an air of bravado, a swagger and a boost of confidence to town when he replaced Joe Bugel as coach of the Phoenix Cardinals.
He even changed the name of the team to the Arizona Cardinals.
New identity.
Same results.
They're still without a victory in the desert.
And now the fans are angry, feeling they've been sold a bill of goods with Ryan as the new coach.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a huge promotional blitz for its lineup of fall programs, CBS forsakes only the kitchen sink.
WHAT'S CBS doing to promote its 1994-95 schedule?
The shorter answer would be, what is CBS not doing?
The network, eager to stretch its skein of consecutive first-place finishes in prime time to four, has embarked on a huge promotional blitz for its lineup of situation comedies, news magazines, dramas and other fare -- the most elaborate effort ever to entice viewers to sample new series (7, this time around) and resume watching returning shows (16).


It's Not the Ryder Cup And That's Not Bad
Greg Norman, thin almost to the point of gaunt, stood on the first tee at the Robert Trent Jones Golf Club on Sunday looking a little like a father who had been up all night pacing the maternity ward floor.
He was smiling wanly, wanting to play, knowing he couldn't.
He had to withdraw from the inaugural Presidents Cup before it began, struck down by a severe gastrointestinal problem that had stripped 14 pounds from his already taut frame.
Still slightly weak after gaining just five pounds back, still 10 days from being able to touch a club, Norman was there just to cheer on his mates on the International team.


A Nonviolent Bomber Leads Polish Police on a Frenzied Chase
For two weeks now, a man who calls himself Gummi Bear after the Walt Disney cartoon characters, has terrorized this graceful medieval city.
He has planted bombs in crowded places and phoned the local newspaper with instructions on where to find them and where to drop a ransom.
He has driven the police into a frenzy of frustration and given some poeple mad ideas of copying him.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section on Thursday, with an article about a group of McKim, Mead &amp; White houses in Montauk, L.I., misidentified a house in some editions.
The house, shown from a distance surrounded by heavy vegetation, is the Orr house, not the Andrews house.


Nearly $850,000 in A.T.M. Cash Is Stolen
Two men posing as security guards gained entry into a locked room of a bank in the downtown financial district yesterday, pistol-whipped an employee and escaped with three canvas bags containing nearly $850,000, the police said.
The men entered a Citibank branch at William and John Streets shortly after 10 A.M. and went into an area housing a dozen automatic teller machines, said a police spokesman, Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell.


Operatic To Pop: A Sunny Crossing
Near the beginning of Dawn Upshaw's delightful concert of Broadway theater songs at the Supper Club on Sunday evening, the singer mentioned that she had had her second child, a little boy, three months ago.
"The next song," she said, "is my daily therapy," and immediately began singing "I Feel Pretty," from "West Side Story."
The transformation of the Leonard Bernstein-Stephen Sondheim waltz from a love-smitten teen-ager's giddy fantasy into a young mother's self-administered pep talk more or less defines Ms.
Upshaw's no-nonsense approach to theater songs.
During the concert, she performed all but two of the numbers from her recent album, "I Wish It So" (Elektra Nonsuch), accompanied by six musicians under the direction of Eric Stern.
Mr.
Stern's arrangements for two pianos, cello, bass, flutes and woodwinds had a breezy lyricism that attractively underscored Ms.
Upshaw's sunny musical temperament.


MISSION TO HAITI: THE G.I.'s; Armed for Battle, but Hazy About How to Try to Insure Democracy
In the end, the hastily assembled invasion was something of an anticlimax, but it was hard to tell from the sweaty faces of the young soldiers gathered at dawn today on the hangar deck of the aircraft carrier Eisenhower.
Long lines of 10th Mountain Division troopers, heaped with bulging rucksacks, M-16 rifles, machine guns, rocket launchers, night-vision goggles and radios, stretched across the cavernous hangars, the size of several football fields.


Parking Rules
Because of Succoth, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Europe Welcomes Accord
Governments in Europe welcomed the accord between the United States and Haiti, but few were willing to chalk up the episode as an unqualified diplomatic triumph for the Clinton Administration.
Some diplomats and editorial writers noted that 15,000 American troops were still going to act as occupying forces and that things could still go wrong.
They warned that further actions and a long-term commitment would be necessary to secure a stable democracy in Haiti.


Brien Taylor's Day in Court Is Postponed Once Again
Brien Taylor's legal delays continued yesterday.
The highly touted Yankee pitching prospect's trial on two misdemeanor charges related to a fight near his home in Beaufort, N.C., last December, once scheduled for January, was continued until Nov. 3 because one of the co-defendants was unavailable to testify.
Charles Donnell Johnson, Taylor's cousin and an important witness, is involved in the United States military actions in Haiti and could not appear in Carteret County District Court.
So Judge Frank Lanier postponed the trial almost seven weeks.


Standard Microsystems Corp.(SMSC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Executive Changes
DANSKIN INC., New York, named Howard Cooley chief executive.
LEHMAN BROTHERS INC., New York, named Mary Coughlin a senior vice president in charge of domestic long-duration, high-grade fixed-income investment operations.


In Performance; POP
A Wing of Mexican Rock Both Intellectual and Bohemian  S.O.B.'s
Cosme, the lead singer of Cafe Tacuba, came out on Saturday night with his hair dyed a satanic red and leered his way through the band's show.
Cafe Tacuba is one of the better examples of the intellectual, bohemian wing of Mexican rock: it is dramatic with elements of performance art and poetry filtering through.
Throwing himself around like a punk rocker stuck in a cabaret, Cosme proves a point that lost its resonance here a long time ago but still has value in Mexico.


Jets Sign Casillas, Plus His Baggage
Tony Casillas, a veteran defensive lineman who has been at the center of more turmoil this year off the field than on it, finally agreed to play for the Jets today.
He promptly dubbed them a Super Bowl contender.
The signing of the Super Bowl veteran late this afternoon couldn't have come at a better time for the Jets, whose general manager, Dick Steinberg, was elated.


As President Claims Victory, Doubts Remain
President Clinton and his three high-level envoys declared success today in their last-gasp bargaining to avert an invasion of Haiti.
Mr.
Clinton pledged that a peaceful American occupation now under way will "make sure that the leaders keep their word" to restore that country's first freely elected President.  [ Excerpts from the news conference by Mr.
Clinton and his envoys, page A14. ]


Before Congress Quits . . .
The 103d Congress was going to be different.
With one party in control of the Senate, the House and the White House for the first time in 12 years, and a large freshman class eager to prove that Congress can get things done, it was supposed to be the end of gridlock.
But barring a quick burst of activity, it will not be so.
In its first session, last year, the 103d and the new President made real headway, including substantial budget deficit reduction, ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement, family leave legislation and handgun controls.
This year's session looks like gridlock-as-usual.


London Journal; For Jostled British, Now Double-Decker Graves?
The tilted tombstones spill across the lawns of the City of London Cemetery, a dense forest of weathered sculpture and broken marble that since 1856 has become the final resting place for more than half a million Londoners.
Now, under a proposal favored by a Labor Member of Parliament from Scotland and endorsed by Britain's cemetery industry, the inhabitants of this cemetery and other crowded British graveyards might be sharing their plots with new tenants.
Facing a growing shortage of burial space, Britain's cemetery managers want to recycle their oldest graves by burying new bodies atop the old.


Amnesty Plan For the Military Angers Aristide
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, told members of Congress today that he had mixed emotions about the agreement signed on Sunday with his country's military rulers, who he feared might refuse to step down.
Father Aristide issued no public statements today, but he complained to lawmakers that there were numerous defects in the agreement, including the blanket amnesty it promises to military officers with a record of human rights abuses.


On My Mind; Clinton Wins and Learns
For President Clinton, Haiti has been a victory so far, military, moral and political.
He deserves time to relish it -- a little time.
By showing determination to use American power to help a tortured nation nearby, he achieved his goal of getting the generals to agree to step down -- without American forces having to pull one trigger.


Wall St. Misses Its Mortgage Profits
Behind much of Wall Street's year of distress, which is forcing the first round of retrenchment and layoffs since 1990, is the collapse of the market for bonds backed by home mortgages.
The bonds, known as mortgage-backed securities, make up some $1.5 trillion, or 30 percent, of the total American bond market, and in recent years they accounted for half or more of the earnings of some firms.
The business had grown because of a boom in mortgage refinancings and a willingness among many investors looking for a high yield to bet that interest rates would not rise.
When rates shot up unexpectedly last winter, mortgage refinancings fell and the firms lost money on their mortgage-bond holdings.
They also had more trouble creating and selling new securities.


Grant Signs, Again, With the Magic
HORACE GRANT, his initial contract with Orlando struck down by the National Basketball Association, signed with the Magic for five years yesterday in a deal already approved by the league.
"We've done this before, and this is the last time," said Grant, the free-agent power forward who spent the past seven seasons with the Chicago Bulls.


Bill Branche, Editor, 67
Bill Branche, a former copy editor at The New York Times and editorial page editor of The Niagara Gazette in Niagara Falls, died on Sunday in Cape Vincent, N.Y., where he had recently moved.
He was 67.
The cause of death was lung cancer, his family said.


Emissions Must Be Cut to Avert Shift in Climate, Panel Says
EVEN if worldwide emissions of carbon dioxide were capped at present levels, atmospheric concentrations of the heat-trapping gas would continue to increase for at least two centuries, rising well beyond the point at which the earth's climate would be disrupted, an international panel of scientists has reported.
Just holding the atmospheric concentration at double today's amount would require cutting global emissions below 1990 levels, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said in a report last week.
A doubling of today's concentration would raise the earth's average surface temperature by 3 to 8 degrees Fahrenheit and cause substantial climatic change, the panel found earlier.


In Performance; DANCE
Honoring Jewish Traditions Both Sacred and Secular  Kaye Playhouse
Bertram Ross, Deborah Zall and John Giudice honored sacred and secular Jewish traditions in "Poems, Proverbs, Prayers," on Saturday night at the Kaye Playhouse of Hunter College.
Their program also attested to the continuing influence of Martha Graham.


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Cuomo Proposes a Cut in Utility Tax
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo traveled today to Long Island, where residents pay among the highest electric rates in the United States, to propose an election-year cut in a state tax on utilities that is passed on to consumers.
Four years ago, the Governor and the Legislature raised the tax, which is known as the gross receipts tax, by 15 percent to help balance the state budget at the height of the recession.
Mr.
Cuomo said he was not prepared today to say how much the tax should be cut or how the state would compensate for the lost revenue.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Quiet Middle Path In a Flute Concerto  Manhattan School of Music and Wave Hill
Bruce Saylor is a composer who has taken a quiet middle path through the thickets of American contemporary style.
A student of George Perle and Hugo Weisgall, he has steeped himself in the heritage of the Second Viennese School, and yet he has avoided making the final leap into Serialist abstraction.
Like Mr.
Perle, and like Alban Berg in the early days, he maintains a strong tonal bias beneath his 12-tone constructions, opening space for free-flowing lyric invention.


Paychex Inc.(PAYX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Transportation Workers Face More Frequent Tests for Drugs
Thousands of bus drivers, train engineers and other transportation workers in the region will face more frequent random testing for drugs and alcohol beginning in January under a Federal law that is expected to cost regional transit operators millions of dollars a year.
The New York Transit Authority expects its annual cost of testing to rise to $5 million from $1.5 million.


The Fall of a Baseball Autumn; The Ballplayers' Strike Seems to Have Been Inevitable
The baseball season was about to expire when management and union representatives met in New York to try to find some common ground on which they could salvage negotiations and forge a new collective bargaining agreement.
At one point, Stan Kasten, the Atlanta Braves' president, rose and made two columns on a blackboard, and then began drawing connecting lines.
Whatever Kasten intended, the union didn't get his point.
According to a person who attended the session, Kasten said: "Well, my first idea didn't work, so I'll go to my second."


Continental Homes Holding Corp.(CON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Rare Find: A Doctor Who Makes House Calls
ELIO J. IPPOLITO is a relic, as rare and obsolete as a Philco radio, and as cherished.
He is a doctor who makes house calls.
Stocky and rumpled, with the burdened but ever-hopeful trudge of a door-to-door salesman, he spends eight hours a week visiting the homes of the old and frail in the polyglot warrens of Tarrytown.
Other doctors may tell invalids to summon an ambulance and make an office visit at government expense, but Dr.
Ippolito, 61, thinks of home visits as he does the remedies in his plump black satchel.
They can be curative.


Q&amp;A
Typewriter Keyboard
Q.
What is the engineering rationale for the placement of the letters on the typewriter keyboard?


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Signed Keith Johnson, guard.


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $400 million of bonds due in 1995 through CS First Boston.
The bonds, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 5.79 percent and are priced at par.


Coloratura Fireworks Amid Colorful Exoticism
Delibes's "Lakme" has often been treated as a dated curiosity, offering sopranos the opportunity to display their coloratura wares in the Bell Song, but otherwise promising little but a blunt, dated drama about a British imperial soldier who falls in love with Lakme, a Hindu temptress.
On Saturday night, in a revival of Fabrizio Melano's production, borrowed from the Chicago Lyric Opera, the New York City Opera kept those dated qualities intact.
The sets, designed by Pasquale Grossi, were full of icons meant to represent Indian exoticism, mixing Rousseauian forest growth with ersatz minarets and statuary.
Lakme's father, the Brahmin Nilakantha, had a bit of cartoonish fanaticism about him in his opposition to the English occupiers.
The awkwardness also included some staging that contradicted the dialogue, a crowd scene that seemed to take place in an alley with only a few extras, and the drama's own instantaneous conversion of the soldier, Gerald, from an intoxicated lover of a foreign beauty to a proper devotee of English military duty.


Networks Held Back the News That Invasion Planes Were Headed for Haiti
All four network television news divisions voluntarily withheld information that American planes had taken off for an invasion of Haiti on Sunday night until the invasion had been called off and the Pentagon agreed the news could be broadcast, network news executives said yesterday.
The executives emphasized that they acted out of concern for American troops.
For the same reason, they said, no network correspondent informed Haitian officials that the invasion was under way.


Richard V. Irizarry, 38, Playwright, Political Aide and Volunteer
Richard V. Irizarry, a playwright and a political figure, died yesterday at Beth Israel North Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 38 and lived in the Inwood section of Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, his mother, Margaret, said.


Marines See Tough Task
Marine commanders warned that the last-minute agreement to avert an American invasion of Haiti would put more pressure on American troops to distinguish between friend and foe as they went ashore to maintain civil order.
About 1,900 marines on this and two other ships were four hours from staging an airborne and amphibious assault on Cap Haitien, Haiti's second-largest city, on the country's northern coast when Washington called it off on Sunday.
The marines practiced mock invasions for six weeks, so they are now are frustrated while awaiting new orders.


'The Press Was Here,' But Not The Enemy
If there was a television moment that captured the spirit of the showdown in Haiti, it may have been one yesterday morning just after the first troops touched down at the airport in Port-au-Prince.
They had arrived on 10 helicopters, a menacing phalanx in the sky reminiscent of "Apocalypse Now," and they hit the ground ready for combat: belly-down on the tarmac, rifles aimed in all directions.
And then, within a few minutes, a soldier identified as Sgt.
Damon Arnett was being asked on live television the quintessential post-game question: How did it feel out there?


Corrections
An article in Styles on Sunday about the auction of a collection of furniture and art objects that belonged to the late Nancy Lady Keith misstated the scheduled starting time at Sotheby's today.
It is 10:15 A.M., not tonight.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a front-page article Wednesday about a sex-discrimination suit filed against the Central Intelligence Agency by Janine Brookner, the agency's first female station chief, omitted several lines in some copies.
The incomplete sentences should have read this way:
"Then, after she reported that her deputy station chief in Jamaica was beating his wife, he turned the tables, calling her a hard-drinking hussy, the suit says. To the disbelief of many of Ms. Brookner's colleagues, the agency's inspector general and top managers believed her deputy, and that ended her climb through the C.I.A.'s ranks.


METRO DIGEST
JOB GUARANTEES IN RETURN FOR PAY CUTS
New York City's private hospitals have promised to protect more than 30,000 unionized workers from layoffs for the next four years, despite a major upheaval in the medical industry.
In return, the union has agreed to a one-year wage freeze and a cut in the hospitals' contributions to benefit funds.
A1.


Colorado Coach Guided by Beliefs
Nothing softens Colorado Coach Bill McCartney more than seeing his grandson, Timothy.
"The little guy will run into his office, and the coach will walk out six inches off the ground," said Jay Elowsky, a close friend and confidant who shares weekly Christian prayer meetings with McCartney.
"That kid is the center of his world."


Grand Met Plans to Sell Alpo Unit to Nestle
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. said yesterday that it would sell its Alpo Petfoods Inc. subsidiary to Nestle S.A. for $510 million in cash.
The acquisition would consolidate Nestle's already strong presence in the United States pet food market, where it is No. 2 behind Ralston-Purina.
Nestle's brands include Friskies and Fancy Feast cat foods, Friskies Mighty Dog canned dog food and Chew-eez dog treats.


Football Verite: Reeves's Realism Buoys the Giants
Tom Landry taught Dan Reeves about goals.
First, make them realistic.
If you're the Los Angeles Rams, you don't talk about going to the Super Bowl this year.
That's why earlier this season, Reeves said his goal was to go at least 9-7.
A nice, reasonable number.
Now, the Giants are 3-0.
With the exception of two games against Dallas and a couple of other tough teams, their schedule is definitely favorable.
Even if the Giants go 7-6 the rest of the way, a 10-6 record would exceed Reeves's preseason goal and probably get them in the playoffs.
Has Reeves re-evaluated 9-7?
Maybe upgraded his goals from coach to first class?


No Headline
"I say to you that we'll have peace, not war." -- EMILE JONASSAINT, President of Haiti.  [ A1:4. ]


Leo Burnett Gets Disney Assignment
The Walt Disney Company said yesterday that it had named Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago to handle domestic advertising duties for its Walt Disney World theme park in Orlando, Fla., previously handled in-house.
Though billings were not disclosed, Disney is estimated to spend more than $60 million annually on advertising for its Walt Disney World and Disneyland attractions.
Thomas R. Elrod, president of marketing and entertainment for Walt Disney Attractions, the company's unit in Orlando that operates the theme parks, said Burnett was awarded the assignment based on the agency's work on a marketing project awarded last month for Walt Disney Attractions.
He added that international advertising and ads running in Florida would continue to be produced in-house, as would the Disneyland account, and media buying would continue to be handled by Western International Media in Los Angeles.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LUKENS INC., Coatesville, Pa., sold the South Central Florida Railroad to South Central Florida Express Inc., a subsidiary of closely held U.S.
Sugar Corp.
Terms were not disclosed


Ruling Aids Prosecution Of Simpson
In what is regarded as a pivotal victory for the prosecution, a judge ruled today that evidence incriminating O. J. Simpson in the slaying of his former wife and one of her friends could be admitted in his trial.
The ruling by Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court is considered crucial because it involves bloodstains and other physical evidence that potentially link Mr.
Simpson to the crime scene.
Prosecutors are expected to rely heavily on such forensic evidence because there are apparently no witnesses to the stabbing deaths of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.


William Henry Memorial
A memorial service for William A. Henry 3d, a former drama critic for Time magazine, will be held at 2 P.M. today at the St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Henry, who also wrote biographies of Jack Benny and Jackie Gleason, died on June 28 in Maidenhead, England, at the age of 44.
Among those scheduled to speak are the cartoonist Garry Trudeau; Christopher Porterfield, an assistant managing editor at Time; the actors Kevin Conroy and Dorothy Loudon; Stephen Rubin, the publisher and senior vice president of Doubleday; the playwright A. R. Gurney, and Mr.
Henry's widow, Gail.


Teen-Age Mothers Helped By Ohio Plan, Study Finds
A closely watched Ohio program that docks or increases welfare payments to prod teen-age mothers into attending school is also pushing more of these young women to complete high school, a study that is being made public today has found.
The program, Learning, Earning and Parenting, or LEAP, has interested policy makers because all current proposals to overhaul the welfare system require teen-age mothers to finish school.
That requirement is based on the belief that better educational credentials will allow them to get off welfare and win better-paying jobs.


CHRONICLE
To his adoring public, Arthur Fiedler seemed as lighthearted and perpetually exuberant as the music he directed while conducting the Boston Pops Orchestra for 50 years, until his death in 1979.
To his elder daughter, JOHANNA FIEDLER, he was a complex and often unhappy man.
She has written a book, "Arthur Fiedler: Papa, the Pops and Me," to be published next month by Doubleday.


Burmese Dissident Meets With Top Military Leaders
The generals who run Myanmar met today with the nation's main dissident leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, for the first time since she was placed under house arrest more than five years ago.
State television in Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, showed Ms.
Aung San Suu Kyi in a reception room in a state guest house with the junta's titular leader, Gen.
Than Shwe, and the military intelligence chief, Lieut.
Gen.
Khin Nyunt, who is widely seen as the most powerful figure in the Burmese Government.


For Runaway, a Violent Death
A 13-year-old boy died Monday night, his mother said, because the pull of Bedford-Stuyvesant's troubled streets was too strong for him to resist.
Gregory Wright was shot to death in that Brooklyn neighborhood after running away from a group home for troubled boys.
Gregory, who often ran away from school and from home, also ran away several times from a group home in Hawthorne, N.Y., returning always to the streets and the older teen-age boys who used him in their criminal pursuits, said his mother, Cherise Wade, 31.


In Sight of U.S. Ships in Port-au-Prince, the Killing Continues
He was a frail man who eked out a living selling coconuts on the streets.
A Haitian policeman clubbed him to death today with a stick of wood just a few feet from heavily armed United States infantrymen who, obeying their orders, did nothing to stop it.


Amnesty Law Expected To Clear Junta Very Soon
Supporters of Gen.
Raoul Cedras said today that they expected to win passage in Parliament soon of a sweeping amnesty for Haitian military leaders for political crimes committed after taking over the Government in 1991.
Breaking away from a caucus at the Legislative Palace this afternoon, Ruly Brutus, a former chairman of the lower house of the Parliament, said that approval of an amnesty law for every member of the military would be "no problem" and could occur as early as next week.


Haitians Welcoming U.S. Troops Are Routed by Police


Corrections
An article on Saturday about investors' reaction to a $5 billion punitive damage award against the Exxon Corporation in the Valdez spill case incorrectly attributed a statement that the award established a cap on Exxon's liability.
The statement was by Michael Young, an oil industry analyst for Smith Barney Shearson, not by Lee Raymond, chairman of Exxon.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about the composer and pianist Arthur Siegel misstated the year that the Off Broadway musical "Tallulah," for which he wrote the score, was produced.
It was 1983, not 1963.


Market Place; Some analysts still like Micron although top officials quit.
THE unexpected announcement by Micron Technology Inc. late on Monday that its three top executives had resigned sent its shares down $1.75 yesterday, to $37.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Management shake-ups have been a way of life for Micron, one of two remaining United States makers -- the other is Texas Instruments -- of dynamic random access memory, or D-RAM, chips, the most common type of memory chips.
But this shake-up included the company's founder, chairman and chief executive.


Immigration Chaos Keeps U.S. in Cheap Labor; Lost, Huddled, Insulted
To the Editor:
Your series on the Immigration and Naturalization Service (front page, Sept. 11-15) reads like my own diary: a tragicomic experience of trying to do the decent thing with an arrogant, incompetent organization.


Jule Styne, Bountiful Creator Of Song Favorites, Dies at 88
Jule Styne, the versatile, prolific songwriter whose tunes became standards for three generations and the composer of such classic Broadway musicals as "Gypsy," "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes" and "Funny Girl," died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, said Shirley Herz, his press representative.
He had undergone open-heart surgery six weeks ago.


Some Credit to Fulani
To the Editor:
Is it appropriate to dismiss Lenora Fulani's percentage of the New York Democratic primary vote for governor as summarily as you do when you state that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo "dispatched a marginal challenge" (news article, Sept. 14)?


N.H.L. Talks Continue
Bargainers for the National Hockey League and the N.H.L.
Players Association talked again for about seven hours yesterday in an attempt to negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement.
No deal was announced, but the two sides agreed to meet again today for further talks.
The last agreement expired more than a year ago, although last season was played under its terms.


Best Buy Co.(BBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Personal Health; Depression at menopause: sorting out the myths.
IN her newly published memoir, Barbara Bush reveals that in the mid-1970's she was overcome by depression so severe that she feared she might purposely end her life by crashing her car.
The former First Lady attributed her emotional distress to the hormonal changes of menopause compounded by the stress of her husband's job as Director of Central Intelligence.
By linking her depression to menopause, Mrs.
Bush perpetuates a centuries-old belief that the hormonal swings that accompany this life stage can touch off what had long been called involutional (a term referring to the body's changes at menopause) melancholia.


C.I.A. Is Working to Overcome Sex and Race Bias, Chief Says
The Central Intelligence Agency is working hard, with mixed results, to eliminate racial and sexual harassment in its ranks and to promote women and members of minorities, the Director of Central Intelligence said today.
Testifying before the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, the Director, R. James Woolsey, said he took "very seriously" the complaints of female employees in pending lawsuits against the C.I.A., and was striving to break down barriers against their promotion.


CHRONICLE
It wouldn't be proper to address him as Sir Cyrus, but CYRUS R. VANCE, the former Secretary of State and international mediator, received the insignia of Honorary Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire last night.
The honor was bestowed upon him by Sir ROBIN RENWICK, the British Ambassador, at a black-tie dinner at the British Embassy in Washington.


Metropolitan Diary
ROBERT B. GOLDMANN brings a bundle of washables to a cleaning establishment in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan.
The woman behind the counter asks him to separate shirts from underwear.
Mr.
Goldmann asks, "How come?"
"Because we don't touch underwear," said the clerk from Personal Touch Valet.
. . .
Dear Diary:
My daughter, Shelly, and granddaughter, Rebecca, residents of Forest Hills, Queens, spent a recent afternoon shopping in Manhattan.
Between one bus and another, Shelly was horrified to discover she no longer had her handbag, which contained a cellular phone and other life necessities.
She scooped up 2-year-old Rebecca and her packages and ran after the bus.
She actually caught up with it, but the handbag was gone.
Exhausted and frustrated, she started to cry.
"Mommy, why are you crying?" Rebecca asked.
"Because I lost my handbag."
Then, Rebecca began to cry.
"Well, why are you crying?"
"Because my candy was in your bag." PAT BREDAU
. . .
A friend writes:
Reading about Jessica Tandy's death reminded me of an encounter I had with her and Hume Cronyn a few days after she won her Academy Award in March 1990.
I was coming down the glass elevator in the New York Marriott Marquis Hotel near Times Square with a friend, Kent McKamy, a public relations executive, when Miss Tandy and Mr.
Cronyn got on.
As we rode down, Mr.
McKamy began complimenting Miss Tandy effusively.
After a torrent of praise for his wife, Mr.
Cronyn finally turned to Mr.
McKamy and said: "And what am I? Chopped liver?"
. . .
And another memory of them, at a movie theater last year: Dear Diary:
It was a warm Sunday on the Upper West Side.
A line of ticket holders was waiting for the next showing of "The Piano." A regal woman in her 80's, dressed in a prim, beige suit, took a seat on a lobby sofa.
Moments later a bearded gentleman sat down beside her.
A gentle buzz went up and down the ticket-holder's line.
No autographs.
No waving.
No applause.
Just smiles and whispers.
The couple nodded appreciatively; they were old hands at being spotted.
As the ropes were removed, the King and Queen rose.
Appropriately, the first couple of the theater were the first in the auditorium.
It was a perfect moment.
THERESA CORIO
. . .
Dear Diary:
My new Discover credit card arrives in the mail with the instruction that I am to call an 800 number.
As I dial the phone, my 3 1/2-year-old son wants to know what we have to eat for a snack.
The Discover operator answers and, after requesting a lengthy list of vital information, puts me on hold.
At that point I go about answering my son's question.
"There's cheese, peaches, popcorn, cucumbers, bananas . . ." I list a virtual inventory of the pantry for him to consider.
Shortly, the operator returns to the line.
"Thank you for holding," she says.
"Your card has been activated -- and you gave him way too many choices." JILANA VAN METER
. . .
Dear Diary: It was a crowded downtown Fifth Avenue bus.
As more and more people attempted to board, the driver admonished the last one, telling him that no one was permitted to ride in the stairwell when the bus was moving.
The would-be passenger's choice seemed clear: Wait for the next bus or ask the crowd to move to the rear.
But instead of the usual plea for more space, his shouted request was, "Would everyone please take one banana step forward?" A brief silence, and then the even more unexpected -- but perfect -- response from several other passengers.
"May I?" they asked.
"Yes, you may," he answered happily.
And most of them did. JAY H. HEYMAN


Heilig-Meyers Co.(HMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Jury Rules Haft Wrongfully Dismissed Son
A Federal jury ruled today that Herbert H. Haft, the 74-year-old patriarch of one of America's wealthiest and most fractious families, had wrongfully dismissed a son, and ordered two family-owned businesses to pay about $34 million in compensation.
The jury decided that Mr.
Haft acted without sufficient cause a year ago when he dismissed his elder son, Robert M. Haft, from his jobs as president of the Dart Group and chairman of the Crown Books Corporation.
Dart was ordered to pay Robert Haft $18.8 million and Crown was ordered to pay him $12.8 million plus 100,000 shares of stock, worth about $2.5 million.


Regimen of Moderate Exercise Tied to Drop in Breast Cancer
A THOROUGH new study of more than 1,000 California women has found that moderate but regular physical activity can reduce a woman's risk of developing premenopausal breast cancer by as much as 60 percent.
The benefits seen were greatest among women who had borne children and those who were physically active in their teen-age years and early 20's.
The most striking reduction in risk was found among women who exercised for four hours a week, doing activities like jogging, swimming laps or playing tennis.
But even as few as two to three hours of weekly exercise was beneficial, reported Dr.
Leslie Bernstein, who directed the study.
The results are described in today's issue of The Journal of the National Cancer Institute by Dr.
Bernstein and her colleagues at the University of Southern California's North Cancer Center.


Magma Shares Surge 26% On Takeover Offer by Rival
Shares of the Magma Power Company soared more than 26 percent today after the company said it was considering an $840 million takeover offer by one of its chief competitors in the geothermal energy market.
The California Energy Company made the unsolicited offer on Monday, saying the merger would enable both companies to pursue international growth opportunities more aggressively and help them to weather a period of increased deregulation and competition in the nation's electric utility industry.


A New Face at Grand Central: South African Art


HAITIAN POLICE CRUSH RALLY AS AMERICAN TROOPS WATCH
To the dismay of Haiti's exiled President, the Clinton Administration insisted today that American forces would not act as Haiti's police, despite the military leaders' repressive tactics against pro-democracy demonstrators.
The last-minute accord negotiated by Jimmy Carter, which left the Haitian military in place for the time being, forced the Pentagon to rewrite its mission and put American troops in the odd position of cooperating with the very Haitian forces they had been planning to fight.


Clinton Frees Russia From Curbs on Trade
In a good-will gesture for a summit meeting with Russia next week, President Clinton signed a declaration today that frees the former Soviet state from one of the central political weapons of the cold war, a law tying trade conditions to emigration, senior Administration officials said.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, who will meet with Mr.
Clinton in Washington next week, had contended that his country remained unfairly burdened by the 20-year-old American law, known as the Jackson-Vanik amendment, which was intended to embarrass Moscow for policies that made it difficult for Jews to emigrate.


Blockbuster Executives Get Viacom Pacts
Viacom Inc. said yesterday that it had reached employment agreements with about 40 executives at the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation that will go into effect upon completion of the pending merger of the two companies.
Viacom said H. Wayne Huizenga, Blockbuster's chairman and chief executive, would become vice chairman of Viacom, as well as chairman of a newly formed unit of the company.
Mr.
Huizenga will hold the posts through a transition period.


New York City Hospitals Chief to Lay Off 3,000
The president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday that he plans to lay off about 3,000 workers and eliminate hundreds of hospital beds to close a budget gap and make the hospitals more competitive in a shrinking industry.
The president, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, who oversees the city's 11 public hospitals and several dozen clinics, said the cuts would be made before the end of the fiscal year next June and would be scattered throughout the system.


The Many Worlds Of Black Dance At Lyons Biennial
Record cold (52 degrees) and frequent rain have not dampened the two-and-a-half week celebration of black dance called "Mama Africa, From Africa to Harlem" that constitutes this year's Lyons Dance Biennial, France's foremost dance festival.
Six American companies are among the 20 groups from four continents invited to appear in theaters here through Oct. 1, and it is obvious that the weather has not had any effect on the packed houses that have made the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and the world premiere of "Still Here," by the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company, the biggest hits of the festival so far.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Pianist as Impresario In Sunday-Night Concerts  Hotel Wales
In a common room on the second floor of the old Hotel Wales on upper Madison Avenue, small groups of listeners can settle into easy chairs, peer through potted palms and spend their late Sunday afternoons and evenings listening to chamber music.
Ilan Rechtman, a pianist from Israel, operates the series and is its running attraction.
The concerts are back to back: the first, at 6, is repeated at 8.


Sabres Suspend Hasek in Contract Dispute
Goaltender DOMINIK HASEK, who finished second in balloting for the National Hockey League's most valuable player last season, was suspended yesterday for missing practice after leaving the Buffalo Sabres' camp a day earlier in a contract dispute, according to his agent, RICH WINTER.
"He's decided not to risk further injury and he's sitting on the sidelines waiting for us to get the deal done," the agent said.


Off the Menu
Return of the Monkey Bar
Tallulah Bankhead, Joe DiMaggio, Tennessee Williams and Paul Douglas are just a few of the regulars who gave the Monkey Bar in the Elysee Hotel, 60 East 54th Street, its cachet.
The cozy bar with its piano, paintings of cavorting monkeys and leopard-patterned carpet closed in 1992.
It reopened Monday in an evocative and lively reinterpretation.
The space was leased by Penny and Peter Glazier, who own the Symphony Cafe and Bridgewaters in Manhattan, and two other partners.
Along with David Rockwell of the Rockwell Group, who was the architect, they dug through layers of history, discovering, for example, that the leopard carpet covered a 1950's parquet floor, which in turn had been laid over cobalt blue linoleum with a banana leaf pattern.
They installed similar linoleum from France.


One Slice Won't Kill
To The Living Section:
Your article on the fat content of pizza is incomplete and misleading.
It made an eye-catching headline, but doesn't stand up under analysis.


Food Notes
Cup of Lyrics, Pinch of Salt
The cast and crew of "Les Miserables" have created a cookbook designed to look like a Playbill and illustrated with the waif-logo in a chef's hat, among other variations.
The 60-page booklet, called Foodbill, has a collection of recipes written not only in standard format but also as lyrics to go with the music from the show.
Thus, there is "Red and Black Chili" that goes, "Red . . . the beans you soak at night, black . . . the skillet which you light." Another recipe to the tune of "One Day More" is "One Dip More."


Long Shadow of the Exxon Valdez
On March 24, 1989, the tanker Exxon Valdez rammed a reef and spilled 11 million gallons of oil into the previously unspoiled waters of Alaska's Prince William Sound.
It was the nation's largest oil spill -- some would say its worst environmental disaster -- and all parties have since paid dearly.
Exxon has already spent $3.4 billion to clean up the mess and settle Federal and state suits.
The Alaskans who fish and hunt there have lost untold millions because of the degradation of the ecosystem on which their lives depend.
Now comes the biggest penalty of all -- a $5 billion jury award of punitive damages to 34,000 fishermen and other Alaskans.
It is the largest pollution award in history and is roughly equivalent to a year's worth of Exxon's profits.


Shake-Up at the Garden and Maybe More to Come
Bob Gutkowski was forced out yesterday as the president of Madison Square Garden, becoming the first casualty of the sports and entertainment complex's proposed $1.075 billion acquisition by ITT and Cablevision Systems from Viacom.
Officially, Gutkowski said he resigned.
"I felt it was important that new ownership make their own decisions on the future of the Garden," said Gutkowski, who is 46 years old.
"It was time."


Cortines Wants 50 High Schools To Get Walk-Through Detectors
The New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, seeking to bolster school security after last week's shooting of a student in a Brooklyn high school, will ask the Board of Education to install walk-through metal detectors in 50 city high schools.
Mr.
Cortines said he hoped to pay for the 50 new detector systems with $1 million from the board's $3.4 billion five-year capital plan, which is scheduled for board consideration on Sept. 28, said John Beckman, Mr.
Cortines's spokesman.
That financing method would likely mean the elimination or scaling back of some school construction or maintenance.
It would also require the approval of the seven-member board.
New York Newsday reported the proposal yesterday.


Split on Abortion Protester
Paul J. Hill, who is accused of killing an abortion doctor and his clinic escort, won a split decision from a county court jury on two misdemeanor charges resulting from protests he was involved in before the July 29 shooting at the Pensacola Ladies Center.
Mr.
Hill was found not guilty of disorderly conduct but guilty of violating a noise ordinance on June 17.
Judge Thomas E. Johnson of Escambia County Court sentenced Mr.
Hill to 45 days in jail, where he is already being held.


Hull Could Come to Rangers for Messier
The departure of Bob Gutkowski as president of Madison Square Garden yesterday created a stumbling block in the Rangers' contract negotiations with their star center, Mark Messier.
The development could lead to a huge trade: Messier of the Rangers for Brett Hull of the St.
Louis Blues.
Such a deal would be a blockbuster, the biggest since Edmonton traded Wayne Gretzky to Los Angeles in 1988.
Messier for Hull would create negative fan reaction in New York, where Messier is the popular captain of the Stanley Cup champions, and in St.
Louis, where Hull is the biggest star in the history of the franchise.


'Silent March' on Guns Talks Loudly: 40,000 Pairs of Shoes, and All Empty
There were baseball spikes.
There were babies' first white walkers.
There were businessmen's black leather wing tips and women's formal high-heel pumps.
The shoes sat empty today, row on row, more than 40,000 pairs arranged around the Reflecting Pool at the base of the Capitol, mute reminders of the tens of thousands of Americans killed every year by guns.


Report of Hospital Merger Spurs Trading in 3 Chains
A report that some of the country's largest hospital chains have been negotiating a multibillion-dollar three-way merger touched off heavy trading in their stocks yesterday, but none of the three companies -- National Medical Enterprises, American Medical Holdings and Healthtrust -- would confirm or deny they were talking.
Shares of National Medical Enterprises, which owns or has a stake in 46 hospitals, dropped $1, to $17.75, on the New York Stock Exchange after The Wall Street Journal said yesterday that the hospital company was ready to acquire the two chains for cash and stock valued at more than $3 billion.


Oklahoma Representative Loses Democratic Primary
In a sign of trouble for incumbent politicians, especially Democrats, Representative Mike Synar, a veteran liberal from Oklahoma, was defeated yesterday by a little-known challenger from his own party.
Mr.
Synar, an eight-term Congressman closely allied with the House leadership and a backer of the White House on many key issues, lost in a runoff to a 71-year-old retired school principal, Virgil Cooper.
Mr.
Synar was the third House member to be turned out this year, the others being Craig Washington of Houston and Lucien Blackwell of Philadelphia, also Democrats.


Brooklyn Sludge Plant Proposed
A Canadian company has proposed building a sludge-processing plant in the Sunset Park neighborhood of Brooklyn, just a year and a half after the Dinkins administration backed away from plans to process sludge on a much larger site nearby.
The company, Thermo Tech Technologies, based in Langley, British Columbia, made the proposal yesterday after announcing that it and Solucorp Industries of Saddle Brook, N.J., had signed a letter of intent to buy the New York Cross Harbor Railroad Terminal Corporation, which holds a lease on a 10-acre site on the Brooklyn waterfront.
The price would be $10 million.


Finlay Fine Jewelry Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to July 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.71
3.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.60
4.61
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.07
5.05
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.51
7.48
5.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.75
6.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.59
8.47
7.16
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.52
6.50
5.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


U.S. Judge Refuses to Extradite Man From Belfast for the British
James Joseph Smyth was in prison or in hiding for 11 years after he fled from the British authorities in Northern Ireland.
But now, thanks to a never-before used loophole in an extradition treaty, he is a free man and something of a local hero.
A Federal judge on Thursday denied the British Government's request to extradite Mr.
Smyth, a 40-year-old Irish nationalist who came to the United States after escaping from Maze prison in 1983.
He had been convicted of trying to murder an off-duty prison official in Belfast in 1978.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(AGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


State Regulators Seek Power Over Self-Insured Employers
The nation's insurance commissioners said today that they needed sweeping new powers to protect millions of consumers against employers' improper denial of health benefit claims, and they asked Congress to rewrite a 20-year-old law to grant them such powers.
Members of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, which represents insurance regulators from the 50 states, said they were virtually powerless to monitor the financial condition or claims practices of employers that serve as their own insurers, paying claims from corporate assets.


Shoulder Surgery Pulls the Rangers' Best Punch
The Rangers traveled to Los Angeles yesterday for a three-game road trip without Joe Kocur, their fighting specialist, who will miss the next six weeks because of shoulder surgery.
The regular season begins on Oct. 1, so Kocur is very likely to miss the first 10 to 15 games of the season.
Kocur injured his right shoulder last January and played in a weakened condition until the team won the Stanley Cup in June.
When a summer of therapy failed to heal the shoulder, he and the team's medical staff decided this week that he would undergo arthroscopic surgery on Friday to remove bone spurs around the rotator cuff.


CHRONICLE
Perhaps it's time to stop picking on Dan Quayle for his spelling.
An invitation arrived yesterday from the Friends of Mario M. Cuomo Committee for a celebration honoring the Governor with "special guest, President Bill Clinton," scheduled for Oct. 19.
The event is to start out with "coctails." NADINE BROZAN


Just in Case Lenin Wakes, Dinner's On
It could hardly come as a surprise to anyone who has eaten more than three meals in this country that for centuries Russian villagers have celebrated something known as the Butter Festival.
At the end of every winter, families toast the coming of spring by cramming as much fat into their gullets as physics will allow.
Traditions die hard in Russia.
The wall may be down now; nuclear warheads are no longer pointed at Boston and New York.
They even have a stock exchange here.
But try changing something that really matters, like reducing the fat content of milk or preparing dinner without a tub of sour cream.


Of Food and Culture
To the Editor:
Other than different cultural attitudes in China and the West, James Piao (letter, Sept. 13) can find nothing to choose between eating dogs and cows.
Let me suggest two: one pragmatic, the other moral.


French Audiences Start a Long, Fond Farewell
The new management at the Paris National Opera may be counting the days until Myung-Whun Chung must abandon his post as music director next month, but the South Korean-born conductor at least seems assured of a long and fond adieu from his French admirers.
Ousted last month after five years at the Bastille Opera, Mr.
Chung won the right to perform one final opera, Verdi's "Simon Boccanegra." And at Monday's opening night, he was given a rousing ovation, first when he arrived and later when he joined the cast onstage after the final curtain.


Immigration Chaos Keeps U.S. in Cheap Labor; Foreign Adoption Mess
To the Editor:
Thank you for your series "Chaos at the Gates" (front page, Sept. 11-15), on the extraordinarily mismanaged immigration service of the mighty United States.
I'm reading it as I sit at the airport, waiting to leave for Russia to bring home our fifth internationally adopted child.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Fired Butch Hobson, manager.


Corrections
A picture credit on Sunday with a sports photograph showing Dwight Clark catching a pass from Joe Montana in a retrospective of historical moments in the National Football League identified the source of the picture incompletely.
The photograph, from the book "75 Seasons," was taken by Walter Iooss for Sports Illustrated.


Children of Smoking Mothers Show Carcinogens in Blood
Mothers who smoke only 10 cigarettes a day cause their children under 5 to have positive blood tests for nicotine and cancer-causing compounds, a study has found.
"This is the first report that young children with relatively light exposure to environmental tobacco smoke have elevated levels" of markers for nicotine and carcinogens from cigarettes, the researchers said in a report appearing on Wednesday in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute.
"This observation underscores the potential carcinogenic and public health hazard of environmental tobacco smoke."


Survey Finds Voters in U.S. Rootless and Self-Absorbed
As they turn inward and worry about their own financial difficulties, American voters have become less compassionate about the problems of the poor and minorities, a study of public opinion shows.
The finding was part of a wide-ranging study, conducted by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press and made public today, that found an electorate that is "angry, self-absorbed and politically unanchored."


What's Best for Women's Circuit Seems to Be Creating Quite a Stir
Two weeks, ago a couple of controversial developments took place in women's tennis, whose constituency is forever making noise about devoting itself to some nebulous notion of doing "what's good for the game," right smack in the middle of its players' attempt to compete in the waning days of the United States Open.
Distracting, yes.
If women's tennis is so healthy, why can't it find a title sponsor and a C.E.O.?
Confusing, yes.
If women's tennis is so unhealthy, why did a conglomerate hunger to take it over?
Disturbing, yes.
If the sport believes it's wrong for 14-year-olds to compete as professionals, why is it taking pains to make sure that this year's and next year's crop can do so?
Good for the game?
Not.


Stocks Lower in Japan
Stock prices were trading lower here today.
At the end of the morning session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 55.31 points, or nearly three-tenths of 1 percent, at 19,781.96.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei rose 283.16 points, or 1.45 percent.


A Rough Start for Digital TV
Neil Shapiro, self-described video enthusiast, has seen the future face of television, and it is . . . blemished.
During a basketball game, the ball zipping around the backcourt can look like Halley's comet, with a long orange tail.
During a football game, as the camera sweeps the field to follow the arc of a pass, the spectators in the stands can turn into solid rectangles of color.
And in some parts of the country, a heavy rain during a movie can cause the picture to freeze on a single frame for several minutes, or disappear altogether.


Report Says Smoking Causes a Global Epidemic of Death
A comprehensive report issued today on the fatal effects of smoking says that it kills three million people worldwide every year, or one person every 10 seconds, and that the numbers will continue to mount.
Sometime around the year 2020, the report predicts, the deaths will reach 10 million a year if current smoking trends continue.


U.S. Judges Vote Down TV in Courts
A three-year experiment in permitting television coverage of some Federal trials and appeals ended in apparent failure today as the judges who set policy for the Federal courts voted down a proposal to make the pilot project permanent.
As a result, the experimental program will expire as scheduled on Dec. 31 without being renewed or expanded.
While 47 states now permit some form of television coverage of courtroom proceedings, resistance among Federal judges has remained widespread and evidently was not substantially eroded by a pilot project that had seemed to run smoothly.


Mead Stock Falls on Report
Shares of the Mead Corporation fell yesterday after a report indicated that initial bids for its on-line information service were slightly lower than some analysts had expected.
Several publishing companies, including the Times Mirror Company, the Thomson Corporation and Reed Elsevier P.L.C., have submitted preliminary bids of as much as $1 billion for Mead's on-line service, The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday.
Final bids are expected before the end of the month.


Report Says New York Taxes Are the 2d Highest in the U.S.
New York's state and local tax burden remains the second highest in the country, according to a new report by the State Business Council, and the gap between New York and other states is widening after a slight narrowing in the late 1980's.
Taxes paid in 1992 by businesses and individuals to New York State and local governments averaged $3,531.85 per resident, 62.5 percent above the national average and second only to Alaska.
But Alaska's figures are distorted by the overwhelming share of its taxes that is paid by a handful of oil companies.


Study Says Small Schools Are Key to Learning
Year after year, small rural schools in the Midwest and West register the highest Scholastic Assessment Test scores in the nation, a phenomenon usually attributed to the racial homogeneity of places like Iowa, the consistent leader in the rankings.
But a study challenging those assumptions as inaccurate, as well as racist, has found instead that rural schools do better because they are small.
Minority children in rural states outperform their counterparts in the rest of the nation, according to The Report Card on American Education, a study conducted by the American Legislative Exchange Council.


Italian Ex-Interior Minister Is Arrested in Raids on Mobsters
Striking before dawn today, Italian police arrested scores of people, including a former Interior Minister, Antonio Gava, accusing him of conspiring in a "perverse circuit of criminal enterprise" with Neapolitan mobsters, politicians and businessmen.
The raid on Mr.
Gava's apartment here coincided with a warning by the present Interior Minister, Roberto Maroni, that Italy's organized crime gangs were planning terrorist attacks to avenge a major Mafia trial that began in Sicily this week.


A Harbor Dredge Spills Oil Into East River
A harbor dredge spilled about 7,300 gallons of diesel oil into the East River before dawn yesterday, leaving a slick from Red Hook in Brooklyn to the Whitestone Bridge.
By midday, most of the oil had evaporated.


The Hourlong Drama Is Alive and Resurgent
Just a few seasons ago, prime time was on the verge of being devoured by sitcoms.
Except for a "Law and Order" here or a fading "L.A. Law" there, the hourlong drama form seemed doomed.
But like the moon, television is cyclical.
Series like "Picket Fences" and "N.Y.P.D. Blue" have put television's 47-minute hour back in business.
Of the new shows this season, 14 are billed as dramas, 13 as sitcoms.
Of course, according to TV Guide's count, only 11 of last year's 36 new shows still survive.
It's not a business for fluttery heartbeats.
So, taking a deep breath, consider some of the new hourlong contenders.


A Cool Quest: One Wine Lover's Search for the Right Cellar
IF there's anything more intimidating than shopping for wine, it's shopping for a wine cellar.
My desire to keep my wine from becoming something worth pouring only onto salads soon confronted cooling contraptions with the size, complexity and price of intercontinental ballistic missiles.
Not that I have any great collection.
Maybe eight or nine cases, much of that bought before leaving New York last fall, knowing that prices and selection in Dallas were no match.
The closest thing I have to a wine cellar is a closet in the coolest room of my house.


Victim's Wife Files Lawsuit In NBC Killing
The widow of the NBC stagehand shot to death last month outside the "Today" show studios at Rockefeller Center filed a $100 million lawsuit yesterday, naming as defendants Rockefeller Center, a security service at NBC and the manufacturer and importer of the assault rifle from which the fatal bullet was fired.
"By lawsuits like this, we're hoping to enforce our gun-control law that's going to affect the manufacturers, distributors and importers of guns directly," said Gregory J. Cannata, a partner in the firm of Schneider, Kleinick, Weitz, Damashek, Godosky &amp; Gentile, which represents Marie-Claire Antoine Montgomery, the widow of the stagehand, Campbell Theron Montgomery.


Spiced-Up Salad Bars, at $5.95 a Pound
THE salad bar has bent the meaning of salad entirely out of shape.
If you believe what you see displayed on the typical salad bar, items like lasagna, barbecued chicken, sushi, mashed potatoes, hummus and chunks of watermelon now qualify as salad.
There was a time when salad bars offered simple makings: slices of cucumber, croutons, shredded carrots and bacon bits to garnish the sturdy romaine or iceberg lettuce.
They have now evolved into buffets with 100 items or more -- hot and cold.
Rarely do they have fewer than two dozen.
Salad bars have become the cafeterias of the 90's -- cheap, convenient and with something for everyone.


Military Censorship Lives
One of the important but little-noticed meetings in the run-up to the Haiti invasion had nothing to do with the fates of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras or the deliberations of President Clinton.
Rather, it governed when and how much Americans would find out about the activities and welfare of their troops if Haiti was invaded.
White House and Pentagon officials, in a meeting with representatives of the television networks, asked for a broadcast blackout of eight hours.
The Administration also wanted to restrict reporters to their hotels until military commanders gave them permission to go to the fighting.


Kansas City and Detroit Talking Super Bowl
In the last few days, the Detroit Lions and the Kansas City Chiefs have earned something that both teams have been yearning for in the past several years -- an unabridged, deep-rooted and maybe, now, lasting respect.
"We're two franchises that kind of mirror each other," said the Lions' All-Pro offensive tackle, Lomas Brown, after he whipped defensive end Charles Haley in his individual matchup and after his team had toppled the two-time defending champion Dallas Cowboys, 20-17, in overtime here on Monday night.
"Even with Joe Montana, and after Kansas City made it to the A.F.C. championship game last year, few teams feared them. They beat San Francisco and then crushed Atlanta and now people are talking Super Bowl for them.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
A Village Jazz Festival In Its Many Moods  Washington Square Park
The free double bill that opened the Panasonic Village Jazz Festival on Monday afternoon suggested a generation gap.
A young group of improvisers, using all sorts of risky approaches, came out to burn the place down.
An older group closed the show by moving through roughly the same harmonic ground, but with a sense of tranquillity that at times verged on somnambulism.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Infomercials expand their reach once again, this time to extol the virtues of Florida citrus.
THE apple may not fall far from the tree, but the orange and the grapefruit are plunging into something significantly different: the realm of infomercials.
Beginning Oct. 1, the Florida Citrus Commission will sponsor a 30-minute infomercial combining elements of talk, cooking and game shows to pitch the health benefits of oranges and grapefruit.
The infomercial is likely the first such program-length commercial on behalf of a government unit.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The American trade deficit with the rest of the world, particularly Japan, rose sharply in July.
The report came as Japanese and American trade officials began their final round of negotiations on market-opening measures this week.  [ Page A1. ]


Despite Role as Negotiator, Carter Feels Unappreciated
Even now that he is helping make United States foreign policy, even now that he is stopping war on the wing, Jimmy Carter still gets that jilted feeling from the Clinton Administration.
And the worst of it is, he signals that he feels he is being treated shabbily by someone he brought into the State Department, Warren Christopher, a man he once called "the finest public servant I ever have known."


Wine Talk
THIS FALL, wine auctions are the newest game in town.
Three important auctions by Manhattan retailers are planned, the first of them on Saturday.
A wine auction is hardly an N.B.A. playoff game when it comes to excitement.
Still, when the bidding gets up into five figures on what looks to be a scruffy old bottle of wine, the tension builds.


Immigration Chaos Keeps U.S. in Cheap Labor
To the Editor:
The gross ineptitude and mismanagement that pervades the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, described in your "Chaos at the Gates" series (front page, Sept. 11-15) cannot be dismissed as a Government bureaucracy that does not work.
The real question is: Why is there no serious pressure from the public or from Government officials to improve the agency's performance?
What purpose is served by an inefficiency that allows three million to four million undocumented immigrants to reside in this country?


Mets' Thompson Undergoes Knee Surgery
Three players in the Mets' organization underwent arthroscopic surgery at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan yesterday, and all are expected to be healed and fully rehabilitated in time for spring training, scheduled for next February.
Outfielder RYAN THOMPSON had surgery to repair a small cartilage tear in his right knee and is expected to be able to work out in four to six weeks.
Thompson is scheduled to rehabilitate the knee, which had bothered him since early May, in San Juan as part of a Puerto Rican winter league.


At AT&amp;T, a Wireless Marketing Act
Having just consummated an acquisition of the nation's biggest cellular telephone company, executives at the AT&amp;T Corporation offered a glimpse yesterday of what they mean by "anytime, anywhere" communications: a colossal marketing opportunity.
One day after completing its purchase of with McCaw Cellular Communications, after winning approval by the Federal Communications Commission, AT&amp;T executives reiterated their sweeping vision of how to link the world's biggest long-distance company with the world's largest wireless operator.


Huge-Scale Caspian Oil Deal Signed
Major oil companies signed an agreement with the Government of Azerbaijan yesterday, obtaining the right to develop some of the most coveted oilfields in the world.
As much as four billion barrels of oil may be involved.
The deal, estimated at $8 billion, the largest yet between Western oil companies and a former Soviet republic, involves some of the biggest names in the industry -- British Petroleum, Amoco, Statoil of Norway, Pennzoil and Unocal.
They will develop fields in the Baku region, which has been producing oil since the time of the Russian czars.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  HAITI VIOLENCE CONTINUES  Haitian policemen attacked the crowds who went to greet American troops and killed one man, as it became clear that the violent forces in Haiti remained in control.
A1  The man beaten to death was a frail coconut vendor.
A15


Lawmakers Who Fled Are Puzzled and Angry
Exiled members of Haiti's Parliament expressed puzzlement, confusion and anger today over what role, if any, they would play in an agreement that averted a United States-led military invasion of their homeland.
Part of the seven-point accord calls for Parliament to grant a general amnesty to an unspecified number of military officers.


Zulu King Breaks Ties To Buthelezi
The King of the Zulus today broke off relations with Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, the powerful Zulu nationalist leader, setting up a potentially fratricidal battle for leadership of South Africa's largest ethnic group.
The King, Goodwill Zwelithini, and his princes announced early this morning that the King would "sever all ties" with Mr.
Buthelezi after rock-throwing followers of the nationalist leader stormed the royal palace and disrupted a visit by President Nelson Mandela.


Welcome, Casillas, Now Get To Work!
Today, his first full day as a Jet, Tony Casillas worked out in the morning and in the afternoon, studied with coaches to learn terminology and defensive schemes and talked about the odyssey that brought him here from Dallas via Kansas City.
The defensive tackle said he no longer had the health problems that led to his departure seven weeks ago from the Kansas City Chiefs before he ever played for them.
He said he hoped to be in for 25 plays on Sunday night when the Jets play the Chicago Bears at Giants Stadium.


Exiled President Urges Quick Disarming Of Haitian Troops and Paramilitary Units
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, called on the United States today to rapidly disarm his country's military and paramilitary groups.
Father Aristide, who had been silent since an agreement was struck on Sunday with Haiti's military Government, issued a statement that did not even mention the accord.
Instead, he indicated in elliptical language his disappointment with the terms of the accord, which his aides said he considered to have no legitimacy.


Looking for Cuts, Giuliani Turns to Police
Scrambling to keep New York City's $31.6 billion budget balanced, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he might have to cut even more than he had suggested just two months ago.
And in the strongest terms yet, the Mayor added the Police Department to his list of administrative bureaucracies that he considered bloated and that he felt needed to be trimmed to produce some of those savings.


Eating Well
WHEN chefs began searching for the best possible local ingredients to use in their restaurants in the early 1980's, they had no idea they would one day expand their efforts and try to help preserve the farmland on which these ingredients are grown.
On Saturday evening, five of the better-known chefs on the East Coast are to prepare a dinner at the historic Decatur House in Washington for the American Farmland Trust, whose mission is to stop the loss of productive farmland and to promote environmentally sound farming practices.


How's Love in the 90's? In a Word, Depressing
The central character in Scott Saunders's faux home movie, "The Lost Words," is a nerdy New York film editor and sometime singer and songwriter named Charles (Michael Kaniecki), who decides to videotape his own life.
He intends to use the film, he says, to study his troubled relationship with his live-in girlfriend, Marcie (Zelda Gergel).
In exchange for free meals, he enlists a friend (never shown) to trail around behind him with a camcorder.
After Marcie refuses to let him tape their intimate conversations, Charles's poker-playing pals and the women they live with become his main subjects.
Long after Marcie has left him, Charles continues filming his meetings with his buddies, whose domestic arrangements turn out to be as precarious as his.
Larded into the film are what seem to be random interviews with strangers who theorize about the battle of the sexes.
These colorful Woody Allen-style snippets contribute to the movie's illusion of documentary authenticity.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 16
Sept 9
Sept 17
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
211.1
209.4
204.6
Distillate stocks
142.5
139.3
129.1
Crude imports, daily
8.4
7.1
6.3
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.0
1.6
Crude stocks
321.4
321.4
339.0
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
93.8
96.0
93.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


AT LUNCH WITH: Yo-Yo Ma; 1 Part Earnestness, 1 Blast of Laughter
YO-YO MA undoubtedly picked the restaurant simply because it was a favorite, not because of any appropriateness to the season.
But there it was: Harvest, an unpretentious establishment in a modern complex a couple of blocks from Harvard Square.
And there, almost two weeks ago, sitting behind a large plaster pumpkin, was the cellist, discussing the waning of summer and the onrush of a new musical season.
Although still working on a cello concerto by Richard Danielpour for its premiere last week, with Herbert Blomstedt and the San Francisco Symphony, Mr.
Ma seemed utterly at ease.
He encouraged a steady flow of white wine, which averaged eventually to a bottle a person.
The food seemed incidental: warned off the squid by a waitress, he settled happily for a smoked trout sandwich.


Public &amp; Private; A Fine Mess
Marybeth Nessler is neither a physician nor a researcher.
But get her started on the subject of a drug called Betaseron and she sounds nearly as knowledgeable as many of them, and a good deal more agitated, too.
Since it was approved by the F.D.A. last year, scientists have been keenly interested in Betaseron because it was the first drug thought to slow and alter the debilitating course of multiple sclerosis.
But Mrs.
Nessler, a 38-year-old mother from Oregon with the chronic disease, became expert on the drug because she could not get it.
Her case makes a powerful argument for an overarching policy that has fallen out of favor since the evening a year ago when the President held up a health care security card on national television.


Book Notes
A Henson Hullabaloo
After Jim Henson died four years ago and a number of publishers expressed an interest in a biography, his heirs began interviewing authors for a family-supported book.
They settled on a seasoned writer: Ron Powers, the author of seven books and the winner of a Pulitzer Prize in 1973 for his work as television critic for The Chicago Sun-Times.
Random House was to publish the book, and Mr.
Powers was to receive an advance of $150,000.
From the beginning, the three-way relationship was complicated, confusing and unusual.
For one thing, although Mr.
Powers's contract was with the Hensons, not with Random House, the publisher was given complete editorial control over the final book.
So Mr.
Powers thought, he said in an interview, that he was to serve as an independent author whose work would reflect the Hensons' opinions, but only up to a point.
He said, "I was never told that it would be a possibility that the Hensons could nix the project."


In America; Betrayal
Turn out the lights, extinguish the hope, it's over.
In a betrayal of everything this country is supposed to stand for, the United States is openly forging an alliance with the fiendish, grotesquely sadistic enemies of human rights and democracy in Haiti.


On the Trail of 10 Tons of Garbage, and Bursitis
Before the sun rose, the sanitation crew bounced down Delancey Street yesterday past the tall, resolute buildings and headed uptown to pick up the rotting food remains and discarded shreds that were the city's detritus.
At 6:15, traffic was light.
As was customary, John Viglietta drove and Bill Corcoran rode beside him.
It was clear out, thankfully for Mr.
Corcoran, who, at 38, already suffered the sanitation worker's trademark arthritis and bursitis.
On rainy days, they exact their price.
Every day, the men pick up about 10 tons of garbage, the weight of 66 refrigerators.


No Headline
"We are not in a business of doing day-to-day law and order, for that matter resolving or quelling any demonstrations, unless these demonstrations or this level of violence becomes so great that it threatens the overall stability and the security of our multinational forces, and then we will intercede." GEN.
JOHN SHALIKASHVILI, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on the situation in Haiti.  [ A14:1. ]


Oilers' McDowell Out for Six Weeks
The Houston Oilers' starting strong safety, BUBBA McDOWELL, will have arthroscopic surgery on his left knee today and will miss about six weeks.


New Pressures on Philip Morris
Last week's plan by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company to shed a major portion of its stock in RJR Nabisco Holdings has reignited a debate over splitting up the Philip Morris Companies.
Four months after Philip Morris said it would not separate its cigarette business from its food and beverage businesses, it will hold an unusual meeting today in New York to hear some large stockholders contend that they would be better off if the company separated the Marlboro Man from other businesses like Miller beer, Kraft Foods and Maxwell House coffee.


Farm Profits Are Down 24% in a Year
Farm profits in New York State dropped 24 percent in 1993 compared with the year before, the State Agricultural Statistics Service reported.
The service attributed the decline to lower prices received by farmers for milk, apples and nursery and greenhouse products and a slight increase in production expenses.


HAITIAN POLICE CRUSH RALLY AS AMERICAN TROOPS WATCH
Club-wielding Haitian police officers waded into throngs of people welcoming United States troops today, beating one to death as frustrated American soldiers looked on.
By early afternoon of the second day of the American mission here, the police, the army and the sinister civilian "attaches" -- the very Haitians that the American presence was supposed to remove from power -- were back in control, riding through the streets in pickup trucks, brandishing riot sticks, lengths of iron pipe, branches ripped from trees and submachine guns, beating people at will.


Wang to Pay $160 Million For Bull Units
Wang Laboratories Inc., just a year after emerging from bankruptcy protection, said yesterday that it would spend $160 million to acquire certain software and services businesses from Groupe Bull S.A., the French computer giant
The acquisition, for $110 million in cash and $50 million in Wang stock and short-term notes, will leave Groupe Bull with 4.9 percent of Wang's shares and provide a seat on Wang's board for Axel Leblois, chief executive of Groupe Bull's American business unit.


METRO DIGEST
HOSPITALS CHIEF PLANS TO LAY OFF 3,000
The president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation said he planned to lay off about 3,000 workers and eliminate hundreds of hospital beds to close a budget gap and make the hospitals more competitive in a shrinking industry.
The president, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, who oversees the city's 11 public hospitals and several dozen clinics, said the cuts would be made before the end of the fiscal year next June and would be scattered throughout the system.
A1.


Univar Corp.(UVX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Trail Blazers Sign Edwards at Center
The Portland Trail Blazers signed the free-agent center JAMES EDWARDS to a one-year contract yesterday.
The 38-year-old Edwards, who played for the Los Angeles Lakers last season and is entering his 17th National Basketball Association season, is expected to back up CHRIS DUDLEY.
Financial terms of the contract were not disclosed.


Adobe Systems Inc.(ADBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26


Top Police Commanders Brace for Major Shake-Up
About 100 senior New York City police commanders went to headquarters yesterday to hear about their retirement benefits.
But pensions were not uppermost in their minds.
The meeting was a prelude to what senior officials describe as the most sweeping management shake-up in a generation to weed out ineffective supervisors and assign the most aggressive commanders to crime-ridden precincts.


Martha Graham Company Reaches Pact With Dancers
The Martha Graham Dance Company reached a settlement with its dancers on Monday night after labor unrest threatened its "Radical Graham" season, which is to open the Next Wave festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Sept. 28.
The dancers ratified a contract after a 10-hour meeting on Monday at the offices of the American Guild of Musical Artists, the dancers' union.
As part of the agreement, the dancers withdrew their demand for a guarantee of employment amounting to 20 weeks a year.
Such a guarantee was the major sticking point in the negotiations, which have gone on for 10 months.
Management withdrew its demands for concessions on travel overtime.


McCormick &amp; Co.  (MCCRK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


ABC's Parent Picks President
The board of Capital Cities/ ABC Inc. named Robert A. Iger as president and chief operating officer yesterday, confirming speculation that Mr.
Iger was the heir to the company chairman, Thomas S. Murphy.
Mr.
Iger, who had been president of the ABC network and executive vice president of the company, was also elected to the board.
Capital Cities/ABC also announced that David Westin, who has been the president of production for ABC, will succeed Mr.
Iger as president of the ABC Television Network Group.
That appointment had also been expected.


Psychiatric Exam Ordered for L.I.R.R. Defendant
A Nassau County Court judge today gave Colin Ferguson until Oct. 20 to submit to psychiatric examinations intended to support his lawyers' assertion that Mr.
Ferguson was insane when he killed six people and wounded 19 others on a Long Island Rail Road train last December.
Under state law, if Mr.
Ferguson refuses to be examined, as he has for several months, the court could rule out the insanity defense.


Don't Forget Somalia, Where Troops Fought
To the Editor:
"Clinton Offering Haitian Leaders Chance to Leave" (front page, Sept. 15) contains a major error in your reference to President Clinton's "lingering ambivalence about sending American troops into ground combat for the first time in his Administration."


Wheatley Nearing Return for Michigan
In between the party lines, the caution that followed Tyrone Wheatley's first day of contact at football practice in four weeks could not conceal a growing sense of optimism.
Wheatley, the University of Michigan tailback whose season has been delayed by a separated right shoulder, today took an important step toward a return for the high-stakes meeting on Saturday between the Wolverines and Colorado.
With a bag of ice attached to the shoulder that was injured in practice four weeks ago today, Wheatley remained noncommittal after the most significantly uneventful day of the Michigan season.
"My mentality is I'm practicing to play in a game," Wheatley said.
"At the end of the week I'll know if I'm ready or not."


Rhodes Inc.(RHD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Deficit in Trade Surged in July; Markets Jolted
America's trade deficit with the rest of the world rose sharply in July to the second-highest level in history, the Government said today in a report that fanned inflation fears, rattled the financial markets and depressed the value of stocks, bonds and the dollar.
The worse-than-expected trade report came as Japanese auto companies, in a highly unusual move, warned the Clinton Administration that they might break off their cooperation with the American auto industry, particularly their purchases of American auto parts, if the White House imposed trade sanctions on Japan.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Pearl Company Moves In With a Dignified 'Lear'  Theater 80
As the Pearl Theater Company moves into its new home, Theater 80 on St.
Marks Place in the East Village, inevitably the house itself will compete with this season's first play for subscribers' attention; people who knew this place only as a movie auditorium for more than 20 years may be surprised at how nearly perfect it is for theater.
But Shepard Sobel, the company's artistic director, has met the challenge with a "King Lear" absorbing enough to make an audience forget its surroundings for a few hours.


More Recycling Reduces Dioxin Better Than an Incinerator Ban
To the Editor:
The Environmental Protection Agency report on the health risks from dioxin is welcome (news article, Sept. 14).
Dioxin, which is a probable cause of cancer and of developmental disorders, is largely produced from the combustion of such chlorine-containing substances as plastics.
Therefore, the main source of dioxins is incinerator smokestacks.
In addition, incineration releases other pollutants and also contributes to global warming.
Yet instead of outlawing incinerators, worldwide experience suggests that it is better to create a recycling-friendly economic environment.
This is achieved by mandating that newspapers be printed on recycled paper and that soda be sold in recycled bottles.
Once such laws take effect, a market develops for used newspapers and soda bottles, and consequently they disappear from regular garbage.
The combustible fraction in municipal waste drops to the point where the garbage can no longer be burned, and therefore incineration is phased out.
Worldwide experience also shows that when regulations treat the dioxin-containing fly-ash from incinerators as toxic waste, resulting disposal costs tend to work against incineration and in favor of recycling.
It can be concluded that if the proper regulations exist, economic forces will support recycling.
On a per-ton basis, recycling in populated areas will cost half as much as landfilling and one-third as much as incineration.
In addition, the recycling industry creates low-skilled jobs and reduces pollution.
BELA LIPTAK  Stamford, Conn., Sept. 14, 1994 The writer is the author of "Municipal Waste Disposal in the 1990's."


Gerulaitis Is Said to Have Died By Breathing Poisonous Fumes
Carbon monoxide levels in the Southampton, L.I., guest cottage where Vitas Gerulaitis was found dead Sunday afternoon were so high in the cottage on Monday that investigators were driven outside, the Southampton police said yesterday.
The team of police and health investigators went to the cottage after an autopsy on Monday found that the 40-year-old former tennis star's blood contained extremely high levels of carbon monoxide, a deadly poisonous gas that investigators said came from a faulty propane heating and air-conditioning system that had been serviced within the last two weeks.


Reeves Not in Gloating Mood
When Dan Reeves was with the Denver Broncos, players said he was too rigid and when he was dismissed it was like a breath of fresh air.
Now that the Broncos are 0-3, that air must be getting pretty stale.
Reeves talked about his old team today, the one that dropped him at the end of the 1992 season.
And in typical Reeves fashion he remained dignified and refused to gloat publicly.
"I don't care," Reeves said when asked about Denver's poor start, "other than the fact I have some really good friends there."


Corrections
A listing in the New Jersey Weekly calendar of cultural events on Sunday misstated the date for a talk by Ronald J. Young, executive director of the United States Interreligious Committee for Peace in the Middle East.
The talk, at Temple Emeth in Teaneck, will be at 8:30 P.M. on Sept. 30, not this Friday.


Publishing Account For Jerry &amp; Ketchum
Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc., a marketer of electronic books and other portable reference products in Mount Holly, N.J., has named Jerry &amp; Ketchum in New York to handle its account, previously inactive.
Billings were estimated at more than $3 million.
Jerry &amp; Ketchum was selected last week in a review in which the other finalist was Bozell New York.


Occupation Lifts Clinton's Standing in Poll, but Many Americans Are Skeptical
The public reacted to the occupation of Haiti with an immediate jump in the President's approval ratings and widespread approval of the accord with the Haitian military government, but continuing skepticism over the wisdom of any military involvement in Haiti, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The new nationwide poll included telephone interviews with 747 adults on Sunday afternoon and evening, before the troops occupied Haiti.
Of these respondents, 504 were reinterviewed on Monday evening, after the troops had moved in.
The margin of sampling error for each day's results was plus or minus four percentage points.


Boarding Schools for Blacks Are Having a Resurgence in Popularity
Once the South was full of all-black private boarding schools like tiny Southern Normal School here in the timber country of southern Alabama.
Most of them flourished during segregation and then withered and died when integration arrived.
Now, in a development no one could have expected when Jim Crow finally fell, the few remaining black boarding schools suddenly find themselves increasingly popular and oddly contemporary, offering learning, discipline, community and safety to all-black student bodies at a time many black parents are often desperate for all four.


Parking Rules
Because of Succoth, alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Evil Legacy: Controlling Haitians With Thugs
When the Haitian police charged into crowds of demonstrators on the Port-au-Prince waterfront yesterday, they were joined by thugs in civilian clothes throwing punches and swinging crude wooden clubs.
The thugs were presumed to be so-called attaches, who have been recruited by the armed forces to help in a terror campaign against supporters of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


U.N. Chooses An African As President
The General Assembly opened a new session today that is expected to draw the largest number of heads of state and prime ministers ever to address the forum.
In its first order of business, the assembly elected Amara Essy, a 49-year-old former Foreign Minister of the Ivory Coast, as president.
Mr.
Essy, who has also served with the United Nations in New York and Geneva, replaces Samuel Insanally of Guyana.


Reassignments By Northwest
Northwest Airlines said yesterday that it had reassigned accounts with billings of $20 million that had been handled by Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis for the last three years until that agency and Northwest parted ways last month.


3Com Corp.(COMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Miller Goes From Suns to the Pistons
The Phoenix Suns will not match Detroit's offer to the restricted free agent OLIVER MILLER, clearing the way for him to join the Pistons, the teams said yesterday.
The Pistons signed the 6-foot-9-inch, 300-pound center to an offer sheet on Sept. 6 worth a reported $10 million over four years.
The Suns had 15 days to match the offer or let the 24-year-old Miller join the Pistons.


Notre Dame's Becton Lost for Four Weeks
LEE BECTON, Notre Dame's leading rusher last season, will be out about four weeks with a strained muscle near his groin.
Becton, who rushed for 1,044 yards last year, has 182 yards and 2 touchdowns on 35 carries this season.
He was injured Saturday during the Irish's 21-20 victory at Michigan State.


Polish Pair Wins World Bridge Title
Two Polish players who had never played together before the start of the event became the World Mixed Pairs champions here Monday night, and were the first major winners at the World Bridge Federation's Championships.
The players, Danuta Hocheker of Olsztyn and Apolinare Kowalski of Warsaw, finished strongly to take the title by a wide margin.
They have both represented Poland before, in bridge and other activities: Ms.
Hocheker is a fencer and Mr.
Kowalski a swimmer.
The runners-up were Bob Hamman of Dallas, many times a world champion, and Sabine Zenkel of Chicago.


All His Shop Needs Now: Star Dust and a Skylark
JEFFREY WEISS, who runs a chair-repair shop, was excited, and he had to tell somebody about what had come into his store.
In his 20 years in business he has had many famous customers, but not until now has he ever had a really famous chair.
"We've recaned chairs for Pavarotti," said Mr.
Weiss, 55, a former advertising account executive.
"We've done chairs for artists and writers, and right now we're doing some settees for the Metropolitan Opera. But look at this!"


CLINTON IS URGED TO ABANDON FIGHT OVER HEALTH BILL
Two leading Republican opponents of health care legislation and one of its oldest Democratic supporters today urged President Clinton to give up on the issue for the year.
Otherwise, the Republicans -- Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader, and Representative Newt Gingrich, the deputy House minority leader -- warned, the President risked losing the rest of his agenda, in particular a new international trade agreement.
Representative John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who has sought health care change since 1955, offered similar advice to the White House.


Graham: New Haven's Other Bulldog
In attempting to fill out the schedule for this season, the new University of New Haven coach, Tony Sparano, called 63 teams.
The answer he heard most often was, "We'd be glad to play you next year -- after Graham's gone."
One team that said yes was Abilene Christian, and Sparano will take the Chargers to Abilene, Tex., for a game there Saturday night.
The coach said he expected the Wildcats of the Lone Star Conference, like other teams, to set up a seven-man defensive line "to try to stop Roger."


The Heart of Manhattan
To look at a map is to see with extraordinary clarity exactly what Central Park is to Manhattan.
It is its heart.
If the park marks the geographical center of this densely packed island, it also marks a certain emotional core.
This, after all, is where generations of New Yorkers have walked dogs, pushed baby carriages, biked and skated, listened to music, thought deep thoughts and even married.
For many, it was their first and last backyard.


Facing Up to Another Beautiful Day


INSIDE
Police Department Shake-Up New York City's Police Department has begun the most sweeping management shake-up in a generation to weed out weak supervisors.
Page B6.
New York's Tax Burden
New York's state and local tax payments are the second highest in the country, exceeded only by Alaska's, according to a new report.
Page B1.
Jury Rules Against Haft
A Federal jury ruled that Herbert H. Haft, the 74-year-old head of one of America's richest families, wrongfully dismissed his son.
Page D1.
No Cameras in U.S.
Courts
The Judicial Conference voted to deny TV cameras access to Federal civil trials and appeals.
Page A18.
Fast Track Turned Bumpy
A Senator's pet project, a new Pennsylvania Station, was a done deal.
Then Congress found out.
Page B1.


Andrea Electronics
Shares of Andrea Electronics, which have taken a wild roller coaster ride in the last 16 months, jumped yesterday for the second straight session.
Andrea said on Monday that BellSouth would use the company's noise-reduction technology in some telephones.


Sports of The Times; New Suits Can't Wait To Wield Ax
SO let's see.
The Knicks couldn't sign Ron Harper and haven't made a major player move over the summer, which means they are going to try to turn back the tide with their bare hands again this season.
And let's see.
The Rangers lost their coach and now they are having trouble signing Mark Messier, which brings them back to where they were for the previous 53 years.


Healthful Pizza
To The Living Section:
Your article on the health horrors of pizza seems to have depressed everyone in New York City  [ "Fat, by the Slice," by Marian Burros, Sept. 14 ] .
But readers should know that your hefty Weight Watchers interviewee was right: pizza isn't inherently unhealthy; it's just that in this country it's become a victim of our usual wretched excess.
To us, it tastes good heaped with cheese and salami and sausage.


A Rejuvenated Lady, Looking Even Fairer After 30 Years
Time ravaged the original negative of "My Fair Lady," but it has been kind to this lavish movie musical all the same.
Never a great film but always a glorious confection, it is even more glorious as it reopens today, at the Ziegfeld Theater, 30 years after it was made.
Audiences were once jaded when it came to wide-screen Super Panavision musicals, which were losing their novelty value by 1963.
But today, an extravaganza on this scale looks like a treasure.
Especially when the treasure features Cecil Beaton's astounding costumes, George Cukor's stately direction, the best-loved, most hummable of all Broadway scores and a sublime cast headed by Rex Harrison and Audrey Hepburn.
Not to mention the considerable contributions of George Bernard Shaw.


Players Talk in Atlanta, About Strike, Not Game
John Smoltz of the Atlanta Braves, his right elbow in a sling because of a recent operation, gingerly shook hands with teammates and other major leaguers who gathered today in a midtown hotel to talk not about baseball games but about a baseball strike.
Otis Nixon, the Boston Red Sox center fielder, rode in on the jet stream of Fred McGriff, reversing what he usually did when McGriff drove him in with home runs in Atlanta last year.
Nixon, among the 700 major leaguers idled since the strike began on Aug. 12, said he was doing as well as could be expected.


What's in the Potato Salad? Mussels!
MUSSELS are becoming more popular to eat because they are easier to clean than they once were.
They often come to the fish market from farms rather than from the wild, and farmed mussels do not require the same lengthy cleaning process.
There is a trade-off: farmed mussels do not have quite the flavor that wild mussels do.


State Calls Simpson's Ex-Wife Sole Target
The district attorneys prosecuting O. J. Simpson appear to have pared their murder case against him to a simple scenario: after killing his former wife in front of her condominium, Mr.
Simpson slashed the throat of a friend of hers who happened upon the scene.
"There was only one intended target, and that was Nicole Brown," Marcia Clark, the main prosecutor said at a pretrial hearing on Monday, outlining for the first time a central element of the state's theory of how the killings occurred.
"When Ron Goldman showed up, that was something the defendant didn't bargain for, and there was obviously a struggle."


L. K. Rosinger, 78, An Expert on China
Lawrence K. Rosinger, an author of books on China who was questioned by the Senate Internal Security subcommittee in 1952, died last Wednesday in the nursing home unit of the Hillside Terrace retirement community in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 78 and lived in Ann Arbor.
He had Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Lillian.


A Quick Landing to Cheers of 'Merci, Merci!'
Hundreds of Haitians, many waving and cheering, today greeted more than 1,500 marines who swept into this northern coast city by helicopter, hovercraft and amphibious tanks.
"Merci! Merci! Merci beaucoup!" shouted one man who ran toward marines at the airfield waving an American flag on a pole.
Throngs flocked to the airfield and port but Creole-speaking interpreters and M16-toting riflemen warned them to keep their distance.


Gincun Journal; Good Earth Is Squandered. Who'll Feed China?
Near the boomtowns of southern China, superhighways and smoke-belching factories sprout from the ground almost as quickly as the stalks of sweet corn raised by the barefoot farmers of this tiny village.
"My two sons cannot sleep at night because of this terrible noise," said Qin Liang Kai, a 30-year-old farmer, nodding toward the unending rush of cars and trucks along the new six-lane expressway that borders his cornfields.


Borden Deal Is Opposed By Teamsters
The takeover bid by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company for Borden Inc. ran into its first organized opposition yesterday: the teamsters' union.
The $46 billion pension fund of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters said it would not sell its 247,000 Borden shares to Kohlberg, Kravis and would also urge Borden's 41,000 other shareholders not to sell their stock.


Bonds Falter On Rise in Trade Deficit
Prices of Treasury securities slipped yesterday after a Government report showed that the nation's trade deficit had widened in July.
The larger deficit also weakened the dollar, which put further pressure on bonds.
Treasury securities also suffered from higher commodity prices.
The Commerce Department's report of the July trade balance was a little worse than expected.
The report showed the nation's trade deficit in goods and services widening to nearly $11 billion, compared with $9 billion in June.
Exports were a little weaker than expected and imports were stronger.


Planters Account Moved to FCB Shop
The Nabisco Foods Group in Parsippany, N.J., has withdrawn the account of its Planters Company subsidiary from Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York and consolidated it, without a review, at FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $6 million to $8 million.
The shift, which Nabisco Foods announced on Monday, is the first account loss for Ammirati &amp; Puris/ Lintas since the agency was formed in July by the merger of Ammirati &amp; Puris with Lintas New York, which lost several large accounts like Diet Coke before the merger.
The Planters account, which includes snacks like nuts and pretzels, had been at Lintas New York for six years.


Trade Data Spur a Big Stock Drop
America's mounting trade deficit was bad news for the dollar yesterday, and that, in turn, meant bad news for the stock market.
Its fall accelerated by high-speed computer-guided trading near the end of the session, the Dow Jones industrial average lost all its hard-won gains since Aug. 30 and slipped below 3,900.
The Dow index of 30 blue-chip stocks, the best-known measure of stock performance, lost 67.63 points to close at 3,869.09, and the other leading indexes also fell.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index fell 7.49 points, to 463.36, and the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index fell 9.98 points, to 766.74.


Judge Rules for Macy Parade (And East River Fireworks)
Now that Federated Department Stores has finally agreed with New York's Attorney General over how many stores it will try to sell to complete its takeover of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, the big company still has to fulfill one more promise to the Federal bankruptcy judge.
Burton R. Lifland, the judge in the Macy case, wants a guarantee "etched in some form of stone" that Federated will continue Macy's traditional Thanksgiving Day parade and its Fourth of July fireworks.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN BARRICK RESOURCES CORP., Toronto, said more than 90 percent of the shares of Lac Minerals Ltd., Toronto, were tendered to its $1.79 billion buyout offer before it expired at midnight on Monday.
American Barrick said it intended to buy all the remaining shares of Lac.
ANDOVER BANCORP INC., Andover, Mass., agreed to acquire Finest Financial Corp. and its Pelham Bank and Trust Co. subsidiary in exchange for common stock valued at $19.9 million at yesterday's closing price.


School's Out 6 Days for the Giants
Ah, life in the penthouse.
The Dallas Cowboys lose and all of a sudden the Giants not only have the best record in the division, at 3-0 they are also the only undefeated team in the conference.
Break out the champagne?
Ready the speeches?
Well, not quite.
Remember, the Giants jumped out to a lead over the Cowboys last season but lost both games to Dallas and ended up losing home-field advantage throughout the playoffs by one game.
So the Giants aren't ready to celebrate.
They say Dallas is still the team to beat.
Don't misunderstand them; most of the players and Coach Dan Reeves didn't shed any tears when Detroit beat Dallas on Monday night, but they know that right now their lead means very little in the grand scheme.


Flatley Thrives on Wear and Tear
He is still considered the premier Islander.
And he is their last link on the ice to the teams that once dominated the Stanley Cup finals.
But Patrick Flatley will be 31 in less than two weeks.
He is coming off yet another season of nagging injuries, the sixth such season in the last eight campaigns.
And it has been suggested by some that the wear and tear of 11 seasons in the National Hockey League has finally taken its toll on his body.


No Campus Lingering
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 14 news article on the growing number of undergraduates who take longer than the traditional four years to graduate states that the cost of college tuition and fees explains graduation differences among colleges and universities.


Carleton Sprague Smith, Scholar, Is Dead at 89
Carleton Sprague Smith, a musicologist and an expert on Hispanic and Brazilian culture, died on Monday at his home in Washington, Conn.
He was 89.
He had Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Damaris Horan.


A C.I.A. to Make Tom Clancy Blush
To the Editor:
As a 25-year deep-cover agent for four Federal agencies including experience trying to work with the Central Intelligence Agency, I read your Sept. 14 front-page article on Janine Brookner, who, her C.I.A. colleagues say, is a victim of sex discrimination, with no small concern.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Reeves and Kestner Share Met Lead  John Reeves of Fairview and Darrell Kestner of Deepdale shared the lead with a 36-hole total of 147 after yesterday's second round of the Izod/Cadillac Metropolitan PGA Championship at the Stanwich Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Reeves posted a 74 to gain the deadlock with Kestner, the first-round leader, who soared to a six-over-par 78.
Rick Vershure of Quaker Ridge, the defender, is at 150 after a second straight 75.
King Among Leaders in New Jersey: The defending champion, Bill King of Spring Lake, overcame problems with his irons to shoot a one-over-par 71 and grab a share of the first-round lead in the $50,000 New Jersey PGA Championship in West Orange.
Mark Guiliano of Fairmount, Marty Vybihal of Garden State Golf Center and Jamie Fordyce of Green Brook were also atop the leader board at the Montclair Golf Club, one stroke ahead of the field.
King, 37, had two birdies and three bogeys in beginning his quest for a third state PGA title. (AP) HORSE RACING  Elizabeth Bay Takes Belmont Feature  Elizabeth Bay, coming off two losing starts at Saratoga earlier this summer, won the $46,000 allowance feature at Belmont yesterday by 1 1/2 lengths.
Ridden by Mike Smith and carrying 119 pounds, Elizabeth Bay covered the mile in 1:364/5 over a fast track.
Imah was the runner-up, with Belle Nuit another 3 1/2 lengths back in the field of six fillies and mares.
It was Elizabeth Bay's third victory in five starts this season.
The Billy Mott-trained filly returned $3.20, $2.60 and $2.20. (AP)


Quality Food Centers Inc.(QFCI,NNM) reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 3


Store Closings in Merger Seen as an Unwelcome Change
Patrick James is suddenly worried about the future of his Garden City art shop, located in one of the most upscale shopping districts on Long Island.
In White Plains, the Mayor, S. J. Schulman got the news and wondered where the city would find another first-class department store for its downtown district.


International Jensen Inc.(IJIN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Rough Stretch of Track for a New Penn Station
It was supposed to be a lock: $100 million in Federal money to pay one-third the cost of renovating the old General Post Office in Manhattan.
The goal was a glorious new Pennsylvania Station to replace what its sponsor, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, called "the very inadequate subterranean substitute" built when the old station was demolished in 1963.
But since President Clinton included the money in his budget as a favor to Mr.
Moynihan, a New York Democrat, last winter -- slipping the first $10 million into an emergency relief bill for victims of the California earthquake -- the project has been on a bumpy track in Congress.


Italian Corruption Scandal Spreads to Gianni Versace
The latest wave of scandal to buffet Italian business has touched a leading fashion house, Gianni Versace S.R.L., with its chief executive, Santo Versace, falling under suspicion of having bribed Government tax inspectors in exchange for favorable audits.
Officials said Mr.
Versace, brother of the designer Gianni Versace, had been questioned on Monday by the chief anti-corruption magistrate, Antonio Di Pietro, and later released.
He was suspected of having made illegal payments in 1990 to officials of the Italian Treasury and Finance Ministry who were inspecting the company's tax records, reportedly in exchange for their turning a blind eye to fraudulent bookkeeping practices.


Autozone Inc.(AZO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


CHRONICLE
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON may often be the target of criticism, but she rated only compliments Monday afternoon from a large contingent of fashion designers, retail executives and health-care officials who came to call at the White House.
The group was invited to a reception to kick off the Council of Fashion Designers of America's campaign called "Fashion Targets Breast Cancer." RALPH LAUREN designed a T-shirt that will be sold in 2,000 stores around the United States to aid the Nina Hyde Center for Breast Cancer Research at Georgetown University.
Ms.
Hyde, a former fashion editor of The Washington Post, died of breast cancer in 1990.


Arson Suspected in Philadelphia


Economic Scene; Economists step up to the plate on ways to reorganize baseball for the benefit of the fans.
WITH baseball junkies suffering from World Series withdrawal, Congress is in a mood to make the club owners share their pain.
At very least, there will be a concerted effort in coming weeks to strip the owners of their antitrust protection, which in turn would eliminate their right to cap salaries without the players' consent.
But some wonder whether it is time to think bigger -- to reorganize Major League Baseball in a way that puts the fans' interests first.
And, surprise, surprise, economists are happy to rush in where tradition-bound commentators fear to tread.


Federal Courts, Back in the Dark
With scant explanation -- or acknowledgment of the need to explain -- the judges who run the Federal court system have announced that cameras will not be permitted at Federal civil or criminal trials.
A limited three-year experiment with courtroom photography in civil cases will expire, the judges said.
They did not bother to tell the public how they thought the experiment had worked out.
The news media had begun to hope that the United States Judicial Conference, headed by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and including the chief judges of all the courts of appeals and leading district judges, would relax the rules after years of obstinate refusal to permit the cameras.


Kings Shut Out Rangers
As a show of player solidarity during labor negotiations, the Rangers and Kings lined up in front of their benches before tonight's exhibition game at the Forum and shook hands, as though it was the end of a Stanley Cup playoff series.
They also must have agreed surreptitiously to not show up one another because neither team could generate much offense in a dreary game the Kings won by 1-0.
The Kings scored midway through the second period, soon after the Rangers made a change in goal.
Corey Hirsch started and stopped all 12 shots before being replaced by Mike Richter 9 minutes 30 seconds into the second period.
A little more than one minute later, and the Rangers a man short, Los Angeles defenseman Alex Zhitnik fired a rebound past Richter into a wide-open net.


Preserving a Central Park Classic


Baseball Lets Fans Savor the High Drama
To the Editor:
In "The Baseball Season Dies: O.K." (editorial, Sept. 16), Philip M. Boffey is content to see major league baseball go down the tubes, not only because of its increasing commercialization, but also because "baseball is boring," and especially "when compared with football, basketball or hockey."


Accounts
Future Vision Multimedia, Great Neck, L.I., to Jerry &amp; Ketchum, New York, as the first agency to handle the CD-ROM software company's account.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


American Commanders Give Cedras A Warning
Top American generals warned Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras today that his forces must stop beating Haitian citizens and took what may be a significant first step toward dismantling the force the military holds in this frightened country.
A day after Haitian police and soldiers lashed out with clubs at crowds who were greeting American troops, Lieut.
Gen.
Henry Hugh Shelton, commander of the XVIII Airborne Corps and Maj.
Gen.
David Meade, commander of the 10th Mountain Division, strode into General Cedras's headquarters to warn the Haitian command to shape up, American military spokesmen said.


Miami Sophomore Receives Romping Reviews
Jammi German's hometowners tend to compare him with another Fort Myers native with sprinter's speed and a flare for the dramatic: Deion Sanders.
Yet to others, this sophomore at the University of Miami is starting to look a little like another Rocket Ismail.
As with Ismail, a former Notre Dame standout, German is a wide receiver and kickoff/punt returner.
The first time German touched the ball this season, against Georgia Southern, he returned a kickoff 64 yards to start a 56-0 wipeout.


Bus Riders, Watch Out for This Trick
To the Editor:
As I consider myself a street-smart native New Yorker, I was amazed to find myself the victim of a very smooth pickpocket operation on a westbound 34th Street crosstown bus during morning rush hour.
I'd like to alert others.


S.E.C. Begins a Broad Inquiry Into Deep-Discount Brokers
The Securities and Exchange Commission has begun a comprehensive review of the deep-discount brokerage business, including sales practices, account-opening procedures and other matters.
At the heart of the agency's investigation is the worry that consumers who believe that they are getting the lowest price for their trades may, in fact, be paying higher prices, as a new breed of deep-discount brokerage firms finds oblique ways to profit without investors' knowing it.


Help for Center Spot Is on Devils' Horizon
The center position has been a perennial problem for the Devils, from the first day the franchise moved to New Jersey in 1982.
Even in the days of Kirk Muller and later Mark Johnson, Patrik Sundstrom and Peter Stastny, the team has lacked depth at the position.
This season the problem remains.
The loss of Bernie Nicholls to free agency after the most successful season in the history of the franchise has left the Devils with a huge gap at the center position for this season of high expectations.


Old Flame Burns the Housing Secretary
The extramarital affair that once threatened to destroy the career of Henry G. Cisneros, the current Federal Housing Secretary and former Mayor of San Antonio, is again complicating his public life.
The new complications spring from telephone conversations, secretly taped by his former mistress over the course of three years, in which they discussed his payments to her that ultimately amounted to about $200,000.


A Film Maker and the Art of the Deal
Lawrence Bender has, without question, the smallest office of any big-time producer in Hollywood.
It's a windowless and cramped space, with a rental desk and couple of movie posters tacked onto a wall.
And Mr.
Bender doesn't limit his frugality to the workplace.
When the 36-year-old producer flies to New York, his hometown, to make a film, he sleeps on sofas in his friends' apartments.
"Someone said to me: 'Don't they put you up in a hotel? Why are you sleeping on people's couches?' " he said.
"And I say: 'You don't understand. "They" is "me." ' Instead of spending $10,000 on a hotel, I could get another crew person. I can't get away from the fact that I want to put everything in the movie."


Where the Room Is the View
THERE must have been a serious shortage of gilt and brocade throughout Manhattan after the Plaza Hotel's face lift was completed several years ago.
The rejuvenated 87-year-old glitters almost as blindingly as it did originally, when some of the gold leaf had to be toned down with bronze varnish.
There are still nips and tucks to be made, but no matter.
Donald J. Trump modestly calls it "the finest hotel in the country," but then Mr.
Trump sort of owns it, with a few banks.
Finest or not, it is something to see, especially the refurbished suites that are usually open only to hefty bank accounts. (Think $3,500 and $5,000 a night.) The Astor, the Vanderbilt, the Presidential and the Frank Lloyd Wright suites will be among those open for viewing next Thursday at a $75-a-person fund-raiser for the New York Landmarks Conservancy.
Although the Astors and the Vanderbilts never lived in those suites, Frank Lloyd Wright did occupy his namesake rooms.
Still, Astors, Vanderbilts, Goulds, Wanamakers and Harrimans stayed at the Plaza, as did legends like Diamond Jim Brady, Lillian Russell, Mark Twain and the Beatles.


Giants Claim A Former Jet
A day after he was released by the Jets, Coleman Rudolph, a big defensive end who had not suited up for a single game this year, was claimed by the Giants yesterday.
Rudolph, who is 6 feet 4 and 270 pounds, said he was delighted to be staying in New York.
His father, Jack, a linebacker for the Boston Patriots and Miami Dolphins in the early 1960's, is a close friend of Giants Coach Dan Reeves.


Clinton Says U.S. Will Deter Abuses by Haiti Police
President Clinton declared today that the United States would not tolerate more outbreaks of police violence in Haiti, and said American military policemen would try to deter Haitian troops from using unreasonable force.
Administration officials described the step as a response to concern that Tuesday's brutal beatings of anti-Government demonstrators had begun to put the American military mission in political jeopardy.


The Mouse That Roared Says 'Thanks'
You could almost hear the gritting of teeth in Washington this week, as the great bowed to the small and the small reluctantly nodded back.
President Clinton telephoned the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide on Sunday night.


Tarpley on Path Toward Reinstatement
ROY TARPLEY may be only two steps away from getting back to the National Basketball Association and the Dallas Mavericks.
Tarpley flew to a league-sanctioned drug treatment center in Van Nuys, Calif., on Tuesday and was to take a drug test, the Mavericks' general manager, NORM SONJU, said.
Tarpley's next, and possibly final, step toward reinstatement would be a meeting with the N.B.A. commissioner, DAVID STERN.
No date for the meeting has been set, although league officials said Stern could rule on Tarpley's status by the end of the month.


U.S. Seeks to Deport Man Accused of Collaborating With Nazis
Federal prosecutors asked a court in Boston today to strip United States citizenship from an 87-year-old man who they said had led a Lithuanian secret police unit that collaborated in anti-Jewish atrocities during World War II.
The civil charges were made against Aleksandras Lileikis, a retired manager at a Lithuanian encyclopedia publishing concern, who lives in Norwood, Mass.
Officials said Mr.
Lileikis headed a Gestapo-like force in occupied Lithuania that handed over Jews to Nazi execution squads from 1941 to 1944.


Ballesteros Replaces Norman in France
SEVE BALLESTEROS has replaced GREG NORMAN in the field for the Lancome Trophy, which starts today at Saint-Nom-la-Bretche, France.
The opposition will be stiff.
For its 25th year, the Lancome has assembled a field loaded with such big names as NICK FALDO, IAN WOOSNAM, the defender; BERNHARD LANGER, JOSE-MARIA OLAZABAL and COLIN MONTGOMERIE.
All except one of the European top 10 is in the 69-man field.


U.N. Reports Serbian Helicopters Are Flying Into Bosnia
United Nations military observers have monitored several hundred flights by Serbian helicopters over northeastern Bosnia in the past week, and many appear to have originated in Serbia, a senior United Nations official said today.
Helicopters flying from Serbia into Serb-held parts of Bosnia could be carrying military supplies in violation of the pledge by Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, to cut off supplies to the Bosnian Serbs.
Such flights would also violate the ban on Bosnian airspace imposed by the United Nations last year.


After Four Super Bowl Rings, Lott Still Has Something to Prove
He performed last Sunday out of fear because he does not want to leave a game with the other guy thinking this: I got the upper hand on Ronnie Lott.
So Lott brushed off the possible reasons why Jets Coach Pete Carroll today named him the defensive captain for Sunday night's game against the Bears.
The Jets will be trying to rebound from their first loss under Carroll as they bring their 2-1 record against the slumping Bears.


Sony Sets Account Review; Burnett Quits
The Leo Burnett Company said yesterday that it had resigned the consumer products account of the Sony Corporation of America, with billings estimated at $40 million to $60 million.
Burnett declined to take part in a broad creative review that Sony decided to conduct among other agencies as well as Burnett.
The Burnett resignation, though unusual, was not entirely unexpected.
There were signs of problems on the account as top management at Sony changed several times and concerns were raised over whether the agency's work should stress products or Sony's brand image.


Now on Design's Runway . . .
TOMORROW it's official.
Fall, that is.
While to some people that means getting excited about sharpened pencils and clean notebooks, rows of pumpkins and the crunch of a crisp apple, to others it means getting a handle on what's happening in design.
And what a difference a season makes.
Arriving along with the autumn breezes are inventive products, inspiring exhibitions and accessible showrooms where visitors who are "just looking" are received with enthusiasm.
"Some day they'll come back and talk to us about decorating," said Jeffrey Bilhuber, a to-the-trade designer who now courts just plain folk (preferably with high style) on the Upper East Side.


A Newcomer With a Novel Approach


Seeking Refuge From Volcanoes in Papua New Guinea


Ancient Chinese Craft Shifts Building Designs in the U.S.
After six months of tough negotiations with a group of Taiwanese investors, Barry Lewen, a real-estate broker, thought he was just days from completing the $14 million sale of a building at 366 Madison Avenue when he was unexpectedly told there was one last detail.
The investors insisted that before anything more was done, a Chinese mystic had to be flown from Taiwan to determine if the building's qi, or life force, was acceptable.
"I thought they were joking," said Mr.
Lewen, an executive managing director of The Galbreath Company, a Manhattan real-estate company.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Kestner Prevails Again  Darrell Kestner, head pro at the Deepdale Golf Club in Manhasset, L.I., registered a two-under-par 70 yesterday and finished with a 54-hole total of 217 to win the Izod/Cadillac Metropolitan PGA championship.
Kestner, who earned $7,500 for his victory at the Stanwich Club in Greenwich, Conn., also won the New York State Open and the Dodge Classic this summer.
John DeForest of Rondout, N.Y., who also had a final-round 70, was runner-up with 221.
Fordyce Seeking Crown: Jamie Fordyce, the first-round co-leader, shot a one-under-par 69 yesterday to open a three-shot lead over John Klocksin and Kevin Syring after two rounds of the $50,000 New Jersey PGA Championship.
Fordyce, a 35-year-old assistant pro at Green Brook in North Caldwell, had four birdies and three bogeys at the Montclair Golf Club in West Orange in moving within a round of winning his first significant pro championship.
His 36-hole total is an even-par 140. (AP)


Dispute Over Computer Messages: Free Speech or Sex Harassment?
In a case that highlights the tension between protected free speech and illegal sexual harassment -- and raises new questions about what legal protections apply to computer messages -- a junior college in California has agreed to pay three students $15,000 each to settle charges stemming from its men-only and women-only computer conferences.
Santa Rosa Junior College reached the settlement after the Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights, with whom the claim was filed, told the college in a letter last June that it had found a probable violation of the Federal law prohibiting sex discrimination in schools.


How to Keep a Warm House From Turning Dangerous
VITAS GERULAITIS was not the first person to die from carbon monoxide from a faulty heater, but his celebrity has focused attention on the problem.
At least 250 people are fatally poisoned this way every year, according to the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and 5,000 or so more suffer injuries, some of them permanent.
Propane equipment, the apparent villain in the death of the former tennis star whose body was found Sunday afternoon in a cottage in Southampton, L.I., is a common cause, along with natural gas heating systems, but oil furnaces and even wood stoves can be deadly.


Owner of Arby's to Buy Long John Silver's Chain
In a merger of roast beef and popcorn shrimp, the Triarc Companies, the owner of Arby's Inc., will acquire Long John Silver's Restaurants Inc. for $525 million.
The deal will bring together Arby's, a chain of 2,800 outlets specializing in slow-roasted beef sandwiches, and the nation's largest fast-food fish and seafood chain, with about 1,450 units.
Triarc will try to turn the acquisition into a venture that would be the most ambitious attempt at fast-food dual branding, the retailing of two separate brands from the same restaurant outlet.


Supermarket Invests in Harlem, Long Shunned by Chains
For years, residents in inner-city neighborhoods like Harlem, Jamaica and East New York complained that the giant supermarkets that serve the suburbs and wealthier parts of the city had shunned their neighborhoods, forcing them to shop in overpriced and understocked bodegas and other small stores.
But in an unusual retail program to be announced today, a nonprofit community development group has collected $24 million from 10 major corporations to help finance a proposed 53,000-square-foot Pathmark store on 125th Street in East Harlem as well as similar stores in inner-city neighborhoods across the country.


A Quiet Man Speaks Through the Blues
There ought to be a photograph of J. J. Cale next to the dictionary definition of low-key.
Mr.
Cale, whose performances in New York are rare, materialized on Monday night at the Bottom Line.
At his early show, he never raised his voice, smiled or gave any clue about why he chose the songs of his rambling set.
Mr.
Cale has supplied hit songs to Eric Clapton ("Cocaine," "After Midnight") and a signature style to Dire Straits, which emulated his bluesy songs, often in minor keys, along with his terse guitar solos and his husky, near-whispered vocals.
He is steeped in the blues; he has absorbed its combination of lament, determination and resilience and its musical austerity.
Using his fingertips, he picks lean, single-line guitar solos that are as prickly and self-sufficient as cactus; he can also play his own simultaneous lead and rhythm parts.


Haiti's Military Peruses Fine Print of Accord in Bid to Hold Onto Power
Forced to retreat without firing a single shot, the Haitian military and its supporters are now shifting tactics in the hope of using political means to prevent the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, from returning to office, and from being able to govern effectively if he does.
Even with 10,000 American troops on Haitian soil, Haitian political leaders and foreign diplomats said Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his military and civilian allies appeared to be convinced that the diplomatic agreement they signed last weekend with an American delegation contains enough ambiguities to allow them to remain in power and thwart Father Aristide's return.


Meredith Monk Looks Into Roosevelt Island's Past
Roosevelt Island is a strip of land in the East River with ghostly remnants of history at its northern and southern tips.
Meredith Monk is a composer and choreographer who specializes in creating and exploring archetypal memories.
And Dancing in the Streets, a group that presents performances in nontheatrical outdoor spaces, is devoted to the proposition that the city is full of places in need of a little extra history of their own.
Those are the ingredients that have gone into "American Archeology No. 1: Roosevelt Island," a two-part piece to be performed outdoors on the island tomorrow through Sunday afternoon. (Reservations are necessary.)
The island's first settlers were probably Indians from the Leni Lenape tribe.
From the late 1600's to 1828, the place was known as Blackwells Island, named after the family that lived and farmed there and whose rebuilt house still stands, dwarfed by high-rises.
New York City bought the island in 1829 and began sending its castoffs to live on what became known as Welfare Island, in prisons, poorhouses, hospitals for people with infectious diseases and asylums.
Legend has it that inhabitants of these institutions included the newspaperwoman Nellie Bly, Typhoid Mary and Mae West, who is said to have been imprisoned for obscenity.


Officer Is Indicted in Rape
A New York City police officer was indicted yesterday on charges that he tried to rape his neighbor last month in Bellerose, Queens.
A State Supreme Court grand jury in Queens voted to indict Officer Daniel Quinlan, 29, on charges of attempted rape, attempted sodomy, aggravated sexual abuse, sexual abuse and unlawful imprisonment.
If convicted, he faces a sentence of 15 years in prison.


AT&amp;T Reassigns TV Buying Account
The AT&amp;T Corporation said yesterday that it had reassigned the duties on its estimated $230 million national network television buying account after a monthlong review.
Robert Watson, general manager of advertising services in New York, said that the reassignment was due in part to the elimination of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide from the AT&amp;T agency roster because of the conflict created when Ogilvy became the worldwide agency for I.B.M.


G.M. FORMS A PARTS UNIT FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLES
The General Motors Corporation, hoping one day to sell components to the makers of electric and hybrid vehicles worldwide, announced yesterday the formation of a business unit, Delco Propulsion Systems.
The new unit, to be based in Indianapolis, will be a joint effort of three G.M. parts-making organizations: AC Delco Systems, Allison Transmission and the Delco Electronics Corporation.
While G.M. has argued that battery technology has not progressed to the stage where electric vehicles can be viable in the consumer market, the auto maker is hedging its bet by preparing to take advantage of the electric-vehicle market if and when it blossoms.


Jericho Journal; The Holy Land 'Digs': Just Whose Heritage Is It?
Picks and shovels sifted through the soft dirt, turning up shards of old pottery until they struck several rounded rocks about a foot below the surface.
The rocks intrigued Prof.
Hamdan Taha, who heads the archeology department in the new Palestinian Authority.
Who knows? he said.
Maybe they form the roof of an ancient house.
Or maybe the top of a wall going back to the Hellenistic period, from the third to the first centuries B. C.


Famous Names Gain in Massachusetts


Corrections
An obituary last Tuesday about John H. Filer of West Hartford, Conn., a philanthropist and former chairman and chief executive of Aetna Life and Casualty, omitted the name of a surviving daughter.
She is Christine Filer.


Uncovered Short Sales on Big Board Climb 9.2%
Short-selling activity on the New York Stock Exchange reached a record high in the latest reporting period, as uncovered short sales increased for the 11th consecutive month.
Short sales on the American Stock Exchange also advanced for the second consecutive month.
The total short position on the Big Board rose 9.2 percent, to 1.78 billion shares from 1.63 billion shares.
On the Amex, the rise was smaller, at 3.3 percent, to 110.2 million shares from 106.7 million shares.
The figures cover trades settled by Sept. 15, which reflect transactions concluded a week earlier.


Pataki Offers Welfare Plan; Critics Say It's Like Cuomo's
Continuing his efforts to define his candidacy for governor, State Senator George E. Pataki called yesterday for reducing the number of people on welfare by requiring more of them to work, penalizing welfare families whose children routinely skip school and creating an independent monitor for welfare fraud.
But while Mr.
Pataki, a Republican from Putnam County, called his proposal a "dramatic" effort to "break the cycle of dependency," much of the plan called for speeding up or expanding policies that have already been proposed or put into effect by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, his three-term Democatic rival.


Bulls Get a Boost by Signing Krystkowiak
The Chicago Bulls, having lost HORACE GRANT to the Orlando Magic, strengthened their frontline today by signing the free agent LARRY KRYSTKOWIAK.
Krystkowiak, a 6-foot-9-inch forward, played with Orlando last season after stops in San Antonio, Milwaukee and Utah.
Krystkowiak was first drafted by Chicago in the second round in 1986, but was traded to the Portland Trail Blazers for STEVE COLTER.
He has averaged 8.4 points and 5 rebounds in his career.
With the Magic last season, he averaged 5.1 points and 3.6 rebounds in 34 games.


Arrow Electronics Agrees to Add Anthem
Arrow Electronics Inc. said today that it had agreed to buy Anthem Electronics Inc. for about $416 million in a move that would solidify Arrow's position as the world's largest distributor of electronics components.
Under the terms of the deal, Anthem's shares were valued at today's closing stock prices at about $33.58.
Anthem shareholders would exchange each of their shares for 0.875 of an Arrow common share.


Islanders' Dalgarno Is No Kid Anymore
Call him the forgotten man of Islanders camp.
Right wing Brad Dalgarno has to be wondering what his role will be on this season's team -- if he still has a role at all.


Arthur B. Krim, 89, Ex-Chief of Movie Studios
Arthur B. Krim, an entertainment lawyer and former chairman of Orion Pictures and United Artists, died in his sleep early yesterday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 84.
He had suffered a long illness, said Barbara Handman, a friend of his family.


Jury Is Selected in Hurley Accident Case
A seven-woman, five-man jury was selected yesterday to try a motorist involved in the collision that seriously injured Sacramento Kings guard BOBBY HURLEY.
Opening statements in the trial of DANIEL WIELAND were scheduled for today before Sacramento Municipal Court Judge ROLAND L. CONDEE.
Wieland, 37, is charged with reckless driving in the Dec. 12 accident.


A Disk Store, Not Compact, And More for Times Square
A six-story atrium at Broadway and 45th Street, which was supposed to embody the new sparkle of Times Square but instead wound up as a brooding, vacant shell, is to open next year with an enormous music store, a sports-theme restaurant and a four-screen movie theater.
The project, announced yesterday, could burnish Times Square's revived reputation as an entertainment mecca capable of attracting the biggest players.
It involves the major entertainment conglomerates Bertelsmann A.G., which owns the building, the Virgin Group of Companies and Sony Pictures Entertainment as well as the founder of the Planet Hollywood chain.


Dollars and Business Sense: Romance Is Missing
In announcing his retirement from baseball broadcasting the other day, Tony Kubek said he didn't care for the film makers and authors who romanticize the game.
"It's a nuts-and-bolts game," he said.
As usual, the man who never let George Steinbrenner intimidate him and influence the job he did on the air said it directly and accurately.
That doesn't mean film makers and authors will stop romanticizing the game.
But just as there is nothing romantic about nuts and bolts -- throw the ball, hit the ball, catch the ball -- there is nothing romantic about a labor strike.
Some commentators, both on the air and in print, have lamented the state of the game to have come to this, but where they are misguided in continuing to think of major league baseball as a game.


Clinton Says U.S. Will Deter Abuses by Haiti Police
President Clinton declared today that the United States would not tolerate more outbreaks of police violence in Haiti, and said American military policemen would try to deter Haitian troops from using unreasonable force.
Administration officials described the step as a response to concern that Tuesday's brutal beatings of anti-Government demonstrators had begun to put the American military mission in political jeopardy.


AT HOME WITH: P. L. Travers; Where Starlings Greet the Stars
AT No. 17 Cherry-Tree Lane, medicine tasted like candy and people could slide up the banisters.
Babies talked to starlings and the wind, trading the world's secrets and laughing with the birds at the silly adults who could never understand.
It was, of course, the Banks residence, home of Jane and Michael, John and Barbara, children like the rest of us whose fortunes were vastly improved the day Mary Poppins blew into their yard, buoyed by her parrot-head umbrella, carpetbag in hand.


Officer Hit in Back 4 Times, Data Say
The Medical Examiner's office has told prosecutors investigating last month's shooting of a transit officer by an off-duty New York City police officer that all the transit officer's wounds appear to be from gunshots to the back, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
A pathologist in the Medical Examiner's office told the Manhattan District Attorney's office on Tuesday that his findings showed that Officer Peter Del-Debbio had fired four shots into the back of Officer Desmond Robinson, said several law-enforcement officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Another shot entered a pouch that the transit officer was wearing around his waist and lodged in a memo book, the officials said.


Garden's Priority: Signing of Messier
One day after Bob Gutkowski's dismissal as the president of Madison Square Garden, his interim replacement said his immediate goal is to break the logjam in contract negotiations with Mark Messier, the Rangers' captain and star center.
"No question, it's the most important issue the Garden is facing," said Dave Checketts, who had been president and general manager of the Knicks.
"It's absolutely the first priority."


Kazarian Suggests He Might Make Bid for Borden
Paul B. Kazarian, a friendly suitor for Borden Inc., presented a letter to the company's management last night, suggesting that his investment firm, Japonica Partners, was willing to purchase from 20 to 90 percent of the struggling consumer-products giant for $16 a share or more.
But participants in the meeting, which ran nearly three hours, disagreed about the letter's provisions, and whether it represented a proposal or was simply a list of hypothetical options for the Borden board.


Children's Viewing: The Brighter Side of Bleak Fare
Nothing takes the sorry measure of the television industry's supposed sense of responsibility more than the state of children's programming.
Periodic apologies for too much violence are followed by still another spate of cartoons featuring ferocious warriors or karate killers.
Promises to improve schedules end up with news reports that some broadcasters list "G.I. Joe" as educational programming.
Content quality is obviously not as important as product tie-ins. (Today, ABC, in a plug for a new Saturday-morning series, "Bump in the Night," is joining with F. A. O. Schwarz to open a "Bump in the Night" boutique at the toy store.)
No wonder crusaders for a modicum of common sense concerning television and young audiences end up discouraged and exhausted.
Still, there are bright spots to be noticed, in the hope that these and not "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers" will become guideposts for the future.
Prominent among the new good guys:


Campaign on Shoestring Ousts Veteran
Virgil Cooper, a retired school principal and political novice, spent all of $16,900 in his race for the Democratic nomination in Oklahoma's Second Congressional District against Mike Synar, an eight-term incumbent.
The 71-year-old Mr.
Cooper bought no television advertising and hired no staff to campaign against Mr.
Synar, one of the best-known politicians in the state, a player in the House of Representatives and an unabashed ally of President Clinton.


Chiefs Seeking Casillas Rebate
The Kansas Chiefs have got back the $300,000 prorated signing bonus they gave Tony Casillas last spring.
But now they want the National Football League to direct him to return the interest he received on the money and other expenses involved in signing him.
They have also asked the league to lower their salary cap by the bonus amount.
Casillas, a free agent, signed a four-year deal with Kansas City last April.
He received a $1.2 million bonus.
But Casillas often missed practice, saying he had high blood pressure.
The Chiefs sent him to his doctors in Dallas.
He eventually left the Chiefs and returned the money.
The Jets signed him on Monday.


Japan Hasn't Stopped Exploiting Asian Women
To the Editor:
You are right to say that the $1 billion offered by the Japanese Government as "compensation" for the hundreds of thousands of Asian women forced into brothels to service Japanese soldiers during World War II is an "incomplete mode of redress" (editorial, Sept. 14).


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
China is rushing ahead to double auto production to three million vehicles a year by the end of the decade.
American, Japanese and European auto makers are competing to participate in a handful of joint ventures with China to produce family sedans for the world's largest untapped car market.  [ Page D1. ] Markets
Stocks fell sharply for a second day as new pessimism on interest rates held sway on Wall Street.
Many traders now predict that the Federal Reserve will raise short-term interest rates as soon as Tuesday.
The Dow has fallen 85.12 points since Monday.  [ D1. ]


Model Adoption Law Provides Records Access
To the Editor:
Since I was an adviser to the National Conference of Commissioners drafting committee on the model uniform adoption law since its inception, I was upset with your reporting on it.
This has also upset Michelle C. Fergenson (letter, Sept. 13).


Bond Prices Fall on Fear Of Fed Move
Prices of Treasury securities sagged again yesterday, after a report of higher-than-expected housing starts for August and a prediction by a former Federal Reserve official that an increase in interest rates was imminent.
Wayne D. Angell, a former Fed governor who is chief economist for Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, predicted that the Fed would raise interest rates by 50 basis points at the meeting next week of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed's policy-making body.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  In one of the nation's most ambitious efforts to improve public schools, New York City will receive $100 million -- half of it from the Annenberg Foundation -- to replace some of the city's large, overcrowded neighborhood schools with 50 small experimental schools in the next five years.
The new schools will serve about 50,000 of New York's 1.2 million school children, and will emphasize greater individual attention and more parental involvement.
A1.
ANCIENT CRAFT SHAPES MODERN DESIGNS The ancient Chinese craft of feng shui, a blend of astrology, design and Eastern philosophy aimed at harmonizing the placement of man-made structures in nature, has begun to exert an influence on the hard-edged world of real estate in America.
The former Gulf and Western Building, 40 Wall Street and the China Trust Bank in Queens are among projects in which developers called in feng shui experts.
A1.


The Mayor Shapes a Plan
In bits and pieces, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has revealed his plan for reshaping the government of New York City.
Without actually calling it a blueprint, the Mayor has in a series of initiatives sketched a design for a leaner and potentially more responsive city government.
It is too soon to judge all the parts.
Perhaps some proposals will be sensible, some shortsighted.
But it is clear that Mr.
Giuliani, seized by an urgent need to close the widening city budget gap, believes he can clear out years of accumulated bureaucracy and inefficient services, and do it across the board.


Rangers Resume Messier Contract Talks
Negotiations between Mark Messier and the Rangers resumed yesterday, with Neil Smith once again representing the Stanley Cup champions in contract talks with their holdout captain.
"We're talking to Neil right now," Messier said in a telephone interview from his home in Hilton Head, S.C.
"Maybe we'll have something to say soon."


CHRONICLE
Women who think they could fit into the gold dress CINDY CRAWFORD wore to the MTV awards earlier this month now have a chance to find out.
The dress, designed by TODD OLDHAM, will be auctioned off tonight, along with other designer fashions at a cocktail party at the Copacabana given by the Junior Life League, which works to help prevent suicide among young people.
Mr.
Oldham described the dress yesterday as a "bronzy-gold bias-cut silk chiffon, beaded with gold bugle beads, slinky and floor length."


Crossroads In Economy Is Foreseen With Growth
Burdened by high taxes and utility rates, and with job growth at a standstill, Long Island is at a crossroads, economists and business leaders said at a daylong economic conference here today.
By the year 2010, planners said, the Island's population is expected to reach 2.9 million, up from 2.6 million in 1990.


Wisconsin Bishops Preparing for Priest Shortage
In an unusual joint document that illustrates the concern among Roman Catholic leaders over the growing shortage of priests, the bishops of Wisconsin will issue a pastoral letter today telling parishioners that they face a decrease in "priestly services" and laying out rules for conducting priest-less worship.
The document, Making Do With Less: Sunday Worship Without a Priest, is occasionally as blunt as its title.
"Our age is now experiencing an acute shortage of priests," it states.
"It would seem that the situation will not be improving for some time." Wisconsin Catholics, it adds, "will all now experience the decrease of these priestly services very much."


COMPANY BRIEFS
BURLINGTON COAT FACTORY WAREHOUSE CORP., Burlington, N.J., said it would repurchase as much as $5 million of its common stock.
MERCK &amp; CO., Whitehouse Station, N.J., said it would resume a previously authorized $1 billion stock repurchase program.


Philip Morris Shareholders In a Walkout
Several members of a group of Philip Morris's largest shareholders walked out of a meeting with company board members yesterday, complaining that the company did not take seriously their concerns about splitting its tobacco and nontobacco operations.
"Philip Morris pledged to us that we could have a healthy give and take with their outside directors," said Mark Green, the New York City Public Advocate who attended the meeting as a trustee of the New York City Employee Retirement System.
"But when we walked into the room, it was a teacher-student situation, with management on a stage."


City Is Fighting Garbage, But Will It Sweep Crime?
IT seems almost unfair, sort of raining-on-the-paradelike, to ask this question, but here it is anyway: Will City Hall take the same tough stance with police officers as it did with its sanitation workers?
Under the city's tentative and roundly praised contract with its sanitation union, garbage collectors may finally work a full day for a full day's pay.
If the deal develops none of the loopholes so common to city labor accords, the contract is great news for those who favor cleaner streets and greater economy.


A Secretarial Pool Out for Blood
In the final scene of "The Secretaries," a mordantly cheerful slice of Grand Guignol at the New York Theater Workshop, five women stand in triumphant tableau, wearing nothing but lingerie, glazed smiles and a fresh coat of blood.
It's a vision that directly evokes the old killer-babe exploitation movies, those weirdly ambivalent blends of misogyny and eroticism from film makers like Roger Corman and Russ Meyer.
It is probably unnecessary to say that in the hands of a troupe called the Five Lesbian Brothers, the vision takes on a decidedly different aspect.
"The Secretaries," written and performed by the Brothers under Kate Stafford's direction, is a thinly protracted, if sometimes very funny, exercise in subverting American images of womanhood.
The story of a quintet of covertly homicidal office employees in an Oregon lumber mill, it plays on anxious male fantasies of what women do when they're alone together; straight women's fantasies of lesbians (they're predatory); lesbians' fantasies of straight women (they're secretly lesbians), and the warping cultural expectations of femininity.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Japanese stocks were lower here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 51.71 points, or 0.26 percent, at 19,833.67.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei gained 48.11 points.


Blimpie Chooses A New Agency
Blimpie International Inc. in Atlanta, the franchiser of Blimpie Subs and Salads restaurants, said yesterday that it had selected Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York to handle its national advertising account, which had been inactive.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.
K. &amp; B. was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to one other finalist, Campbell Mithun Esty in New York.


S.E.C. Suit On Towers
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed civil fraud charges yesterday against Marvin E. Basson, a certified public accountant in Upper Brookville, L.I., who served as the outside auditor for the Towers Financial Corporation.
The S.E.C. charges, filed in United States District Court in Manhattan, said Mr.
Basson knew, or should have known, that large parts of the Towers books were falsified.


Pessimism Takes Hold On Wall St.
A quickening pessimism, based on recent economic data, has suddenly soured the mood on Wall Street and sent stock and bond prices sharply lower.
Many traders say the Federal Reserve will raise short-term interest rates as soon as Tuesday, when the Fed's policy-making committee meets, battering both stocks and bonds just three days before the end of a problematic third quarter.


Share of Holy Bull Sold; Colt to Retire After 1995
Jimmy Croll confirmed yesterday that he was selling a 25 percent interest in Holy Bull to the Jonabell Farm of Lexington, Ky., where the great gray superstar of racing will retire as a stallion after his 1995 season.
"I've had lots of offers to sell him outright," Croll reported from his barn at Monmouth Park on the Jersey Shore.
"But I'm going to race him next year and then retire him to stud. We're drawing the contract with Jonabell right now. I'm keeping three-quarters and Jonabell will purchase one-quarter, but the sale won't take effect until he retires at the end of next year."


Pataki Is Criticized by London, Party's Comptroller Candidate
In a surprising assault on party unity, Herbert London, the Republican candidate for comptroller, criticized his own party's nominee for governor yesterday, saying State Senator George E. Pataki "has not clearly defined himself or his plan to cut taxes and stop runaway spending."
The criticism from Mr.
London, who had been Mr.
Pataki's chief rival for the Republican nomination this spring, came in a one-page statement only hours after the question of comptroller independence emerged as the defining issue in a debate between Mr.
London and his Democratic opponent, H. Carl McCall.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  U.S.
TO ACT ON HAITI VIOLENCE  President Clinton said that the United States would not tolerate police violence in Haiti and that American military policemen would try to deter Haitian troops from using unreasonable force.
A1


Getting Involved in Improving Schools
LAST week, officials at Public School 69 in Jackson Heights, Queens, painted a red line on the sidewalk just outside the front door and told parents they could not cross it to enter the building, even to drop off or pick up their children, said Jon Moscow, executive director of Parents Coalition for Education in New York, a nonprofit advocacy organization.
This school strategy -- treating parents as if they must be kept at bay -- is not only antithetical to many new state and Federal guidelines on forming partnerships with parents, but also probably contrary to the best interests of the children.


No Headline
"This is the most exciting thing to happen since Lucy." -- DR.
OWEN LOVEJOY, a paleontologist, on the discovery of fossils of the oldest human ancestors.  [ A16:3. ]


Will Knicks Keep Up Amid These Changes?
Dave Checketts has climbed to another level. Can the Knicks do the same?
The promotion of Checketts to president of the newly created Madison Square Garden Sports Group is not important to most fans.
They just want the Knicks to win a championship, no matter who calls the shots at the Garden.


Cuban Official Criticizes Lag By the U.S. in Issuing Visas
A senior Cuban official pressed the United States today to begin granting visas to thousands of Cubans who want to emigrate, saying a new American policy must show results quickly if it is to deter the flight of refugees.
The official, Ricardo Alarcon, a former Foreign Minister who was Cuba's chief negotiator in immigration talks with the United States this month, cautioned that he did not feel that Washington was deliberately delaying enforcement of an agreement reached Sept. 9 in New York.


Study Says Many of Tiniest Babies Will Have Learning Problems
A study of babies born at very low weights has found that many will have neurological problems and nearly half will have learning problems requiring special education when they reach school age.
The study, by Dr.
Maureen Hack of Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital at University Hospitals of Cleveland and her colleagues, is the first to follow babies born at very low weight, less than 1 pound 10 ounces, in order to see how they perform when they go to school.
It was only in the early 1980's that babies with birth weights that low began surviving in any great number.
The study is being published today in The New England Journal of Medicine.


An Architect Who Puts Work Before Worship
DUO DICKINSON is an ambitious man with a fistful of clients and a philosophy that rates Willy Loman higher than Howard Roark.
A 38-year-old architect who has written four books, including "The Small House" (McGraw-Hill, 1986) and "The Small House for the Next Century" (due from McGraw-Hill in December), Mr.
Dickinson works in Madison, Conn., with his staff of five.
A man who sees himself as a rebel within the profession, he travels throughout Connecticut, down to Long Island, over to Rye, N.Y., and up to Vermont to build new houses and additions, all the time espousing his credo, which might be stated thus: Design it small, make it as beautiful as possible and practice every trick in the book to keep it as cheap as possible.


Under House Arrest, Venezuela's Ex-Chief Takes Offensive
After half a century in Venezuelan politics, Carlos Andres Perez has retired to his hillside estate near Caracas.
Framed on a wall is the slender gold pen he used two decades ago to nationalize the largest oil reserves in the Americas.
But the 71-year-old former President is spending his golden years under house arrest.
Last year, he was forced from office and charged with corruption, and this year he spent two months in jail.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Retained Dave Nelson, first base coach; Jeff Newman, third base coach; Buddy Bell, infield coach; Luis Isaac, bullpen coach; Charlie Manuel, hitting coach, and Phil Regan, pitching coach.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed a player development contract for four-year with Springfield of the Class A Midwest League.


CHRONICLE
The committee that chose former President JIMMY CARTER to receive the National Civil Rights Museum's National Freedom Award, to be given tonight in Memphis, had no idea how timely the honor would be when they decided to award it to him eight months ago.
Mr.
Carter, who just returned from negotiating the agreement that averted combat in Haiti, is to attend a dinner at the Peabody Hotel to receive the prize -- $25,000 and a sculpture.
The presentation is to be made by ISAAC TIGRETT, a founder of the Hard Rock Cafe and House of Blues chains.
His International House of Blues Foundation helps to support the prize.


Placing a Supermarket In Harlem


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Tuesday, with an article about the remarks of Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, at a conference at Boston College, misidentified one panelist in a discussion of financial markets.
The panelist, fourth from the right, was William C. Ferguson, the chairman and chief executive of the Nynex Corporation, not Martin Feldstein, a Harvard economist and former adviser to President Ronald Reagan.
Because of an editing error, the article also referred incorrectly to Mr.
Feldstein.
His office said he did not attend the conference.


Woman, 86, Is Found Slain In S.I. Home
A week short of her 87th birthday, a reclusive Staten Island widow was found slain yesterday, her hands bound behind her back, in the bedroom of the modest home on a quiet street where she had lived for some 40 years.
The victim, identified by the police as Mildred McInerny of 835 Bard Avenue in Sunnyside, was found by a nephew who became concerned when he was unable to reach her by telephone.


Motorola Unit Has Funds for Sky-Phone System
Defying a legion of skeptics, Motorola has raised $1.57 billion to build its vision of a global telephone system in the sky.
In the process, it has jumped well ahead of rivals and chastened those who had dismissed its plan as pie-in-the-sky.
Iridium Inc., the company formed by Motorola four years ago, intends to launch 66 small satellites and build a $3.4 billion global wireless phone network to allow people to talk over pocket-sized telephones anywhere in the world.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 9, 1992, about the resignation of Pamela D. Hayes as an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn described the reason for her resignation incorrectly.
Ms.
Hayes's resignation did not result from allegations that she had interceded in the Federal drug investigation of a friend.
The Times now believes that the allegations themselves were false.


School Safety Chief Chastised for Contracts
The safety chief for New York City schools will be reprimanded and lose vacation time for violating rules governing the awarding of contracts, officials said yesterday.
A school investigation found that the official, Zachary Tumin, the executive director of the Division of School Safety, violated rules in handling two contracts awarded in 1993 to two consulting concerns, one of which included William J. Bratton, who is now New York City Police Commissioner.
The consultants helped plan a reorganization of the school safety division.


G.I.'s Angry Over Orders To 'Stand By'
The soldiers followed orders, and it made them sick.
Fresh-faced, some as young as 18, they sat atop the walls and behind the fences of the United States perimeter at the city docks and watched in helpless disgust as Haitian police and their plain-clothes allies clubbed people who had come to welcome the American soldiers to Haiti.
"It hurt, real bad," said Pvt.
Jeremy Caris, the 19-year-old son of a West Virginia minister, who sat behind his loaded machine gun and watched as police officers used tree limbs, nightsticks and iron pipe to beat back onlookers at the docks.
His orders were not to intervene in violence between Haitians, so when the people looked up to him for help, he looked away.


The Pop Life
Jungle Out There
In New York, night life revolves around club culture, where clothes and attitude take precedence over music.
In London, club culture takes a back seat to dance culture, where music comes first.
Genres of dance music here change faster than styles of clothes, and many D.J.'s are more popular than the bands they play.
From acid house to rare groove, from hardcore techno to ragga-rave, not all of English dance music's twists and turns survive long enough to work their way into American popular music.


Disney Wins 2 Votes for Virginia Park Plan
The Walt Disney Company tonight won its first official approval to proceed with plans for a giant theme park in the Virginia suburbs when the Prince William County Planning Commission voted 7 to 1 to recommend that county supervisors to change zoning regulations to suit the $650 million project.
The park, Disney's America, is the centerpiece of a 3,000-acre project 35 miles southwest of Washington that has drawn criticism from some historians and preservationists concerned about the effect on nearby Civil War battlegrounds.


For an Aging Yossarian, the Catch Is Cosmic
Closing Time  By Joseph Heller  464 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
You loved them and laughed at them in "Catch-22," Joseph Heller's blackly comic first novel, published originally in 1961 and about to be reissued in a new edition with a preface by the author.
And now some of the characters are back in a not entirely successful sequel to that antiwar classic, "Closing Time," whose title refers to terminus, shutdown, punkt, the end, death.


Corrections
Because of a production error, two picture captions on Sunday with an article about Americans' opinions on plans for a United States military invasion of Haiti were reversed in some copies.
Gay Earls was shown in the top photo and Glo Ruiz in the bottom one.


New York Receives $100 Million Gift For 50 New Schools
In one of the nation's most ambitious efforts to improve public schools, New York City will receive $100 million -- $50 million from the Annenberg Foundation -- to replace some of the city's large, overcrowded neighborhood schools with 50 small experimental schools in the next five years.
The new schools will serve about 50,000 of New York's 1.2 million school children and will be modeled after the 50 alternative schools that have opened in the last two years, emphasizing greater individual attention and more parental involvement than the city's colossal, factorylike high schools can provide.


Sit, Stay and Say 'Woof-Woof' for the Camera
IF a snapshot of Fido, Kitty or Polly the Parrot seems too informal for the family album, the Petography portrait studio can provide something grander.
Operated by Paul Coughlin and Jim Dratfield, the studio, in Manhattan, specializes in animal images that combine the dignity of Yousuf Karsh's photos and the candor of Weegee's.
"William Wegman is a big inspiration, too," Mr.
Dratfield said, referring to the art photographer fond of arranging his pliable Weimaraners into alphabet formation or dressing them as fairy-tale ingenues.


Study Uncovers Link of Cancer To Birth Drugs
Women treated with infertility drugs have a risk of ovarian cancer that is 2.5 times higher than that of women in the general population, a new study has found.
In the study of 3,837 women, 11 developed ovarian cancer, while the number expected from statistical calculations was 4.4 cases, reported Dr.
Mary Anne Rossing of the University of Washington and her co-authors from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.
The study is being published today in the New England Journal of Medicine.


Poor Showing by Foley Hints at Trouble on Nov. 8
Tuesday's primary election results here indicate that House Speaker Thomas S. Foley appears headed for one of the toughest races in his 30-year career as Representative from Eastern Washington.
Running unopposed, Mr.
Foley finished with just 35 percent of the total vote, his lowest percentage in three decades.
The Republican victor, George R. Nethercutt Jr., received 30 percent of the vote, with the remaining 35 percent split between two other Republican candidates.


The room is the view
Swan fixture in the bathroom of the Astor suite at the Plaza Hotel. (Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times) (pg. C4)


Justice Officials Clarify Stand In Race-Based Dismissal Case
Officials of the Justice Department said yesterday that the Clinton Administration intended to argue in favor of an appeal of a civil rights case that it helped to win, but that it would participate only as a friend of the court.
Senior members of the Justice Department said that they had always intended to file an amicus curiae, or friend of the court, brief in the case of a white Piscataway school teacher who was laid off so that a black colleague could be retained.


Bridge
When the first stage of the World Open Team Championship began here Tuesday under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation, 168 teams were in play, divided into 14 groups of 12 teams.
After three days, 64 teams will advance into a second stage of round-robin play.
When four of the 11 rounds were completed last night, most of the top-seeded teams were in strong positions.
There were three exceptions: the United States team led by Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., had 47 percent; the United States team captained by Bill Pollack of Englewood, N.J., had 48 percent, and the Australia team headed by Paul Marston had 39 percent.
These teams have met opponents who are theoretically weaker, and will be hard pressed to make up lost ground.


An Architect Who Puts Work Before Worship
DUO DICKINSON is an ambitious man with a fistful of clients and a philosophy that rates Willy Loman higher than Howard Roark.
A 38-year-old architect who has written four books, including "The Small House" (McGraw-Hill, 1986) and "The Small House for the Next Century" (due from McGraw-Hill in December), Mr.
Dickinson works in Madison, Conn., with his staff of five.
A man who sees himself as a rebel within the profession, he travels throughout Connecticut, down to Long Island, over to Rye, N.Y., and up to Vermont to build new houses and additions, all the time espousing his credo, which might be stated thus: Design it small, make it as beautiful as possible and practice every trick in the book to keep it as cheap as possible.


Prosecutor's Resignation Was Unrelated to Federal Drug Inquiry
To the Editor:
On the day this letter appears, The New York Times is publishing a correction of a statement in its Aug. 9, 1992, article about me.
The Times had incorrectly reported that I was accused of interceding in a Federal drug investigation, and that this accusation led to my resignation as an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.
The actual events leading up to my resignation were quite different.


Hills Stores Outlines Expansion Plan
Seeking to counter a large shareholder's attempt to take seats on its board, the Hills Stores Company took the wraps off a plan yesterday to buy back $75 million of its stock and embark on an ambitious strategy to open 15 to 20 stores a year.
The company's proposal is an effort to reach a compromise with Dickstein Partners L.P., a large shareholder that is seeking seats on the Hills board in order to push through a different stock repurchase program in an effort to prop up the company's share price.


Bubka and Morceli World Marks Ratified
The International Amateur Athletic Federation yesterday ratified world records set this summer by SERGEI BUBKA and NOUREDDINE MORCELI.
Bubka improved his outdoor record in the pole vault to 20 feet 1 3/4 inches at Sestriere, Italy, on July 31.
Morceli bettered the 3,000-meter mark by nearly three seconds with a clocking of 7 minutes 25.11 seconds, at Monte Carlo, Monaco, on Aug. 2. (AP)


U.N. Again Debates How to Press Serbs on Bosnia
The Security Council began debate today on several resolutions involving Bosnia, including one demanding that Bosnian Serb forces permit the movement of United Nations troops and relief organizations near towns where thousands of Muslims have been forced from their homes in "ethnic cleansing" operations.
This resolution, proposed by a caucus of developing nations, carries no sanctions but restates the position that ethnic cleansing violates international conventions and that people involved in such practices are individually responsible under international law.


Not So Fast on That Flawed Trade Bill
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 18 editorial, after ignoring all the input requested from my office, erroneously concludes that I am "blocking" free trade.


A Graphic Change For Cooper-Hewitt
PERHAPS only one museum would change its name just for the sake of, well, looks.
The Cooper-Hewitt museum, to bring design front and center, has refined its mission, re-created its visual identity and changed -- slightly -- its name.


At Michigan, a Return Fraught With Risk
Barring unforeseen complications between now and Saturday, we can expect Tyrone Wheatley to make a dramatic entrance onto the biggest football stage of any campus in America this week.
At some point during the game between Michigan and Colorado that has suddenly attracted the hot lights, the preseason favorite for the Heisman Trophy should take his rehabilitated right shoulder onto the field at Michigan Stadium and become a factor.
There will be little margin for error.
When Wheatley, the Michigan tailback, made his surprising and inspiring decision last January to postpone his first check from a National Football League team, earn a degree in education and a chance at a Heisman and remain a part of the student economy, this week was a nearly inevitable part of the plan.


Rare View Of Dissident Feeds Hopes Of Burmese
For nearly six years, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi has been a ghost to the people of her homeland, her image considered so dangerous to the generals who run Myanmar, the nation formerly known as Burma, that they refused to allow her face ever to be seen on a television screen or in a newspaper.
So when millions of Burmese picked up today's copy of the Government-controlled newspaper, The New Light of Myanmar, the common reaction was a startled shake of the head, and a carefully hidden grin.


No Charges for Now Against Michael Jackson
After more than a year of investigation, accompanied by lurid speculation in the press, prosecutors said today that they would not file child molestation charges against the pop superstar Michael Jackson.
At a joint news conference, the District Attorneys for Los Angeles and Santa Barbara Counties said they had decided not to proceed with allegations that Mr.
Jackson had sexually molested three boys because the "primary alleged victim" had decided not to testify.


Jimmy Hamilton, 77, Clarinetist Integral to the Ellington Sound
Jimmy Hamilton, one of jazz's great clarinetists, who was a member of Duke Ellington's orchestra from 1943 to 1968, died on Tuesday in St.
Croix Hospital in the United States Virgin Islands.
He was 77 and lived on St.
Croix.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his granddaughter, Vivian Greenaway.


Macy's East Head Skillful and Contentious
Harold D. Kahn, a career merchant whose first job was as a shoe department trainee at Abraham &amp; Straus, faces a daunting task blending three department store chains into what will be Federated Department Stores Inc.'s largest division.
Mr.
Kahn, 49, was named chairman and chief executive of Macy's East division on Tuesday.
Its 58 stores under the names Macy's, A.&amp; S. or Jordan Marsh will ring up $4 billion in sales from 16 states, sprawling from Maine to Florida.


Victoriana Reconsidered
COLLECTORS awaiting the star of next week's Antiquarian and Landmarks Society Antiques Show -- a Rhode Island secretary, circa 1745 -- should brace themselves.
It's gone, sold for more than $100,000.
"I couldn't resist the offer," said Zeke Liverant, the dealer who was to show the relic.


China Is Planning a People's Car
In the People's Republic it is being called the people's car, an affordable compact sedan for the masses in the world's largest untapped car market.
The car is the focus of an ambitious effort by leaders of China's Communist Party to double the nation's annual production to three million vehicles, half of them automobiles, by the end of the decade.
Increasingly, the cars would go to individual consumers; in the past the emphasis had been on larger vehicles like mini-vans that could move groups of people.


Ads for Leasing Eased on Radio
The radio industry has won some long-sought relief from requirements that advertising for leasing disclose all the "fine print" during its time on the air.
A provision of the interstate banking bill signed into law by President Clinton earlier this month revises the rules for advertising leases on the radio, allowing stations to provide toll-free telephone numbers during the ads that consumers can call for additional information and leasing details.


Haiti: Stop the Beatings
The events of the last two days illustrate how easy it is for military interventions into political crises to go badly wrong, even in a country with no serious military capability.
That lesson should not be lost.
The Senate Republicans who called for speedy return of American forces by a date certain are right in principle, even if the extrication will take longer than they admit.
No Administration should ever again dispatch American forces so recklessly and with such disregard of majority opinion.
Now that American forces are in Haiti, however, they must behave responsibly as well as prudently.
As wary as the American people were of getting involved, they will not tolerate U.S. forces standing by while people are beaten to death.


Senate Praises Clinton on Haiti But Urges U.S. Withdrawal Soon
The Senate voted today, 94 to 5, to commend President Clinton for avoiding bloodshed in Haiti, to express support for the American troops and to urge a withdrawal of forces "as soon as possible." But the lopsided vote could not obscure the solid opposition of Republicans to the President's policy in Haiti and the qualms felt by many Democrats.
The resolution the Senate approved was a compromise carefully written by the leaders of the two parties so senators could vote for it comfortably and still criticize the Government's policy.
The House of Representatives approved a similar resolution on Monday.


A Cherished Legacy
To The Home Section:
Barbara Flanagan's article about Puerto Rico's architectural legacy  [ "Uncertain Future for Island's Legacy," Aug. 25 ]  was relevant to me for several reasons:


Mother's Fight for Son Loses to Lure of Streets
Cherise Wade saw the blood on the television news Tuesday, her boy's blood, dripping down the steps of a Brooklyn housing project.
Later, numb with grief, she went to the project to see the stains for herself.
The seventh-floor stairwell of the Sumner Houses in Bedford-Stuyvesant had already been scrubbed clean of any evidence of Gregory Wright's murder.
It was, Ms.
Wade said yesterday, as if the brief and troubled life of her 13-year-old son had been erased before she could begin to absorb the news of his death.
She had always feared she would lose him to the streets, she said.
But she never expected that it would be so soon.


Integrated Micro Products
The American depository receipts of Integrated Micro Products, a British telecommunications supplier, tumbled yesterday after the company said it would report lower-than-expected revenue for the fiscal year ending this month.


Hostage to Our Genes?
The announcement of the discovery of the gene responsible for inherited breast and ovarian cancer poses broad questions: will the discovery be used to benefit society, or could it have adverse and unpredictable consequences?
The past few years have seen the isolation of genes responsible for common hereditary diseases like cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease and fragile X syndrome, a form of mental retardation.
With each new discovery, the potential uses and abuses of these genetic tests have become clearer.


Scientist Says Tests Show New Vaccine May Prevent Malaria
In the 16 years he has conducted basic research on malaria, Brian Greenwood's hopes have risen and fallen with the announcement of each new strategy or treatment to conquer one of Africa's deadliest scourges.
But with tests under way here on a chemically engineered vaccine against the malarial parasite, expectations have never been higher that an effective means of prevention may finally be at hand.


Cigarettes That Go Out
To the Editor:
Re "13 Fire Chiefs Call for 'Fire-Safe' Cigarette" (news article, Sept. 19): Rather than redesign the cigarette, an idea resisted by the tobacco industry, why not just stop adding the chemicals to the tobacco that cause cigarettes to keep burning?


Market Place; Will those royalties to Texas Instruments continue to pour in?
WHEN investors buy Texas Instruments, they have come to recognize that they are not just getting a chip maker.
They are also getting a law firm.
The company's legal staff, with about 50 lawyers working on patents alone, generated $521 million in royalty payments last year through threats, lawsuits and negotiations, three times as much as in 1990.


New Fossils Take Science Close to Dawn of Humans
Fossils of the oldest human ancestors have been discovered in Ethiopia, where these apelike creatures lived 4.4 million years ago on a forested flood plain.
Not only do they represent an entirely new species, scientists said, but they also may well be the long-sought relatives who lived close to the fateful time when the lineages leading to modern apes and Homo sapiens went their separate ways.
"The discovery of these ancient fossils and their context signals a major step in our understanding of human origins," Dr.
Tim D. White, a paleontologist at the University of California at Berkeley, said yesterday in an announcement of the findings.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Wave Hill Recuperating
It's been a rough summer for Wave Hill Garden in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
A fire in late May destroyed much of the garden equipment and the old stone building in which it was stored.
But thanks to contributions of tools and funds, the horticultural crew has the grounds blooming as beautifully as ever.


Bipartisan Group Nearly Ready To Give Up on Health Care Bill
Senator George J. Mitchell and the senators who devised a bipartisan health care bill are close to giving up their effort after learning that they lack enough votes to block a filibuster against the plan.
Senator John H. Chafee of Rhode Island, the Republican leader of the bipartisan group, told Mr.
Mitchell, the Democratic majority leader, on Tuesday evening that he could not count on even the votes of all the 10 Republicans in the group.
By one account, Mr.
Chafee said he was sure of only four votes, including his own.


Please Don't Spill the Paint
SCHREUDER interior and exterior enamel is dear: $68 for 2.5 liters (2.64 quarts), three times the price of the best American enamel.
But the Dutch paint is said to keep its looks for up to 12 years.
Clem Labine, the editor of Traditional Building magazine, swears by it.
"Sublime," he said of the door of his Park Slope brownstone, which was spruced up last year with Schreuder's black.


Geritol Sees Critical Film As a Potential Pick-Me-Up
One of the most seen, and most maligned, characters in "Quiz Show," the new film about the television quiz-show scandals of the 1950's, is a product rather than a person.
But the marketers of the product, like anyone under fire, are seeking to exploit the unwanted attention to their own advantage.
Geritol, the venerable iron and vitamin tonic that was a hugely popular, heavily advertised brand during that decade, is portrayed in "Quiz Show" almost as negatively as the human miscreants who fixed the NBC program "Twenty-One," which Geritol sponsored.


Sports of The Times; The Stokes Center Is Still That
UNBELIEVABLE is one of today's most misused words.
Most events that prompt people to say, "Unbelievable!" are, on second thought, most believable.
The baseball shutdown, for example.
But to those who remembered Maurice Stokes, the headlines over the weekend were truly unbelievable: St.
Francis College in Loretto, Pa., was removing Maurice Stokes's name from its athletic center and renaming it the DeGol Arena after a local businessman who had donated $2 million to the school 85 miles east of Pittsburgh.


INSIDE
China Rushes to Make Cars
China is rushing to double automobile output, despite congestion and pollution, and Western auto makers are vying to participate.
Page D1.
U.N.
Reports Serbian Flights
The United Nations said helicopters had flown from Serbia to Serb-held land in Bosnia, violating a flight ban.
NATO disputed the report.
Page A3.


Arts Critic To Create A Summer Festival
Lincoln Center yesterday named John Rockwell, an arts critic and writer for The New York Times, to be the director of a new summer performance festival.
Mr.
Rockwell will have overall responsibility for the new festival, which is to be held annually starting in 1996.
As yet unnamed, the three-to-four-week festival is to include classical music concerts, contemporary music and dance presentations, stage works and non-Western arts.


Simpson's Attempt to Bar Evidence Is Turned Down
A judge refused today to throw out evidence obtained with a search warrant from O. J. Simpson's estate even though he said that detectives had showed "reckless disregard for the truth" in getting the search warrant the day after the murders of Mrs.
Simpson's former wife and her friend.
The judge, Lance A. Ito, cited a series of misstatements made in an affidavit to establish reasonable cause to search Mr.
Simpson's estate in the Brentwood section after the bodies of Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend, Ronald L. Goldman, were found slashed and stabbed to death outside her home.


Groark Joins Connecticut Election Fray
After sitting on the sidelines during the Republican and Democratic primary campaigns, Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark, the nominee of A Connecticut Party, took center stage today in the first debate among the five gubernatorial candidates.
While her four opponents provided examples of the state's economic malaise, Ms.
Groark, who has spent the summer impatiently listening to criticism of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker's administration, dismissed it as the talk of desperate candidates willing to say anything to get elected.


Corrections
A chart yesterday with an article about the state and local tax burden in New York referred incorrectly in some editions to the average per capita local tax in New York.
It is $1,870, not $1,359.


From the Shores of Haiti Into Hearts of the People
A small drama unfolded this morning at the crowded main traffic circle here, where half a dozen United States marines stood sentry in two light armored tanks surrounded by concertina wire.
As two Haitian soldiers approached on foot, two M-16-toting marines in battle dress hopped down and walked to the edge of the wire.
Haitians and Americans eyed each other in tense silence as the Haitian soldiers strode through the suddenly hushed crowd and up the road.
As they left, a lusty cheer and waves of clapping suddenly erupted from the people.


Rejecting New York City's Bid, Bank to Move to Connecticut
The Swiss Bank Corporation, rejecting offers of tax incentives to keep 1,500 workers in Manhattan, said yesterday that it would move 1,300 of those workers to a new office tower it planned to build in downtown Stamford, Conn.
Swiss Bank, an investment banking concern, said it would hire an additional 700 workers, bringing total employment in Stamford to 2,000 when the new building opens in 1998.


CHRONICLE
The theme of the New England String Ensemble's debut concert on Saturday was "Music Journey Into Night," but the musicians could hardly have guessed how appropriate that title would be.
The 25-piece orchestra was deep into Mozart's "Eine Kleine Nachtmusik" in the Endicott College auditorium in Beverly, Mass., when the lights flickered and died, a result of lightning's having struck a transformer outside the building earlier in the day.


A Burst Water Pipe Shuts Down a New Jersey Courthouse


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday about the health care negotiations in Washington was incomplete.
In addition to Representative Thomas S. Foley and Senator George J. Mitchell, the picture showed Robin Webb, Mr.
Foley's deputy press secretary, and Mary Ann Hill, Mr.
Mitchell's deputy press secretary.


For Insurers, a Black Hole Looms
Despite the expected reform by Congress of the Federal Superfund law that will partly limit the liability of insurance companies for cleaning up the nation's largest hazardous-waste sites, insurers remain vulnerable to billions of dollars in claims from thousands of other sites.
At the very least, the remaining claims will reduce the profits of insurers, causing them to draw on the capital they have to absorb unexpected losses.
At the worst, the claims could force some companies into bankruptcy or mergers.


Calendar: Tours, Talks, Seminars, a Symposium
A Tour in Brooklyn  The Church of the Good Shepherd, 7420 Fourth Avenue (near 75th Street), Brooklyn; (718) 836-2087.
Seven brownstone, Queen Anne- and Dutch Colonial-style houses in the Bay Ridge neighborhood, some with gardens, will be included on a self-guided tour on Sunday, from 1 to 5 P.M.
Tickets, $15.


Barbara Fassbinder, 40, Nurse With AIDS Traced to Her Job
Barbara Fassbinder, one of the first health care professionals to be infected with the AIDS virus while on the job, died on Tuesday at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics in Iowa City.
She was 40 and lived in Monona, Iowa.
The cause was complications from AIDS, the hospital said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $50 million of medium-term floating-rate notes due in 1995 through Lehman Brothers.
The notes float daily and pay quarterly at the prime rate minus 285 basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent.
The notes are priced at par.  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $200 million of notes due in 1997 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes, which are callable in one year, carry an interest rate of 7.05 percent and are priced at par.


Journal; Holier Than Whom?
Faced with the religious right's steady abduction of the Republican Party's nominating machinery, almost every G.O.P.
Presidential candidate turned up to kiss Pat Robertson's ring at the Christian Coalition's "Road to Victory" conference last week.
But can anyone really win the Presidency by opposing a woman's right to an abortion, vilifying gay people and promising to bring prayer and creationism to public schools?
Not likely.
Which is why the two-day meeting at the Washington Hilton was more schizophrenic than spiritual.


Rev. Daniel N. Corrigan, Fighter For Peace and Rights, Dies at 93


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.70
3.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
4.60
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.07
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.56
7.51
5.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.80
7.77
6.09
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.63
8.59
7.14
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.52
6.52
5.49
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Essay; Jimmy Clinton, II
With lust in his heart for a Nobel Prize, Jimmy Carter undermined Bill Clinton's resolve and turned a triumph of American strength in Haiti into a fiasco of wimpish indecision.
Here is what the last-minute flinch shows us about Mr. Clinton:
1.
He does moral flip-flops with the greatest of ease.
On Thursday, Clinton was portraying the Haitian dictator as a murderer and tyrant; three days later, the thug became a man of honor, and worse, our partner in cracking skulls.


Arthur B. Krim, 89, Ex-Chief of Movie Studios
Arthur B. Krim, an entertainment lawyer and former chairman of Orion Pictures and United Artists, died in his sleep early yesterday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 84.
He had suffered a long illness, said Barbara Handman, a friend of his family.


Despite Chaos in Mogadishu, U.N. Hopes New Talks Will Bring Peace
Somali militiamen attacked a company of Zimbabwean peacekeepers recently, stripped them to their underwear and stole their guns, vehicles and even their boots.
In the capital, Mogadishu, Somali crowds encircled the World Food Program headquarters and held its occupants hostage for two days.
Gunmen surrounding a United Nations compound in southern Mogadishu have told officials they will be obliged to surrender all their equipment, from cars to computers, when they leave.
Last week, the United States Embassy closed because of worsening security.
And this week, heavy factional fighting broke out in Mogadishu with recoilless rifles and heavy machine guns.


Crystal Gets A Real Job
NOTHING says "rich" quite like crystal.
Which explains why the designer Andree Putman, the doyenne of suave, affordable modernism, raised an eyebrow when Baccarat came calling.
"They do expensive things that look pretty but do nothing," Ms.
Putman said.
"I said, 'Let us be modest and practical.' " To her delight, she added, the French company was "incredibly open to my -- how do you say it? -- disrespect."


The G.I.'s and the 'Rules of Engagement'
The American forces in Haiti are governed at every turn by a detailed set of instructions known as "rules of engagement," which seek to limit and to explain when they may use force and how much they may use.
The rules are usually kept secret and are always hard to explain; and they can easily dominate the public debate over military operations, especially when a mission is vaguely defined or politically subtle.


Meggett May Be Worth His Abilities in Gold
His exploits on the field have earned him the nickname Super Dave.
He runs.
He passes.
He plays with sore ribs.
David Meggett even has the cool-and-calm Dan Reeves to give him a big, fat hug after a game.
It has only been three games in a 16-game season, but if Meggett keeps putting the Giants on his back and carrying them to victories, he will not only be Super Dave but also Rich Dave.
That's because at the end of this season, when Meggett's two-year deal expires with the Giants, he just might be one of the most attractive free agents on the market.
Some think he might be the most attractive.


Forget Slot Machines: Look to a Super Horse
In horse racing, a business desperately searching for success these days, they have casinos, card rooms, riverboats, slot machines, simulcasts, the Pick Six and the Best Seven.
But they need the one thing that creates success in any business trying to capture the public's fancy: a hero who stars in a dramatic story line.
Now they have it: the imposing gray horse who came thundering down the homestretch in one major race after another this year and turned back the clock 21 years to the days when Secretariat was the hero who captured the public's fancy.
And the horse who did it was Holy Bull, who outran his pedigree as well as his opposition and who did it with theatrical flair, flying out of the starting gate into the lead and holding it with command, daring them all to "catch me if you can."


Saudi Arabia Cracks Down on Islamic Militants, Seizing Many
The Saudi authorities have cracked down on militant Muslims, arresting an undetermined number in a series of confrontations that began three weeks ago when Muslim leaders forced the Government to boycott the United Nations Conference on Population and Development in Cairo.
Last week, militants staged demonstrations demanding the release of jailed Islamic leaders, but foreign diplomats and Islamic militants provided conflicting reports on the number of people involved, and the Saudi Government has been reticent.


Now Sashaying Down Design's Runway . . .


Masur and the Philharmonic: A Comfortable Partnership
When Kurt Masur began his fourth season as the music director of the Philharmonic with a gala concert last night in Avery Fisher Hall, it was clear that this season's opening was finally presenting an orchestra and a conductor at home with each other.
There was nothing either had to prove.
And while a fair amount of ordinary musicianship was mixed in with some glorious moments, the event gave off an aura of comfortable seriousness.
Yo-Yo Ma joined the orchestra, displaying consummate musicianship in cello works by Tchaikovsky and Boccherini.
Mr.
Masur showed off the robust sweetness of his ensemble in the Overture to Weber's "Oberon." And the opening movement of Bartok's "Concerto for Orchestra" bristled with energy and imagination.


Player an Ancient and Royal Member
GARY PLAYER has accepted an invitation to become only the 11th honorary member of the Royal and Ancient Club, golf's governing body, it was announced yesterday at St.
Andrews, Scotland.


Birthplace of Human Race Was Not Exactly an Eden
Humankind's earliest known direct ancestors, newly discovered in Ethiopia, lived 4.4 million years ago in richly forested surroundings on a flat tropical flood plain abounding in wildlife.
But it was no Eden: Before being fossilized the skulls of these early hominids were crushed into fragments by carnivorous animals.
The picture of the environment inhabited by Australopithecus ramidus, as the new species of hominid has been named, emerges from an extensive collection and evaluation of fossilized plants and animals that also occupied the Middle Awash region of Ethiopia when the earliest ape-man lived there.
The picture suggests that this forebear of the species that today dominates Earth was in many ways nothing special, certainly not the most abundant of large life forms of its time and place, or the most powerful.


Cards Drop Maxvill as General Manager
The St.
Louis Cardinals' general manager, DAL MAXVILL, who failed to lead the team into post-season play his last seven seasons, was fired yesterday.
The team president, MARK LAMPING, who has been on the job only about three weeks, had no specific reasons for the move, other than the fact Maxvill couldn't produce a winner.
"I don't think any of us were satisfied that we haven't had post-season play here since 1987," Lamping said.
"I don't think in the world of sports you're ever going to be able to go down a check list. It came down to a gut call. Dal understands our position."
Maxvill, who was signed through next season, and the Texas Rangers' general manager, TOM GRIEVE, have been fired since the strike ended the season.
Kansas City Manager HAL McRAE and Boston Red Sox Manager BUTCH HOBSON have also been let go.


Former U.N. Envoy Deplores Haiti Accord
The former United Nations envoy to Haiti, Dante Caputo, who resigned his position last week, said today that he had grave concerns over the last-minute Haitian-American accord that allows the Haitian military to remain in the Caribbean nationas United States troops arrive.
In interviews with local and international news organizations here this week, Mr.
Caputo, a former Foreign Minister of Argentina, has assailed the Clinton Administration for failing to obtain written assurances that Haiti's military leaders will leave the country.


Northrop To Cut 8,650 Positions
In a response to the nation's shrinking military budget that will strike the economies of Long Island and California, the Northrop Grumman Corporation said today that it would reduce its work force by 8,650 jobs, or more than 18 percent, by the end of 1995.
Consultants to military contractors and Wall Street analysts viewed the development as necessary for the newly combined company to survive in a fast-consolidating industry.
"This is a healthy response as defense revenues shrink and it is the only way to justify the merger -- to cut costs," Robert Paulson, head of the aerospace practice for McKinsey &amp; Company, a management consultant firm, said.
In May, the Grumman Corporation and the Northrop Corporation merged in a $2.1 billion deal.
"It shows that management is getting on with the business."


What's Playing When at the Film Festival
The 32d New York Film Festival opens tonight with two screenings of Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction" and closes on Oct. 9 with "Hoop Dreams," a documentary by Steve James, Frederick Marx and Peter Gilbert.
The festival, presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, includes 27 programs representing 20 countries.
All films are shown at Alice Tully Hall except the late show tonight and the closing-night screening on Oct. 9, which are at Avery Fisher Hall, and a screening of "Satantango" on Oct. 9 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
Many screenings are sold out, although a few tickets may be returned.
Tickets are $7 and $10 at the Alice Tully Hall box office, (212) 875-5050; tickets for opening and closing nights are $15 and $25.
Unless otherwise noted, the films were made this year.


Judge Assails News Report On Simpson
In an unusually sharp courtroom rebuke, the judge in the O. J. Simpson murder case denounced the news media today for what he said was an inaccurate report that blood found on socks in Mr.
Simpson's house matched the blood of his former wife.
"For this kind of information to come out and for it to be incorrect and to be so prejudicial is outrageous; it's irresponsible, " said the angered judge, Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles County Superior Court.
He said he was considering taking some kind of action because of the report, which originated with a Los Angeles television station on Wednesday.


Friends Recall How Gerulaitis Loved Humor
At a funeral in which grief was softened by humor, Vitas Gerulaitis was remembered yesterday as an elfin spirit whose tennis triumphs were overshadowed by his conquests of friendship.
Among the more than 500 mourners who gathered at St.
Dominic's Church in Oyster Bay, L.I., were famous friends from the world of tennis, among them John McEnroe, Bjorn Borg, Jimmy Connors, Billie Jean King, Tony Trabert, Jack Kramer, Bill Talbert, Chris Evert, Fred Stolle and Mary Carillo.


Stop and Go and the Police Officer Who Says Which and When
When Brian O'Connor dreamed of becoming a policeman, standing in the middle of Greenwich Avenue blowing his whistle and yelling "You can cross now" was not what he had in mind.
The 26-year-old officer is often asked why he is on Greenwich's main shopping boulevard wearing a neon-green mesh vest over his navy polyester uniform, motioning cars forward or holding them back with an outstretched hand.


Supervalu Inc.(SVU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


Micron Technology Inc.(MU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


Inside Art
Reina Sofia Head Discharged
Maria de Corral has been dismissed as the director of the Reina Sofia Art Center, Spain's national museum of contemporary art in Madrid.
Miss de Corral, who had run the museum for nearly four years, had a reputation for mounting retrospectives of cutting-edge artists, including Bruce Nauman, Lucian Freud and Gerhard Richter.
The problem was, her mission could not have been more different from that of Carmen Alborch, Spain's Minister of Culture since July 1993, who oversees the museum.
"Mrs. Alborch had lost confidence in Maria," said a spokesman for the culture minister in a telephone interview yesterday.
"The two were not compatible." She dismissed Miss de Corral last Friday.


London Hit By Criticism For Attacks On Pataki
A day after Herbert London, the Republican comptroller candidate, declared his independence from the head of his own ticket, he got a taste of what independence means: a donor canceled a $10,000 check, a fund-raising event was put into jeopardy and supporters asked why Mr.
London would endanger party unity with his attack on State Senator George E. Pataki.
But Mr.
London seemed unrepentant.
While saying yesterday that he did not intend "an unfriendly act," he repeated his criticism that Mr.
Pataki, the party's gubernatorial candidate, had failed to outline a substantial plan for cutting taxes and spending.
And his campaign manager, Jim Dillon, refused to say whether Mr.
London would unequivocally support Mr.
Pataki's candidacy.


The Annenberg Gift to New York Schools
In the next five years, New York City will receive $100 million to start 50 experimental schools.
A $50 million grant from the Annenberg Foundation, to be matched by grants from public and other private sources, should help entrench some important reforms that are now exceptions.
Most of the money will go to high schools, to replace or break up existing large schools.
Many of those schools resemble factories.
Students often feel anonymous and become apathetic; many perform poorly and eventually drop out.


N.C.A.A. Uses Bad Statistics, Group Says
An independent group of academics agreed today that statistics used by the National Collegiate Athletic Association to determine academic eligibility for prospective student-athletes are flawed.
The group, the Scientific Conference on Re-examination of the Academic Performance Study, discussed its preliminary findings at a news conference with members of the Black Coaches Association and Rep.
Cardiss Collins, Democrat of Illinois, chairwoman of the House subcommittee on commerce, consumer protection and competitiveness.


New Publisher For Playboy
Richard Kinsler, a former publisher of New York and Mademoiselle, has been named publisher of Playboy, effective Monday.
Mr.
Kinsler replaces Michael S. Perlis, who became publisher of Details last month.
Unlike Mr.
Perlis, Mr.
Kinsler will not carry the title of president of Playboy Enterprises Publishing Group.
Christie Hefner, chairwoman and chief executive of Playboy Enterprises Inc., which is based in Chicago, said in an announcement that the publishing group had been reorganized and a new president would be named later.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CRH P.L.C., Dublin, a building materials company, acquired A. Rotondo &amp; Sons Inc., a supplier of precast concrete to telephone and utility companies in the Northeastern region of the United States, for $22.5 million.
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP., Maynard, Mass., said it had agreed to sell a mill complex in Maynard, Mass., to privately held Franklin Lifecare Corp.
Terms were not disclosed.


You Can Take the Star Out of the Series but. . . .
A fixture of any new television season is the television movie showcasing stars of weekly series.
The system has a tendency to feed on itself.
On NBC alone, Dennis Franz ("N.Y.P.D. Blue") has popped up in "Moment of Truth: Caught in the Crossfire," while on Monday at 9 P.M.
"A Friend to Die For" will feature Tori Spelling ("Beverly Hills 90210") and Kellie Martin ("Christy").
And on Sunday at 9 P.M., Kelsey Grammer, the recent winner of an Emmy Award along with his comedy series "Frasier," goes for a dramatic change of pace in "The Innocent." Well, maybe this will help him get such urges out of his system.
In five minutes, the entire plot of "The Innocent" is groaningly clear.
Nine-year-old Gregory White, played quite ably by Keegan Macintosh, the season's first Macaulay Culkin look-alike, is the only survivor of a violent robbery, the latest atrocity by a pair of dimwitted sadists who try not to leave witnesses.
The investigating detective is Lieut.
Frank Barlow.
This is where Mr.
Grammer comes in, not entirely persuasive in adjusting his familiar patrician tones to tough-cop cadences.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.87
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.77
4.78
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.17
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.53
7.56
5.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.80
6.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.59
8.63
7.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.53
6.52
5.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Lois/USA, never a quiet voice on Madison Avenue, tries to make a splash on Wall Street, too.
GEORGE LOIS wants to go public.
There are those, of course, who would assert that Mr.
Lois, the flamboyant and voluble creator of well-known campaigns like "I want my MTV" and "Make time for Time," has never been particularly private.
In this instance, though, the reference is to his intention to sell stock in his agency, Lois/USA, to the public.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE BURNS went home from Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles yesterday, to continue recuperating from surgery to drain fluid from his brain, The Associated Press reported.


550 Agents' Jobs to Be Cut At Airline
American Airlines said yesterday that it would contract out the work of 550 agents at 30 airports, a move that American said will save it $35 million next year.
Big airlines have been trying to cut costs for years, but American's move is noteworthy because it addresses an area that airlines have been generally reluctant to touch: employees who deal directly with customers.
After all, airlines have long cultivated identities based on the service their employees provide.


Fisk Offered a Coaching Job by Red Sox
The Boston Red Sox have offered their former catcher CARLTON FISK a coaching job within the organization.
Fisk, who grew up in New Hampshire and now lives in a Chicago suburb, and his agent, JACK SANDS, met this week with the Red Sox owner, JOHN HARRINGTON, and General Manager DAN DUQUETTE to discuss a coaching position.
Duquette did not say whether the job involves coaching in the minor leagues or with Boston.


Value of Ruble Plunges


Gifts and Gridlock
Facing an election that could turn out very badly for them, the Democrats who run Congress have begun to address voters' anger about the way they take gifts and money.
Yesterday, the leadership announced agreement on a lobbying reform bill that would ban most of the meals, resort vacations and other gifts from seekers of influence.
This is an accomplishment, given the devotion on both sides of the aisle to cherished perks.
The measure, which is expected to pass both chambers, is not perfect, and the fine print may turn up new problems.
But none of this obscures the bill's central achievement.
It pushes lawmakers to change their lobbyist-subsidized life styles.


Abortion Clinic Workers Say Law Is Being Ignored
People who work at abortion clinics told Congress today that they and their patients were still being subjected to violence and harassment because neither Federal nor state officials had done much to enforce a new Federal law that guarantees free access to the clinics.
But opponents of abortion testified that the law was deterring peaceful protesters from the exercise of rights to free speech that are protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution.


Sounds Around Town
American Music Club
American Music Club, St.
Etienne, Grant Lee Buffalo, Soul Coughing; Manhattan Center Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street, (212) 249-8870.
The CMJ Music Marathon is in town this weekend, turning most rock clubs into band-crammed showcases that start early and run into the wee hours.
The only connection between these four bands is that they record for Warner Brothers and its associated labels.
American Music Club (at 10:40 P.M.) is a lodestone for depressives, with Mark Eitzel's bleary, self-lacerating ruminations set in rock that's sometimes crisp and sometimes dreamy and atmospheric.
Soul Coughing (8:50) backs M. Doughty's free-associative poetry and an occasional melodic chorus with jazz vamps and sampled noises.
Grant Lee Buffalo (9:40), a three-man rock band led by Grant Lee Phillips, gazes at Americana with a literary eye in songs that move from folk-rock to Neil Young stomps to late-Beatles pop, while St.
Etienne (11:50) creates a swirling, post-disco reverie.
The show is tonight, beginning at 8.
Admission: $13.50.
JON PARELES Jeff Buckley
Jeff Buckley, Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, Manhattan, (212) 249-8870.
Jeff Buckley's eerie, liquid, androgynous voice can't help reminding people of his father, Tim Buckley.
But he uses it to personalize his own emotionally volatile songs, which drift from pained delicacy to hard rock on the verge of Led Zeppelin.
In a CMJ showcase, he shares a bill with Tindersticks, whose understated songs can take on an edge of dissonance.
Tomorrow at 7 P.M.; tickets are $10.
J.
P.
Roosevelt (Booba) Barnes
Roosevelt (Booba) Barnes, Chicago Blues, 73 Eighth Avenue, at 14th Street, West Village, (212) 924-9755.
Roosevelt Barnes comes from the juke joints of Mississippi, and he plays unvarnished Delta blues: a spiky, syncopated dialogue between his electric guitar and his deep, unflinching voice, finding new resonances in the classic blues subjects of trouble and pleasure.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 9:30, 11 and 12:30.
Admission: $10 cover charge and a two-drink minimum at the tables.
J.
P.


GenCorp Inc.(GY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Study Says Schools Must Stress Academics
Saying that the American educational system is failing the nation's employers, a leading business organization called today for a new emphasis on basic academic training at the expense of social goals and services.
The Committee for Economic Development, an organization of executives at about 250 large corporations, called for an end to efforts to incorporate mentally and physically handicapped children in regular classrooms, and urged educators to move away from providing social services like pregnancy counseling, AIDS information and drivers' education classes.
The group also said schools should not be battlegrounds over ideological issues like abortion, homosexuality and creationism.


Dr. Donald M. Kaplan, 67, Dies; Psychoanalyst Taught at N.Y.U.
Dr.
Donald M. Kaplan, a psychoanalyst and professor of psychology at New York University, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 67 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was an aortic aneurysm, said Dr. Mark Grunes, a colleague at N.Y.U.


Suicidal Police Officers Don't Get Medication
To the Editor:
Richard Dresselhuys (letter, Sept. 16) attributes most of the fourfold difference in suicide rates between police officers and the general population to the ready availability of firearms to police officers.
In doing so, he distills the entire focus of the antigun lobby into one paragraph.


Dorothy Dehner, 92, Sculptor With a Lyrically Surreal Style
Dorothy Dehner, a gifted sculptor of Surrealist and geometric abstractions in bronze and wood, whose professional career began in the 1950's after a stormy marriage to David Smith, the New York School artist, was found dead yesterday in a stairwell outside her apartment in Manhattan.
She was 92.
Her dealer, Susan Teller, said yesterday that the cause of death had not yet been determined.


On My Mind; Men of Honor
The lives of four men, two American and two Haitian, came together briefly in Port-au-Prince, but long enough to show the world the truths about Haiti, its military rulers and the one special nightmare of those who live under tyranny.
None of the four intended to reveal those truths, or even speak them.
The Americans, former President Carter and Gen.
Colin Powell, were doing the opposite.
They were so intent on agreement with the Haitian generals that they spoke a terrible falsehood.


Art in Review
Patrick Nagatani
Jayne H. Baum Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 15
Patrick Nagatani continues to appear in many of his complex collage-like photographs.
In one work, he watches himself play solitaire on a table suspended in the air, against a wall papered with playing cards; in another, his photograph appears among a grid of R. Crumb's trading cards of famous blues guitarists, with a goose flying away in the foreground.


At the Bar; A vexing legal question: when can Presidents ignore Congress and unslip the dogs of war?
In May 1801, President Thomas Jefferson dispatched a small fleet to the Mediterranean Sea to crush the Barbary pirates who were raiding American ships and demanding payments as tribute.
In the florid language of the times, he ordered an American naval commander to seek out the pirates and "chastise their insolence by sinking, burning or destroying their ships and vessels wherever you shall find them."
Yet, when an American ship seized a Barbary corsair three months later, Jefferson reassured Congress that he did not intend to wage a full war because he was "unauthorized by the Constitution without the sanction of Congress to go beyond the line of defense."


Exel Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Hextall Leaves Isles In Swap Of Goalies
Don Maloney decided he did not want to hear the chants of "Hextall! Hextall!" anymore.
Yesterday, Maloney, the Islanders' general manager, said that he had made a mistake in acquiring Ron Hextall from Quebec in the summer of 1993.
So, Maloney shipped the goaltender back to his original National Hockey League team, the Philadelphia Flyers, with the Islanders' sixth selection in next year's draft, for a 25-year-old Swedish goalie, Tommy Soderstrom.


DIALOGUE: The Reach of Democracy; Cold War Games Again
The intervention in Haiti is most disturbing for what it says about the Administration's post-cold-war strategy as defined by Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser.
To Mr.
Lake, America is involved in an extension of the struggle for democracy and against authoritarianism that began with World War II and continued in the cold war.
As in those conflicts, the struggle is Manichean: the forces of evil (rogue states, terrorists, tribalists) against the forces of good (democracies, tolerant societies).


Sports of The Times; The Owners Strike Out On Hill, Too
LIKE a Lee Smith or a Goose Gossage, Rep.
Melvin L. Watt, Democrat of North Carolina, came into the game in the ninth inning, throwing the best smoke of the day.
"Give me something to hang onto," Watt pleaded with Bud Selig, the acting commissioner of baseball, trying to get Selig to explain why baseball has been exempted from antitrust legislation for, lo, these past 72 years.


House and Senate Conferees Agree on Rules for Lobbyists
For the first time in nearly 50 years, Senate and House negotiators have agreed on a major overhaul of lobbying on Capitol Hill, banning lobbyists from paying for gifts lavish or lowly, whether resort vacations or the ubiquitous fruit basket.
But even as the agreement was announced, Republicans took to the floor of the Senate in an effort to block another piece of legislation aimed at making changes in campaign financing.
This bill would allow partial public financing of Congressional elections and limit the amount spent by candidates.


Infighting in the Grand Old Party; Nassau County Republican Leaders Are Making a Public Display of Their Dissension
Within the clubby ranks of the Nassau County Republican party, an organization that has held a virtual lock on government here for half a century and is the home base of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, public dissension is virtually unheard of.
But now, to the amazement of friends and foes alike, the party's two top leaders are at each other's throat, trading accusations of treachery and betrayal and -- even more astonishingly -- doing it in public.
"His word doesn't mean a hill of beans," the county's party chairman, Joseph N. Mondello, said of Thomas S. Gulotta, the County Executive, during an interview in which he criticized virtually every aspect of Mr.
Gulotta's seven-year record.
"And he can't make decisions. The guy can't decide when to go to the bathroom."


On Stage, and Off
Can 'Molly Sweeney' Be Far Behind?
This is shaping up as Brian Friel's year.
"Dancing at Lughnasa," his comic turn on five spinsters left out of a village's pagan rite, was a 1991 hit and is now one of the most popular plays on the regional theater circuit.
The revival of his 1964 play "Philadelphia, Here I Come!" opened on Sept. 8 at the Criterion Center, and is doing so well that its run has been extended.
His 1980 play, "Translations," is due on Broadway in mid-March.
His latest at the Gate Theater in Dublin, "Molly Sweeney," about a blind massage therapist who briefly recovers her sight, got a glowing review from David Richards of The New York Times just before "Philadelphia" opened.
One would think the push would be on to bring "Molly Sweeney" to Broadway as soon as possible to capitalize on the excitement.
On the contrary.
"I'd be reluctant to do that," Mr.
Friel's agent, Jack Tantleff, said.
"It would be right on the heels of 'Translations.' I have this theory that regular theatergoers will go to any number of musicals you put before them in a season, but only go to one play. Either you are that one big play of the year -- 'Sisters Rosensweig' or 'Lughnasa' -- or it's harder."


An Undercover Job: Viewing a Rainy Day


N.H.L. Warning: No Deal, No Season
Another sports labor confrontation turned threatening yesterday when National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman said the start of the season would be postponed unless the teams and the players settle on a new collective bargaining agreement.
"The absence of a collective bargaining agreement leaves us no choice," Bettman said, reading from prepared remarks during a conference telephone call with reporters.
Bettman said starting the season as scheduled on Oct. 1 without a new contract would put the "season at risk" because management would be vulnerable to a strike during the season, similar to what happened in baseball.


Mourning a Tennis Star, and Friend


President Is Ready to Move On White House Shake-Up
After months of discussions about shaking up the White House staff, President Clinton is about to make changes that may sideline its most prominent woman but would, in the view of some officials there, fail to resolve the communications shortcomings that prompted the moves.
In the most public shift, Dee Dee Myers, the White House's most visible female aide, is likely to be replaced as the chief spokeswoman by Michael D. McCurry, who is now chief spokesman at the State Department, Administration officials said today.


Compuserve Backs Internet Leader
Compuserve Inc., the nation's largest consumer on-line service, said yesterday that it would announce today an equity investment in a one-year-old spinoff of Novell Inc. that provides Internet publishing services to commercial customers.
The company, Network Publishing Inc. of Provo, Utah, is one of only a handful that have expertise in conducting business on the Internet.
Compuserve will work with Network Publishing to help Compuserve's customers establish a presence on an area of the Internet known as the World Wide Web.
Together, the companies will help Internet customers manage security, perform customer billing and handle customer support, according to James Hogan, director of product marketing at Compuserve.


Congress Sends Baseball a Strong Message
Striking major league players turned into lobbyists today, blanketing Congress in their latest effort to have baseball's antitrust exemption repealed in areas of labor.
But the players' fervor paled in comparison to what they found to already exist on Capitol Hill: a blanket indictment of the exemption by many legislators angered by baseball's incessant labor wars.
The indictments, as well as an explicit call for baseball and its union to act before spring training, were both loudly stated in a hearing on the exemption by members of the House judiciary subcommittee on economics and commercial law.
For three and a half hours, players and owners heard members question the propriety of Congress allowing baseball to keep the immunity granted by the Supreme Court in 1922 because the sport was not deemed an interstate business.


Moses and Schmidt to Enter Hall of Fame
EDWIN MOSES, the 400-meter hurdler who won two Olympic gold medals and set the world record four times, was among four athletes elected yesterday to the National Track and Field Hall of Fame in Indianapolis.
Joining Moses were KATE SCHMIDT, the American record-holder in the javelin and two-time Olympic bronze medalist who is now battling ovarian cancer, and two deceased Olympic gold medalists: Lillian Copeland and Cornelius Johnson.


Araruama Journal; Inflation Fighter Smiling All the Way to the Polls
With less than two weeks to go before 100 million Brazilians are to turn out to elect a new President, the front-runner, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, would normally be immersed in a pounding countdown of mass rallies up and down Brazil's densely populated Atlantic Coast.
Instead, his campaign helicopter skimmed over the azure waters of the Sun Coast of Rio de Janeiro State today, alighting on the lawn of a hotel overlooking this isolated fishing and resort village.


Seoul's Show-Stoppers
Progress in nuclear diplomacy between the U.S. and North Korea could accelerate when talks resume today -- but not if South Korea's hard-liners get their way.
Their shrill opposition to accommodation could complicate Washington's efforts to make a deal with Pyongyang.
It also could delay North-South talks.
The hard-liners are playing on doubts about who is actually running North Korea following the death of Kim Il Sung.
They are also sowing doubts about how much bomb-making plutonium the North may have already produced.
The best way to lay those doubts to rest is to keep negotiating and see whether the North lives up to its commitments.


Cards' Ryan Expresses Interest in Simms
BUDDY RYAN, yet to win with the Arizona Cardinals or settle on a quarterback, now says he is interested in the former Giant PHIL SIMMS.
"I've got a call in to him right now," the coach said after practice yesterday.


Body Shop Again Criticized
Franklin Research and Development, the largest independent firm to specialize in socially responsible investing, which a few weeks ago sold its 50,000 shares of the Body Shop International, yesterday joined the critics of the cosmetics chain.
Questions over whether the Body Shop has lived up to its goals for environmental standards, use of natural ingredients, efforts to buy materials from indigenous people and fair treatment of franchisees have been raised in articles this month in three journals aimed at socially responsible investors.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about health care negotiations referred incorrectly in some editions to efforts to block a filibuster against compromise legislation.
Backers of the bill were seeking enough supporters to force a vote; they had not concluded that they could not get the votes.


After 334 Receptions, Giants' Jackson Catches Pink Slip
Mark Jackson read it in preseason and he read it in the regular season.
He read it on the field and on the depth chart.
The handwriting was never on the wall; it was always directly in front of the veteran wide receiver, a conspicuous little message from his employer:
Thanks for everything, but. . . .


Officer to Retire At Leo Burnett
Jack Smith, group president and deputy chief creative officer at the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, said yesterday that he would retire on Jan. 2 after 23 years with the agency.


La Quinta Plans Hotels In Mexico
La Quinta Inns announced plans today to open 22 of its moderately priced hotels in Mexico, and possibly as many as 50, to capitalize on increased trade, investment and travel.
La Quinta joins Radisson's Country Lodging chain, the Holiday Inn Express chain and the Mexican Fiesta Inns in trying to fill out the middle of the Mexican hotel industry.
Some big cities and resorts already have hotels, many owned by United States companies, that cost more than $100 a day.
Smaller places may have Spartan rooms for $25 a day or less.


Haagen-Dazs Splits With Its Agency
The Haagen-Dazs Company has placed its account in review after the company and BBDO New York, its agency of the last four years, mutually agreed to part ways.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million.


An Elegy for Lost Youth, With Hurts but Few Tears
Who Will Run the Frog Hospital?
By Lorrie Moore
147 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
From the very start, Lorrie Moore's generous gifts as a writer have been clear: a wry, distinctive voice, a gift for the telling detail and supersonic radar for the pretentious and the phony.
Although her first two books, a short-story collection called "Self-Help" (1985) and a slim elliptical novel called "Anagrams" (1986), were somewhat detached works that relied heavily on jokes and one-liners, her last collection, "Like Life" (1990), demonstrated a fresh new emotional spontaneity, a willingness to probe beneath the jazzy surface of life to the hurts and disappointments below.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, is selling $200 million of 7 percent medium-term notes due in 1997 and priced at 99.712 to yield 7.108 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated A1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of debentures due in 2001 through Morgan Stanley.
The debentures, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 7.61 percent and are priced at par.


National Service Industries(NSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The Changing Seasons of Cy Twombly
IS it Cy Twombly's moment?
When he showed in the mid-1950's in New York City, his work seemed an affront to Abstract Expressionism and was panned.
In the mid-60's, it was panned again, this time as too much like the Abstract Expressionists and not enough like what the Minimalists or Pop artists were doing.
The 70's told a similar story.
Mr.
Twombly, a native Virginian who has spent most of his time since the late 1950's living in Italy, has also spent much of his career out of sync with art in America.
The 80's brought change as his reputation here rose (along with prices for his works, into the millions of dollars) partly on the wave of renewed interest in contemporary European art, not to say in painting itself.
Still, he has remained a polarizing figure.
His admirers think he grapples with the great themes of antiquity, that he is a painter of strange but ecstatic poetry, and that he has miraculously bridged the gap between the New York School and the art of the present, in its mixing of words and images and of high and low, its taste for irony and its sexual content.
His detractors think he's a decorator, pretentious and empty.


Brooklyn Armored-Car Ambush Leaves Gunman Dead
A gunman waiting in ambush in the vestibule of a check-cashing store on bustling Brighton Beach Avenue in Brooklyn shot and wounded an armored-car guard shortly before noon yesterday, but was immediately killed when the guard returned fire, the police said.
Two other suspects escaped, speeding off in a maroon minivan, but without any money, the police said.


Tabasco Cat Draws the Inside Post Position for His Outside Shot at Year-End Honors
Remember Tabasco Cat?
First in the Preakness, first in the Belmont, second in the Jim Dandy, third in the Travers and still racing toward the Breeders' Cup Classic in one last bid to outrun Holy Bull for Horse of the Year.
He will pursue that bid tomorrow when he races Best Pal, West by West and three other horses in the Kentucky Cup Classic, a new route to the Breeders' Cup that is being inaugurated at Turfway Park in northern Kentucky.
They will run one mile and an eighth for a purse of $400,000.


Congress Keeps $40 Million for Pennsylvania Station in a Spending Bill
House and Senate negotiators agreed today to retain $40 million for a new Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan, clearing the way for final passage of the measure by Congress as part of a transportation spending bill for the fiscal year that starts Oct. 1.
The House had initially refused to vote any money for the project beyond the $10 million Congress approved earlier this year, while the Senate cut President Clinton's original request of $100 million in half.
On Tuesday, in a nonbinding vote, the House instructed its negotiators to fight against including any money in the pending bill for the project, which is expected to cost $315 million.


Oracle Systems Corp.(ORCL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lithuanian Calls for Remorse For Crimes Against Jews in War
In the first public effort by a Lithuanian leader to atone for crimes that Lithuanians committed against Jews in World II, Prime Minister Adolfas Slezevicius appeared on television today to urge citizens to acknowledge and repent for shameful aspects of their country's history.
"During World War II, over 200,000 Lithuanian Jews were killed," Mr.
Slezevicius said.
"Despite the fact that this Holocaust was the realization of Nazi policies in our country, we should recognize that hundreds of Lithuanians took direct part in this genocide. This obliges us to repent and ask the Jewish people for forgiveness.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Washington Talk; Both Parties Study the Lessons of '78
Politicians in both parties remember well the last time there was a midterm election with a Democrat in the White House.
It was 1978.
Republicans from coast to coast promised tax cuts.
The Democrats did not take them seriously.
The Republicans did not do so well that year, picking up only three seats in the Senate and 11 in the House.
But the tax cut idea took hold.
Two years later, Ronald Reagan rode it into the White House.
Republicans won control of the Senate and gained 33 seats in the House.


For Tati Fans
"The Heady Comedy of Jacques Tati," a retrospective featuring the writer, director and actor's five feature-length films, is a special feature of the New York Film Festival.
It will run tomorrow through Sept. 30 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
Admission to each feature is $7.50; $5 for Film Society members; $4 for the elderly at weekday matinees.
Information: (212) 875-5600.
Here is the schedule.
Tomorrow  "PLAYTIME" (1968), 2, 5 and 8 P.M.


Health Care Legislation in Senate Survives for Another Day
The lingering hopes for major health care legislation survived today for another day after several Republican senators told colleagues that they might be prepared to help force a vote on a compromise bill, but not until after at least several days of debate.
Their support could mean that backers of a bill could bring it to a vote.
But with only a few weeks remaining until Congress is expected to adjourn, Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, is reluctant to commit much floor time to the legislation, whose prospects for final approval are uncertain.
The willingness of the House to consider the bill he is pursuing is even more problematic.





Closing of Brokerage Firm Prompts Fall of Some Stocks
The closing of a New York brokerage house yesterday caused the steep fall of some over-the-counter technology stocks during an otherwise dull day when the stock market generally stabilized.
The regulatory problems of D. Blech &amp; Company, a New York brokerage house and merchant banker, prevented it from opening for business yesterday.
It was the leading trader, or market maker, in more than a dozen small stocks, and those securities plunged in price after the firm's problems became known.


Sudden Letdown and Lingering Questions for Faithful
The souvenir T-shirts had been approved, convoys of buses had been arranged, altars had been designed and choirs were prepared to sing as hundreds of thousands of Roman Catholics in the New York area prepared for their spiritual leader's visit next month.
All those plans came to an abrupt halt yesterday when the Vatican announced that lingering problems from a broken leg earlier this year would prevent John Paul II from doing what the Pope has done so often and energetically through his 16-year tenure -- traveling the globe to take his message of hope and faith to his followers.


Courtney Love and Hole Look Back in Anger
"I am the girl you know, the one that should have died," Courtney Love sang when her band, Hole, performed on Wednesday night at the Academy.
Those changed lyrics in "Miss World" half-acknowledged what the audience knew: that Ms.
Love is the widow of Kurt Cobain, Nirvana's leader, who killed himself in April.
But Ms.
Love won't be the Yoko Ono of alternative rock, mourning with the fans.
She's sticking to the punk paradigm, turning anger into noise.
Songs she wrote before Cobain's death have taken on more meanings than she knew.
Ms.
Love arrived on stage as a punk antiheroine in spike heels and bleached-blond hair, wearing a white, sliplike dress and balancing her guitar between her legs.
She tossed dolls into the audience, for "girls only." In a Hollywood touch, the actress Drew Barrymore, now dating the band's guitarist Eric Erlandson, appeared from the wings.
Later, Ms.
Love displayed her daughter, Frances Bean Cobain.


Now Playing: Disney in Turmoil
In a decade, Michael D. Eisner and Jeffrey Katzenberg transformed the slumbering Walt Disney Company into an $8.5 billion entertainment giant whose success has seemed magical.
Investors surged to the company, and its stock price multiplied.
Its top executives were lavishly rewarded.
Mr.
Eisner, the chairman, earned more than $203 million last year.
And this year Disney is enjoying the most profitable film ever, "The Lion King"; the top-rated television show, "Home Improvement," and the most successful musical on Broadway, "Beauty and the Beast."


GIULIANI WEIGHING FURTHER CUTBACKS AS COSTS ESCALATE
Only three months after the city balanced a $31.6 billion budget with sharp spending cuts, the Giuliani administration is struggling with a further gap that city officials say will require another round of cuts that could reach $800 million.
To fill the gap, the administration has embarked on a high-gear search for spending cuts, agency consolidations and work-force reductions that could include as many as 7,000 layoffs.
Administration officials said Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani wants to use severance offers as much as possible to soften new rounds of personnel reductions.


METRO DIGEST
AS COSTS RISE, MAYOR WEIGHS MORE CUTS
Only three months after the city balanced a $31.6 billion budget with sharp cuts, the Giuliani administration is struggling with a further gap that officials say will require another round of cuts that could reach $800 million.
A1.
POPE, CITING HEALTH, DROPS NEW YORK TRIP
The Vatican announced that John Paul II was postponing a visit to the New York City area and Baltimore, planned for next month, because he had not fully recuperated from a fall in April in which he broke his leg.
A1.
Many believers could not help but wonder if something more serious was going on. A8.


Masur and the Philharmonic: A Comfortable Partnership
When Kurt Masur began his fourth season as the music director of the Philharmonic with a gala concert Wednesday night in Avery Fisher Hall, it was clear that this season's opening was finally presenting an orchestra and a conductor at home with each other.
There was nothing either had to prove.
And while a fair amount of ordinary musicianship was mixed in with some glorious moments, the event gave off an aura of comfortable seriousness.
Yo-Yo Ma joined the orchestra, displaying consummate musicianship in cello works by Tchaikovsky and Boccherini.
Mr.
Masur showed off the robust sweetness of his ensemble in the Overture to Weber's "Oberon." And the opening movement of Bartok's Concerto for Orchestra bristled with energy and imagination.


Dean Foods Co.(DF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Sandra Fisher, 47, Figurative Painter
Sandra Fisher, a figurative painter and printmaker who was also the wife of the painter R. B. Kitaj, died on Monday at the National Hospital for Nervous Disorders in London.
She was 47 and lived in London.
The cause has not been determined, Marilyn McCully, a family friend, said yesterday.


A Civil Rights Victory in Old New York
To the Editor:
The daguerreotype of Chatham Street, later Park Row, looking northeast from Pearl Street, to be auctioned at Christie's in October (news article, Sept. 2, and letter, Sept. 14) depicts the site of an important event in New York City history.


Recalled Players Try to Get Pay Back
The Players Association, contending that 18 players have been improperly deprived of $1 million in pay, filed default notices yesterday that could get the players their money and make them free agents.
For the most part, the players were recalled from the minor leagues to major league clubs in the week before the players strike began or during the first week of September, when major league rosters could expand from 25 players to 40.
Included in the group are Joe Ausanio of the Yankees and Randy Tomlin of the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Ghosts of the Mongol Hordes Yielding Up Secrets
WHEN the Mongols swept across Eurasia in the 13th and 14th centuries, their conquests reached from Korea all the way to Hungary.
No empire before or since has matched theirs in territory, not Alexander's, Napoleon's or Hitler's.
These nomadic warriors on fast horses, charging out of clouds of dust, seemed to be everywhere and come from nowhere.
They were feared by all, known by few.
An aura of mystery still clings to the Mongols, long after they retreated to the margins of world history.
What were their origins, their cultural affinities?
What was it like to be a Mongol?
Only in recent decades have archeologists begun to put a face on the Mongols and their long line of ancestors living beyond the northern walls of China.
They were not just skilled horsemen following herds and spoiling for a fight.
They also had their artisans and an artistic culture that was at once distinctive and a reflection of techniques and motifs borrowed from foes, particularly the Chinese, and the people they encountered along the ancient trade route, the Silk Road.


DIALOGUE: The Reach of Democracy; Tying Power To Diplomacy
To many Americans, the cold war divisions have given way to a confusing tangle of problems that prevent us from setting clearly defined goals for our foreign policy.
These problems include aggression by regional bullies, transnational dangers like overpopulation and refugees, a global economic and information free-for-all that produces fear and uncertainty, and terrible ethnic conflicts.
Beneath the surface, however, there is an enduring truth about this new world.
The same idea attacked by Fascism and Communism remains under attack today.
Now, as then, we are defending an idea that comes under many names -- democracy, liberty, civility, pluralism -- but has a constant face.
It is the face of the tolerant society, in which leaders and governments exist not to use or abuse people but to provide them with freedom and opportunity.


Diner's Journal
Monkey Bar Is Back
The Monkey Bar in the Hotel Elysee has been so recently resurrected that there is still plywood on the doors, but that did not deter the hordes who showed up to celebrate the reopening of one of Manhattan's best-loved bars, which opened in 1933 and has been closed for a couple of years.
Inside it was a nightmare of noise and confusion with people shouting to be heard over the piano player.
"This is either the cheapest bar in town or they don't have their act together," said the man next to me, shelling out $7 for two Stolichnayas and a beer.
The restaurant, down a few steps, is a different matter: entirely new, it is soft, comfortable and blessedly quiet.
And the staff definitely knows what it is doing.


Oliver J. Lissitzyn, 82, Is Dead; Expert on International Air Law
Oliver J. Lissitzyn, an authority on international air law who taught at Columbia University, died on Saturday at the Hughes Convalescent Home, in West Hartford, Conn., where he lived.
He was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Lawrence, through a spokeswoman.


A Shoe Drops, and a Next Step Is Pondered
Ever since the Grumman Corporation agreed to be taken over by the Northrop Corporation in April, employees here knew the merger would lead to layoffs.
When the ax finally fell today, it caught few by surprise.
But it still hurt their pride.
Grumman had once been synonymous with jobs and economic security here.
For more than five decades it was Long Island's largest employer, making jet fighters for the Navy and building the Apollo lunar excursion module, which landed astronauts on the moon.


Suicidal Police Officers Don't Get Medication
To the Editor:
Lack of confidentiality because of managed care probably does not add much to police suicides (letter, Sept. 16).
The problems existed before.


Italy Cracks Down on Loan Sharks Preying on Merchants
Ciro Tronnolone, a 44-year old ex-convict, was arrested at the Porta Susa train station this summer after he was denounced for usury.
At the time of his arrest, Mr.
Tronnolone was pocketing lire in cash worth the equivalent of $31,000 from Giorgio Ballestrazzi, who owns the newsstand at the station and had earlier borrowed $19,000 from Mr.
Tronnolone at 15 percent a month interest, a bargain at current market rates.
Belatedly, Italians have discovered that a banking system too sclerotic to serve the needs of merchants and small businesses has created a vacuum imaginatively filled by tens of thousands of freelance lenders.
And so, one by one, Italian cities are cracking down on a vast network of loan sharks.


Art in Review
John Chamberlain
Pace Gallery  142 Greene Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 15
John Chamberlain rarely deviates from the materials for which he is famous, the brightly colored and crumpled pieces of car bodies, casually yet astutely fashioned into abstract sculpture.
But his career has its ups and its downs; that is, those moments when the artist seems to be asleep at the wheel.
That's not the case with his new work, seen in an eye-opening show that is his best in several years.


Food Lion Inc.(FDLNA,NNM) reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 10


Rehnquist Court Ruled For Affirmative Action
To the Editor:
"Affirmative Action Without Fear" (editorial, Sept. 19) applauds the Clinton Justice Department's change of position in the Piscataway case, so that now the United States argues that the use of race was proper in choosing which of two equally qualified teachers should be laid off during a reduction in force.


Hospitals Liable for Actions By Ex-Patients, Judge Rules
New York City municipal hospitals have a duty to protect the public from homeless mental patients with violent histories whom they discharge without supervision or medication, a state court judge ruled yesterday.
He said the hospitals may be sued for any injuries or deaths the former patients cause.
While recognizing that established case law precludes such suits, Justice Salvador Collazo of State Supreme Court in Manhattan based his ruling on the ground that the city's revolving-door policy of treating homeless mental patients was negligent and unreasonable.


Japanese Cabinet Approves Tax Cut as Economic Spur
In a move sought by the United States as well as businesses here, Japan's Cabinet tonight approved a long-stalled plan to cut income taxes in a bid to stimulate its puttering economy.
The immediate income tax cut will be compensated for by an increase in the sales tax to 5 percent from the current 3 percent.
The raise will take effect in April 1997.
The plan is expected to be approved by Japan's Parliament this fall.


On Foreign Policy, 2 Clinton Advisers Wage a Bitter Duel
The Carter mission to Haiti has fueled a struggle between two long-time colleagues, as Anthony Lake, the national security adviser, and Secretary of State Warren Christopher compete for dominance over foreign policy.
Critics of Mr.
Christopher inside the White House say that he has failed, most recently with the Haiti crisis, to project an image as a strong Secretary of State whose role is to serve as the President's chief foreign policy maker.
With the exception of the Middle East, they say, he has essentially ceded policy portfolios to subordinates or other agencies of government.


U.S. Cuts Nuclear Arsenal, Hoping Russia Will Follow
President Clinton has ordered new cuts in the American arsenal of bombers and submarines and will ask President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia to reciprocate with similar reductions at a meeting next week between the two leaders in Washington, Administration officials said today.
After completing a 10-month review of nuclear policy, Defense Secretary William Perry announced today that the Administration would cut the number of Trident submarines in the Navy's fleet from 18 to 14 and the number of B-52 strategic bombers from 94 to 66.


Disney's Virginia Project Receives Its First Two Approvals
The Walt Disney Company's plan to build a giant theme park in northern Virginia has gained its first official blessings, winning approval for local zoning changes and transportation projects for the $650 million venture.
By a 7-to-1 vote on Wednesday night, the planning commission of Prince William County, Va., agreed to zoning changes that would allow the company to build the park, Disney's America, as the centerpiece of a 3,000 acre project with more than 2,100 residential units, a hotel, schools, offices and stores.


MISSION TO HAITI: IN HAITI U.S. Soldiers Begin Dismantling Elite Haitian Military Company; Marines Tighten Security
American marines tightened security in Haiti's second largest city today after Haitian police officers late Wednesday clubbed and fired into a jubilant crowd of civilians trailing two American trucks.
Witnesses said as many as two people were killed but Marine officers said the bodies were dragged away before they could confirm the casualties.
In a show of force to intimidate the police and comfort civilians, the Marine commander, Col.
Tom Jones, ordered light armored tanks to roll through the streets and Cobra helicopter gun ships to fly overhead.
About 200 marines were assigned to guard more than a dozen police precincts tonight to keep order.


Ramirez Picked As Bronx Chief For Democrats
The Bronx Democratic Committee, once a legendary machine dominated by Irish and Jewish politicians, elected Assemblyman Roberto Ramirez its chairman last night, making him the first Hispanic in the state to head a Democratic Party organization on the county level.
But the vote appeared to leave the committee a bit splintered.
Congressman Jose E. Serrano, another prominent Hispanic leader who had been expected to challenge Mr.
Ramirez, walked out of the party meeting -- with several supporters in tow -- about an hour before his name could be put into nomination.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Fired Charlie Moss, trainer.
Announced they have reached a two-year working agreement with the Peoria Chiefs of the Midwest League.


Hospitals Unit Details Plans For Layoffs
At least seven of the city's 11 hospitals will be hit with layoffs and other cuts under a plan to close a $357 million budget gap, the head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation told the agency's board yesterday.
As expected, Harlem Hospital would be most severely affected by the cuts, losing 300 workers, including 28 doctors and 37 part-time residents, and 119 surgical beds, bringing a projected savings of $9.6 million.
The hospital has the lowest occupancy rate of any city hospital, with just 65 percent of its beds being used on any given day, and the president of the hospitals agency, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, said the agency could not afford to provide staff for empty beds.


Quentin Tarantino's Wild Ride On Life's Dangerous Road
EVER since Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction" created a sensation at this year's Cannes Film Festival, where it won top honors (the Palme d'Or), it has been swathed in the wildest hyperbole.
In fact, it has sparked an excitement bound to look suspect from afar.
It must be hard to believe that Mr.
Tarantino, a mostly self-taught, mostly untested talent who spent his formative creative years working in a video store, has come up with a work of such depth, wit and blazing originality that it places him in the front ranks of American film makers.
But tonight, as "Pulp Fiction" opens this year's New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center, the proof is on the screen.


No Headline
"Faced with a relatively long trip, the doctors said: 'Holy Father, it would be better to postpone this.' And the Pope accepted this medical advice." JOAQUIN NAVARRO-VALLS, spokesman for the Vatican.  [ A1:3. ]


Neil M. Ratliff, 58, A Music Librarian
Neil M. Ratliff, a music librarian and expert on Greek music, died on Saturday at the Hospice of Washington.
He was 58 and lived in Washington.
The cause was AIDS, said Herb Scher, a spokesman for the New York Public Library.


Moses Is Soupy Sales But God Is an Unknown
If you were making a biblical epic, whom would you get to play God?
Clive and Marvin, the director and producer in the mock documentary ". . . and God Spoke," go for Marlon Brando and Bobby De Niro, as they call him.
But the high point of their careers is a film called "Nude Ninjas," their budget is not epic, and they settle for an unknown.
"You wouldn't recognize God," Marvin says.
It's perfect casting.
They're luckier with Moses; there they get a name.
It's Soupy Sales, good-naturedly playing himself here.
When he comes down the mountain with the Ten Commandments, he brings product placement to new extremes, but he's a recognizable star.


No Time for Cowardice
Suppose Congress had handed President Clinton shortly after he took office a health care bill that would subsidize coverage for all poor families and low-income children, guarantee sick people affordable premiums, create a long-term care program and prohibit insurers from taking coverage away from workers who change jobs.
A bill that good would surely have been declared a monumental legislative achievement.
The dismaying fact is that there is a bill that good within reach of Senate negotiators, but its sponsors cannot find the 60 votes needed to push past a filibuster attempt.
The majority leader, George Mitchell, and a bipartisan "mainstream" coalition led by John Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, have reached almost complete agreement on substance.
Their bill would reduce the number of uninsured Americans by perhaps 20 million and, by holding down costs through competition, would make it easier for Congress to achieve universal coverage later in the decade.
So why can't Senators Mitchell and Chafee find 60 votes for their worthy compromise?
The chief reason is cowardice.


Art in Review
Sandy Skoglund
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 29
An operatic, almost campy emotionality suffuses "The Wedding," Sandy Skoglund's latest work.
As usual, Ms.
Skoglund has created an elaborate installation, then used it as the set for a single, staged photograph.


Carnival Corp.(CCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


No Bait From Rangers, So Messier's Out Fishing
Yesterday was another futile day in the contract negotiations between Mark Messier and the Rangers.
No progress was made, no new offers discussed, no substantial conversations held between the two sides.
With only eight days remaining before the scheduled start of the regular season, Messier went fishing in Hilton Head, S.C., caught two grouper and cooked them for dinner.
He had nothing better to do.
"I'm just trying to keep busy," the Ranger captain said by telephone last night.
"I'm just anxious, hoping this will get done soon."


Prison Tale by Stephen King Told Gently, Believe It or Not
There are standard ways to stage a prison film and standard ways to tell a story by Stephen King.
But "The Shawshank Redemption," based on a King novella and set in the correctional institution of the title, succeeds in avoiding the familiar.
Without a single riot scene or horrific effect, it tells a slow, gentle story of camaraderie and growth, with an ending that abruptly finds poetic justice in what has come before.
The writer and director, Frank Darabont, tells this tale with a surprising degree of loving care.


For Israel, Peace Now or a Missile War Later
To the Editor:
Last month I drove my 18-year-old Israeli grandson, Alon, from his Tel Aviv home to the Golan Heights.
Alon is about to begin his three-year compulsory army service.
He wanted to see the land he will defend.


NATO Jets Strike Serbs Near Sarajevo
NATO aircraft struck today at Serbian targets near Sarajevo after United Nations troops patrolling the city came under Serbian machine-gun and rocket fire.
Maj.
Gen.
Andre Soubirou, the acting commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, said an American A-10 ground-attack plane and a British Jaguar fighter bomber attacked a Serbian tank.
Aides said the strafing and bombing took place at 6:15 P.M. local time in the Serbian-held Rajlovac area northwest of the Bosnian capital.


Art in Review
Selections Fall '94'  'Installations'
The Drawing Center  35 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 22
It is possible to see this attractive show of installation-size works on paper by four young artists as being about the traditional uses of drawing writ large, whether in the form the abstract expressive line, the geometric grid, the outline of the figure, or the written word.


Over the Centuries for Excellence
The Eugene V. and Clare Thaw collection of drawings has long been regarded as among the finest in private hands and its periodic exhibition at the Pierpont Morgan Library -- first in 1975, then in 1985 and now, a few months shy of the decade mark -- is always an event of note.
The current show is likely to be the last of these "updates," as the Thaws have turned their attention elsewhere (a permanent home for their important collection of American Indian art is under construction in Cooperstown, N.Y.).
But it may be the best one of all.
Beautifully installed and documented, it includes 70 pieces acquired in the last nine years, as well as 30 highlights from the two previous shows.


For Children
Medieval Festival
Fort Tryon Park  Fort Washington Avenue and 190th Street  Washington Heights  (212) 795-1600  Recommended for all ages  Sunday
Any young man with pride in his blood and a budding war horse in the stable longed to grow up to be a knight, King Arthur-style, in the Middle Ages.
The word "chevalier" was connected not only to riding steeds but also to a way of life: one that meant acting honorably and bravely and being frail in love matters.
It also meant fighting.


Ex-Head of Baptist College Pleads Not Guilty to Fraud
The former president of Mississippi College, a Baptist institution founded in 1826, pleaded not guilty in Federal District Court today to charges that he stole $1.7 million in college donations.
The authorities said he used the money to buy stocks and pay for prostitutes and lavish gifts.
The defendant, Lewis Nobles, 68, stood silently as a magistrate read the 20-count indictment that included charges of money laundering and violations of the Mann Act, which bars the transportation of a woman across state lines for "immoral purposes."


Harvard Club Strike Sticks Over Givebacks
To the Editor:
I reply as an employee of Local 6, the union representing striking Harvard Club employees, to the Sept. 14 letter by Preston Townley, vice president of the club.
Mr.
Townley claims union leaders "participated grudgingly" in mediation and "walked away at the first opportunity," and that "work rules say bus persons in the dining room can't make coffee."


Citizens of Germany Before the Nation Shattered
A crowning achievement of photography in this century is a small book published in 1929 by a longtime studio photographer from Cologne, Germany.
On the surface, August Sander's "Antlitz der Zeit" ("Face of Our Time") is simply a collection of 60 portraits of a wide variety of people, from farmers to industrialists.
But Sander's subtly structured book provides a searing, incisive picture of late Weimar culture and society, capturing all the contradictions and tensions that only a few years later would tear it apart.
"Antlitz der Zeit" has long been out of print, but in one of the most important shows of the young season, the Robert Miller Gallery is presenting a complete set of vintage prints from the book's original mockup.


Joseph Loves Sarah and So Does Frank, and Everybody Is Talking About It
One of these days Eric Stoltz will have a first-rate career, and he'll deserve it.
Right now, he's the only good reason to see "Sleep With Me," an innocuous romantic comedy about three friends in a love triangle and the other friends who have nothing better to do than talk about it.
Mr.
Stoltz plays a landscape designer named Joseph, who is about to marry Sarah (Meg Tilly).
Joseph's best friend, Frank (Craig Sheffer), loves Sarah, too.
At barbecues, poker games and dinner parties, "What should Frank do?" becomes a hot topic of conversation.


CHRONICLE
Applying to private schools in New York City is trying enough for those familiar with the system.
Imagine, then, the dilemma of SERGEY LAVROV, the new Russian Ambassador to the United Nations, who arrived here on Sept. 2 and needed to find a school immediately for his 11-year-old daughter, KATYA.
Mr.
Lavrov enrolled her in a parochial school in Manhattan but after two days decided it was not the right choice.
He called several private schools and was told they were all filled.


Executive Changes
HUFFY CORP., Miamisburg, Ohio, appointed Richard L. Molen, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman.
He has been acting chairman.


Irvan Makes First Appearance Since Crash
ERNIE IRVAN's stride was a bit off and the black eye patch was definitely new.
But his smile and humor gave him away when the 35-year-old Winston Cup driver made his first public appearance since suffering massive head injuries in a crash last month.


No Headline
The Rev.
Daniel N. Corrigan, an Episcopal bishop whose long career was marked by campaigns for peace and human rights, died on Wednesday at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 93 years old.
The cause of death was internal bleeding after a fall at home last week, said Timothy Corrigan, a grandson.


Faldo to Play on PGA Tour Next Year
NICK FALDO, two-time Masters champion and three-time winner of the British Open, said yesterday that he would be playing on the United States PGA Tour next year.
Faldo said he would play three groups of four American tournaments up to the end of April and that he was looking to play at least 17 events. (Reuters)


Diving From the Sky Into a Thickening Plot
"Terminal Velocity," a thriller set in the world of skydiving, has many picturesque scenes of bodies tumbling in free fall high above the Arizona desert.
The prettiest shot shows two aerialists silhouetted against the final moments of a glorious sunset.
In the niftiest stunt, a car with a woman locked in its trunk is dumped out of an airplane.
The hero jumps out of the same plane, catches up to the car, unlocks the trunk, pulls out the woman, and opens his parachute just in time for them to land safely at the bottom of a canyon.
That hero is a wisecracking, womanizing daredevil named Ditch Brodie (Charlie Sheen).
The woman he saves, Chris Morrow (Nastassja Kinski), is a former agent for the K.G.B. (jokingly referred to in the film as the "K.G Used-to-Be") who is fighting off the Russian mafia in order to return $600 million of stolen gold bricks to her economically troubled homeland.
Just how and why those bricks wound up in the Arizona desert on a hijacked airliner, the movie hardly bothers to explain.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the effects of a tentative labor agreement on garbage collection in New York City misstated the origin of a bonus for sanitation workers in two-member crews.
The payment, known as a differential, was created when work was shifted from three-member to two-member crews under the Koch administration, not the Dinkins administration.


Treasury Prices Higher On Fed Chief Comments
Treasury prices moved higher yesterday for the first time in three days as Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, said that economic growth was clearly slowing.
But the gains are likely to be short-lived as more investors predict the Fed will raise interest rates next week.
Some of the buying yesterday also represented traders covering short sales, which occurs when traders sell borrowed securities in hopes of buying them back at lower prices and pocketing the profit.
Rising prices caused many short-sellers to take action sooner.


Yanks Extend Stanley's Pact
The Yankees made a logical and expected decision yesterday when they picked up the option year on catcher Mike Stanley's contract and assured him of being with them next season.
The 31-year old Stanley, who batted .300 with 17 homers and 57 runs batted in as the third-highest paid catcher on the Yankees this abbreviated season, will receive a $562,500 salary if he plays in 1995, still one of the best bargains in the major leagues.
The Yankees have seven players signed to guaranteed contracts for 1995.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the defeat of Representative Mike Synar, Democrat of Oklahoma, in the Tuesday primary referred incorrectly in some copies to defeats of House incumbents this year.
Mr.
Synar's was the fourth, not the third.


Rangers Stuck In the Slush
Hockey is played so infrequently here at the ARCO Arena that the Zamboni driver working tonight's game between the Rangers and San Jose Sharks must have confused "gold rush" with "make it slush." Outside it was 90 degrees, and that helped turn the ice into a snow cone, a surface on which the Sharks slogged their way to a 3-0 victory over the Rangers.
The loss was the second in as many nights for the Rangers, who are 3-3 in exhibition games.
The Rangers will complete a three-game Western trip on Saturday night, when they play the Kings in Phoenix.


Sampras Is Using the Davis Cup to Sharpen His Game
Tom Gullikson, dressed in red, white and blue from neck to toe, looked over fondly at Pete Sampras and chuckled.
"I've had plenty of late-night phone calls from friends, but that was the best I ever had," Gullikson said.


Robert Johnson, 79, Investment Banker
Robert S. Johnson, an advisory director of Lehman Brothers, the New York investment banking firm, died in New York Hospital on Sept. 14.
He was 79.
He died of a stroke, said A. Edward Gottesman, an associate.


Northrop Grumman Cutting 8,650 Jobs
The Northrop Grumman Corporation, responding to the nation's shrinking military budget, will reduce its work force by 8,650 jobs, or more than 18 percent, by the end of 1995.
The reductions are a blow to California and Long Island, which will absorb most of the layoffs.
Business Day, page D1.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.(KBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cheers and Sighs of Relief as Beatings Subside
For the first time in her life, Marie Louise said, she walked unafraid past a Haitian police officer today.
Miss Louise, a fruit vendor in the slum known as La Saline, said she is accustomed to being cursed and beaten by the men in blue-and-tan uniforms whose main responsibility has been to control and intimidate poor Haitians.
But today, she said she walked right under the nose of a tall, forbidding man with a big stick and looked him right in the eye.


Restaurants
How to be happy at Cub Room:
1.
Ask your dinner guests to be punctual.
If you are over the age of 21 and forced to spend any length of time waiting in the very popular bar, you are apt to get very grumpy.
It is extremely crowded with very pretty people.


Cuomo Proposes More Tax Cuts, but Again Says Details Will Have to Wait
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that the election-year package of tax cuts he plans to propose this fall will include a reduction in the personal income tax for some people and an income tax credit intended to offset property taxes.
But, as he did earlier this week, when Mr.
Cuomo said he would propose cutting a state tax on utility revenues, he declined to provide any details about his plan, saying they would come in the next few weeks.


The Elusive Information Highway
At a gathering here of leading computer and telecommunications executives, AT&amp;T showed a video the company shot recently on the streets of Manhattan.
The video crew had asked passers-by a single question: "Where can I find the on ramp to the information highway?"
"Take a left on Houston Street, and keep going straight," one man replied.
"Gee, I'm not sure," a woman said.
"I've been there a million times, but I can't remember. . . . Ask Reynaldo, the doorman."


U.S. Soldiers Begin Dismantling Elite Haitian Military Company
United States special forces dismantled the Haitian Army's most elite military unit today, and American soldiers were told they were allowed to stop Haitian police from beating citizens.
The actions were described as part of a rapidly changing policy of gradually dismantling the Haitian Army's control of the country.


Pope, Citing Health, Calls Off Visit to New York
In another sign of the Pope's physical frailty, the Vatican announced today that John Paul II was postponing a visit to the New York City area and Baltimore, which was planned for next month, because he has not fully recuperated from a fall in April in which he broke his leg.
The unexpected announcement renewed speculation about the 74-year-old Pope's broader state of health, particularly because he planned an important speech at the United Nations on the family in which he was expected to discuss the Vatican's views of the recent population conference in Cairo.


Halting Cash for Cuba Is a Delicate Task
Aida Perez looked like a Mardi Gras queen.
A man's shirt draped her shoulders, her colorful skirt topped layers of other skirts.
In one arm, she clutched a giant teddy bear, in the other a bag with several sausages.
To her friends and family in Cuba, she is a treasure trove.
To the United States Customs officials here she is, potentially, a walking violation of the prohibition on sending cash to Cuba.


FOOTBALL: Passing a Tradition From Generation to Generation; For the Townspeople of Valdosta, Ga., the High School Game Is a Way of Life
By 8 o'clock this morning the inner circle of the "coffee club" had already occupied its customary table in the back of Jackson Baywood Pharmacy.
L.
E.
Deming, Bob Anderson, Bill Mizell and Laman Golivesky arrived at 7:30 and put in their orders.
Soon, Mack Green and John Lastinger trickled in.
The conversation is seamless and, to an outsider, flows like a river that has no beginning or ending.
Everybody speaks at once, everyone knows precisely what is being said in each conversation, and everyone comes together when the talk turns to Valdosta High School football.


In Mo Lewis's World, Jets' Image Is No Joke
Mo Lewis is getting impatient -- for a sack, for recognition and for the Jets to finally shed the image of, well, being the Jets.
Lewis has been waiting all summer to get one of his big hands on a quarterback.
Maybe Lewis will have his way on Sunday night against the Bears at Giants Stadium.


Canadian Pacific Seeks Rival Rail Operations
Canadian Pacific Ltd., which built Canada's first transcontinental rail system in the 1880's, announced today that it was offering $1.4 billion (Canadian) -- a little more than $1 billion (United States) -- to buy the rail operations east of Winnipeg, Manitoba, of its chief rival, the Government-owned Canadian National Railways.
Though both rail networks are profitable in the west, they have lost $2 billion (Canadian) in eastern Canada over the last five years as a result of excess capacity and competition from trucks, air freight and marine haulers.


Marion Barry Showed Remorse for Past
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 18 Week in Review article on Marion S. Barry's Democratic mayoral primary victory in the District of Columbia is inaccurate and unfair.
In comparing Mr.
Barry to Boston's James M. Curley, you say that neither man apologized for the actions that brought him down.


U.S. Begins Inquiry Into Payments by Cisneros
The Justice Department has begun an initial review of tape-recorded conversations between Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros and his former mistress about thousands of dollars in payments he made to her between 1990 and 1993, law enforcement officials said today.
The review is the earliest stage of scrutiny under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, the law that provides for the appointments of independent prosecutors.


Art in Review
Shelagh Keeley
John Gibson Gallery  568 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 15
Shelagh Keeley has followed an ambitious though thin-textured show at Exit Art with one of works on paper, a medium suited to her fleet, glancing touch, at John Gibson.
In each piece, photo-transferred images -- ranging from antique medical prints to examples of contemporary pornography -- are complemented by the artist's semi-abstract drawings in crayon, charcoal and gouache.


Race for Governor: Pataki
CANDIDATE: George E. Pataki PRODUCER: Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va., and Sacramento, Calif.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc.(BBBY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Virginia Tech Romps for a 4-0 Start
Tailback Dwayne Thomas and a strong defense helped Virginia Tech, ranked No. 14 in The Associated Press poll, overcome a subpar outing by quarterback Maurice DeShazo and roll to a 34-6 victory over slumping West Virginia in Blacksburg, Va., last night.
Thomas rushed 18 times for 94 yards before leaving with a sprained left ankle early in the fourth quarter, and the Hokies moved to a 4-0 start for the first time in 13 seasons.


Sounds Around Town
Max Roach
Max Roach, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
The master drummer is leading his richest group, the double quartet, pairing up his regular group with a string quartet.
They make sublime music, sensual yet brittle at times, dissonant and swinging.
It's the perfect place to hear Mr.
Roach's sidemen, as well, including Odean Pope, who sounds spectacular against the lushness of the strings.
Sets today and tomorrow are at 9 and 11:30 P.M. and at 1 A.M. and on Sunday at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $30 cover and a $5 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Cobra
Cobra, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
Cobra is among John Zorn's more entertaining game pieces.
Bobby Previte, a longtime collaborator of Mr.
Zorn's, is the prompter, and the group includes Marty Ehrlich, Mr.
Zorn and Lenny Pickett on reeds, along with Kermit Driscoll, Marcus Rojas and Jerome Harris.
It's a good way to find out what the early 1980's were about.
The show is on Sunday at 9 P.M., and the cover is $10.
P.
W.
Kenny Barron
Kenny Barron, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, (212) 255-4037.
One of jazz's great trios, with Mr.
Barron on piano, Buster Williams on bass and Ben Riley on drums, is to begin a three-week stay that defines intelligent, adventurous club booking.
Each week is to feature a different instrumentalist; this week's is the young and gifted alto saxophonist Jesse Davis.
Next week, it is to be Gary Bartz and after that, James Spaulding.
Shows today through Sunday are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M., with no third show on Sunday.
The cover is $15, and there is a $10 minimum.
P.
W.


Abroad at Home; Question of Power
From right and left, the Haiti operation is under attack.
President Clinton did too little.
He did too much.
And so on and on.
Underneath, what is involved here is a question of the greatest importance to the United States, and to the Presidency, at this moment in history.
That is how a great country and its leader use power.


A Missing Link in Late-20th-Century Styles
The 1950's, the glory days of American art, are strewn with famous names, like Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning, who formulated Abstract Expressionism, and Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg and Cy Twombly, who forged crucial links to much that has followed.
It might be stretching things to call the obscure California collagist and painter known simply as Jess one of the great missing links of this period.
But the phrase applies with special accuracy to his sometimes mesmerizing, sometimes repellent art, the subject of a fascinating retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Linkage, especially of unlikely qualities and disparate times and styles, is one of the central aspects of Jess's work, with its unsettling mixture of radical and conservative impulses, of obsessive painterliness, wide-ranging literariness and plain old kitschiness.
And Jess is also in some sense missing: a virtual recluse who rarely leaves his house in San Francisco, he is a legend to a small clutch of devoted collectors, critics and curators, but unknown to many others on the contemporary art scene.


Seeking Real Life in the Mob But Finding Movie Cliches
In "Me and the Mob," a struggling magazine writer named Jimmy Corona (James Lorinz) decides to hang around with gangsters in search of "real life crime stories." Instead of real life, he winds up finding a whole slew of mob movie stereotypes, with actors doing De Niro imitations of varying credibility and dialogue that is colorful in all the expected ways. ("Joey was as slippery as cooked squid, but the calamari had the edge in the looks department.")
As produced and directed by Frank Rainone, who wrote the screenplay along with Rocco Simonelle and Mr.
Lorinz, this semiautobiographical film is more facetious than funny.
Though cartoonish titles and a vaguely jazzy score (produced by Phil Ramone) suggest somebody thinks the film has "Pink Panther" possibilities, it labors awfully hard to achieve its lighter moments.


Flat Tax Is an Idea That Just Won't Go Away
To the Editor:
The 17 percent flat tax advocated by Chuck Haytaian, the New Jersey Republican candidate for the Senate, would do much more than simplify the Federal income tax codes that have grown into the most complex on earth since 1913.
It would produce explosive United States economic growth by dramatically reducing the cost of capital.
The whole country would benefit, but because New Jersey is among the states with the highest per capita incomes, the benefits would be enormous here.


Apogee Enterprises Inc.(APOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Transit Officer Contradicts Shooting Victim's Account
A transit officer involved in last month's subway shootout in which an undercover officer was critically wounded by an off-duty New York City policeman has told prosecutors that the undercover officer was moving toward the off-duty officer when he was first shot, a lawyer involved in the case said yesterday.
The account by Transit Officer Joseph Fitzgerald, given yesterday to a prosecutor with the Manhattan District Attorney's office, differs significantly from the version of the wounded officer, Desmond Robinson.
Officer Robinson has said that he had already walked by the door of the train where Officer Peter Del-Debbio stood, and that Officer Del-Debbio then shot him four times in the back while he posed a threat to no one.


The Last Choice Is People's Choice
Some of the coaching elite stumped for the Arizona job eight years ago: Dick Sheridan of North Carolina State, Jack Bicknell of Boston College, Earle Bruce of Ohio State.
And some guy from Hawaii who once worked under Bo Schembechler at Miami of Ohio.
Dick Tomey was fairly anonymous in 1987, just as his players were anonymous four and five years ago.
He became the front-runner only after the others removed themselves from consideration, just as his recruits became bona fide college football players only after he risked a scholarship on them.


INSIDE
NATO Hits Serbian Targets
NATO jets struck at Serbian targets near Sarajevo after United Nations troops came under Serbian machine-gun and rocket fire.
Page A8.
Disney's Turmoil at the Top
The Walt Disney Company's magic is fizzling without Jeffrey Katzenberg.
His one-time ally, Michael D. Eisner, forced him out.
Page D1.
First Baseball, Now Hockey?
The National Hockey League Commissioner said the season would not start without a new collective bargaining agreement.
Page B9.
Clinton Cuts Atomic Arms
President Clinton ordered cuts in nuclear bombers and submarines and will ask Russia's President for similar reductions.
Page A3.


Arrest in Poland
The police today arrested a 50-year-old man suspected in the planting of four bombs in Cracow this month in an effort to extort a half-million German marks.
The man, identified as Sylwester Augustynek, had signed notes identifying himself as Gummi Bear, after the cartoon characters and the jelly candy, and giving elaborate instructions for money drop-offs that always ended up frustrating the police.
None of the bombs exploded.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  POPE POSTPONES NEW YORK VISIT  Pope John Paul II has abruptly put off a planned visit to New York in October because he has not recovered from a fall in which he broke his leg in April.
The visit is being postponed to November 1995.
A1  Preparation in the New York regions came to an abrupt halt.
A8


Kelly Candidate To Overhaul Haiti Police
Raymond W. Kelly, the former New York City police commissioner, is President Clinton's leading candidate to lead the creation of a new Haitian police force under the control of a civilian government that is expected to retake power on Oct. 15, White House officials said.
Mr.
Kelly, 53, is at the top of a list being weighed by the White House to work from Port-au-Prince in bringing practical experience to a mission that is expected to be prolonged and difficult, said the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
His status was reported in today's Daily News.


Pinched Nerve Changes Terreri From Solid to Uncertain
The Devils have played six exhibition games, and Chris Terreri, a vital part of last season's goaltending tandem with Martin Brodeur, has not played a single minute in them.
He is bothered by a pinched nerve in his left shoulder and his status is uncertain for the start of the season.
Today, Terreri faced shots for the first time since suffering the injury on Sept. 10.
"It wasn't bad," Terreri said after the light workout before the rest of the team took the ice, "but it wasn't great, either. It'll take some time."
With three exhibition games left, time is not on Terreri's side.
Goaltenders Peter Sidorkiewicz and Mike Dunham have played well and are making a strong challenge to start the season with Brodeur.
But Terreri, a six-year-veteran, said it was too early for him to worry about losing his job.
"I've played so long in this league it won't take me long to get into conditioning," Terreri said.
"But it is frustrating not to be able to do the things I want to do. It's just taking too much time."
Despite the intensive therapy on his shoulder, it is unlikely that Terreri will see any action before the regular season, which is scheduled to start Oct. 1.
"If Chris is not ready, for sure we'll have to keep another goalie," Coach Jacques Lemaire said after today's practice.
"Chris will be going in and practice every day until he gets ready."
Dressed in black, Terreri swung his left arm as he skated up and down the ice.
He tested his endurance with a few short sprints, from the goal line to the blue line.
Then he faced shots from Jacques Caron, the goaltending coach, and the assistant coaches Larry Robinson and Dennis Gendron.
"We took low shots at him today because of his range of motion and we'll start taking high and harder shots at him gradually," Caron said.
Any hope Terreri had of challenging Brodeur for the position as the team's premier goaltender has disappeared.
Brodeur has looked extremely sharp in the exhibition games he played, especially in the 4-1 victory over the Flyers Wednesday night.
Several of his 30 saves were of the spectacular kind and he lost his shutout bid with only 36 seconds left.
Brodeur keeps saying he can handle a heavy workload, but Lemaire is inclined not to overwork his top goaltender early in the season.
Lemaire prefers to have two goalies sharing the duties until he settles on one of them for the playoffs, as he did last year.
SLAP SHOTS
PETER SIDORKIEWICZ and MIKE DUNHAM will handle the goaltending duties for Friday night's visit by the Islanders. . . .
SCOTT STEVENS and JOHN MacLEAN could miss the game with minor leg injuries.


Russia's Poor Army! Now Power to Rocket Forces Is Cut Off
In an episode that has driven millions of Russians to tears of laughter -- and many others to just plain tears -- the Moscow regional electricity authority severed all power to the nation's Strategic Nuclear Missile Command Center on Wednesday because nobody had bothered to pay the bills.
The Odintsovo Central Command Post, 15 miles west of Moscow, which controls one of the largest clusters of nuclear missiles on earth, immediately switched to an emergency fail-safe system for four hours until power was restored.


Faculty Strike Ends At a L.I.U. Campus
A faculty strike at a Long Island University campus ended after nine days yesterday, when both sides agreed to merit raises to close the gap between teachers' salary demands and the administration's offers, college officials said.
Before the strike, members of the Brooklyn unit of the Long Island University Faculty Federation rejected a management offer of a 13 percent pay raise over three years, saying it was too low.


In a Remote Village, the Cry on All Sides Is, When Will the G.I.'s Come?
Three days after United States forces landed on Haitian soil, Haitian soldiers and civilians in this rugged farming town in the plains north of the capital say they would welcome the presence of troops here, each group for different reasons.
In Port-au-Prince, United States military officials say they have set no date to deploy troops here, so the only soldiers patrolling the narrow cobbled streets here are Haitians in drab green uniforms.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Northrop Grumman will cut its work force by more than 18 percent, or 8,650 jobs, by the end of 1995, as the newly combined company seeks to adapt to a fast-consolidating arms industry.
The job cut will be another hard blow to the economies of California and Long Island.  [ Page D1. ]  Few employees of Grumman, which was Long Island's biggest employer for more than five decades, were surprised by the announcement of job cuts.  [ D11. ]


U.S. Bridge Teams Face Elimination
Two top-ranked American teams were in serious jeopardy here this afternoon at the NEC World Championships, organized by the World Bridge Federation.
With two rounds of qualifying play remaining in the Rosenblum Open Teams, the team led by Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., was seventh in its qualifying section, with four teams to qualify.
Among his teammates are Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., and Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif., winners of several world titles.
They were 20 victory points behind the fourth team in the section, with 25 the maximum in a match.


Ideal Juror for O. J. Simpson: Football Fan Who Can Listen
Men rather than women, black men if possible.
Older people rather than younger.
Discerning rather than deferential.
Shepherds rather than sheep, football buffs rather than football widows, fans of "L.A. Law" rather than "NYPD Blue."
And though there are no longer any blank slates when it comes to O. J. Simpson -- "If you get people who don't know anything about this case, they must be total idiots," Gerry Spence, the high-profile defense lawyer, remarked -- it's better that they get their news from "MacNeil/ Lehrer" or Newsweek than "Geraldo!" or Star.


Rival Suitor Says Borden Snubbed Him
Paul B. Kazarian, a suitor for Borden Inc., publicly denounced the company yesterday for the first time, asserting that it had treated him unfairly in his quest to buy the struggling consumer products giant.
He said Borden should allow its shareholders to vote on a buyout proposal that he would offer in competition with a bid from Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.
That buyout firm surprised Wall Street last week by offering $2 billion of RJR Nabisco stock for Borden.


Teacher Dismissed in Fight Over Silent Moment
A suburban school teacher who refused to observe a state-mandated moment of silence was dismissed today by his school board.
Brian G. Bown, a social studies teacher at South Gwinnett High School, was dismissed by the Gwinnett County School Board for insubordination and "conduct unbecoming a teacher" in refusing to be silent for one minute at the start of the school day.


Lennar Corp.(LEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Clinton Links Unpopularity To Voter Fear Of Shake-Ups
Unable so far to say that his efforts to change the Government have made him popular, President Clinton is opening a string of pre-election political speeches by arguing the opposite: that his low popularity stems from a determination to shake things up, whatever the penalties.
Speaking at a Democratic dinner here, Mr.
Clinton suggested on Wednesday night that his efforts to reduce the Federal deficit, increase global trade and rewrite foreign policy had not yet restored optimism about the future -- and about his Presidency -- because their very nature is to make the future less predictable.


Ode to a Director Who Dared to Be Dreadful
"Ed Wood," Tim Burton's very good film about a very bad film maker, has a cheerful defiance that would surely have appealed to Orson Welles, who was Ed Wood's hero.
Late in the film, Welles appears (played deftly by Vincent d'Onofrio, who really looks like him) to advise Wood that independence is everything and that an artist's visions are worth fighting for.
Mr.
Burton, currently Hollywood's most irrepressible maverick, has taken that credo to heart.
So here is the Z-movie ethos of Edward D. Wood Jr., as filtered through the dark wit and visual brilliance of Mr.
Burton.
Two questions immediately present themselves: Who and why?
To answer the first, Ed Wood was a director working on the outermost fringes of Hollywood in the 1950's.
He made the kind of science-fiction film that used Cadillac hubcaps for flying saucers.


Mob Allegation Clouds New York Concrete Deal
In its efforts to stop buying concrete from the Mafia, New York City may have ended up buying it from a company that was tied to the Colombo crime family.
At least that is what a former mob leader has testified.
City records show that through a subcontracting arrangement, most municipal concrete work this year in Manhattan -- about $1 million in gross sales -- has gone to the Ferrara Bros.
Building Materials Corporation.
That company, the former Mafia leader testified in 1992, made payoffs to the Colombo crime family in return for labor peace and help in winning contracts.


Players Seeking Antitrust Reversal
The legal power struggle between the National Basketball Association and the players' union yesterday moved into a Federal appeals court, where the union sought to reverse a lower court ruling that found that the salary cap, college draft and right of first refusal signing system do not violate antitrust law.
The union contends that after the collective bargaining agreement with the league expired June 24, the three disputed policies fell out of the jurisdiction of Federal labor law and became provisions restricting the free-market opportunities of players from the day they are drafted to when they retire.


Judge Issues Ultimatum On Charter
The final wording of a referendum on a new legislature for Nassau County was approved today by a Federal judge who warned that if voters do not approve it in November, he will impose his own plan for a new county government.
The judge, Arthur D. Spatt of the Federal District Court, urged "active bipartisan support" for the proposal, describing it as "an unbelievably good plan."


Wausau Paper Mills Co.(WSAU,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "BECOMING VISIBLE: THE LEGACY OF STONEWALL," New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue at 42d Street.
The history of the gay rights movement as seen through unorthodox artifacts.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 930-0800.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday, about Prudential Securities' settlement of Idaho charges of securities law violations, misspelled the surname of a broker in Boise who was named in the state's complaint.
He is Judson T. Moller, not Miller.


John T. Galvin, Author and Executive, 79
John T. Galvin, a public relations executive and political author who played a leading role in the redevelopment of Boston in the 1950's and 1960's, died Monday at Youville Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
Mr. Galvin was 79 and lived in Boston and Edgartown, Mass.


Alabama Accused of Rules Violations
Alabama, which has never been on National Collegiate Athletic Association probation, was accused yesterday of two possible rules violations involving former players GENE JELKS and ANTONIO LANGHAM.
The N.C.A.A., in an official letter of inquiry delivered to the school, raised questions about a bank loan obtained by Jelks and whether Alabama officials responded promptly to information about an agent contacting Langham.


Home Video
Whole 9 Innings
It's not very PBS-like, but in some ways the promotion for "Baseball: A Film by Ken Burns," the nine-part series currently on television and released in video stores today, rivals the ballyhoo for a movie like "Jurassic Park."


Corrections
A headline on Tuesday with the continuation of an article about a contract agreement for workers in New York City private hospitals referred imprecisely to one aspect of the agreement.
While the hospitals would cut their contribution to benefit funds under the agreement, the workers' benefits would not be reduced; as the article explained, both sides agree that management has been paying too much into the fund because health care costs were overestimated.


Editor Shift At Bride's
Barbara Tober, the editor in chief of Bride's magazine for 28 years, will retire at the end of the year, Conde Nast Publications said yesterday.
She will be succeeded by the executive editor, Millie Martini Bratten, who will assume the top position immediately.
Mrs.
Tober, who is 60, will continue her association with the magazine as editorial adviser for the balance of the year.


Magic Signs Another Free Agent in Shaw
The Orlando Magic signed former Miami Heat guard BRIAN SHAW yesterday, their second free-agent acquisition this week.
HORACE GRANT, a former All-Star power forward from the Chicago Bulls, signed Monday.


Market Place; Japonica's bid for Borden is long on advice, short on numbers.
"PROFITABILITY is a state of mind." "There are no mature markets, only mature managers who need to be rejuvenated or replaced." "Wear out the soles of your shoes before the seat of your pants."
Those are some of the "management principles" that Japonica Partners provided to Borden Inc. on Wednesday as part of its proposal -- perhaps suggestion would be a better word -- that Japonica take control of Borden.


Mets Dispatch Players to the Four Winds
The Mets don't know whether next season will start on schedule -- or at all -- but that has not prevented them from making plans to send the best and brightest prospects in the organization to various outposts to play winter ball.
Forced to make cutbacks on front- office staff and in other areas, the Mets have not cut back on their player development, and are one of 13 teams that started Instructional League play this week in Florida.
Major league ownership is also supposed to approve the Arizona Fall League, and the Mets will chip in their $35,000 fee to send six players -- including infielder Butch Huskey and pitcher Pete Walker -- to that program.


Haywood Henry, 81, Clarinetist And Saxophonist for Big Bands
Haywood Henry, an important saxophonist and clarinetist who was one of the last of the living members of the 'Bama State Collegians, died on Sept. 15 at his home in the Bronx.
He was 81.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Diane Washington.


CHRONICLE
TERRY ANDERSON has filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court in Washington to gain access to the files that Federal agencies compiled about him during his seven years as a hostage in Lebanon.
He said that bureaucrats have not agreed to give him access without permission from his kidnappers, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Mr.
Anderson named 13 Government agencies, including the Central Intelligence Agency, as defendants in the suit, which he filed yesterday in an attempt to get documents that he said are his under the Freedom of Information Act.


Clinton Warns Japan of Trade Sanctions
President Clinton bluntly warned Foreign Minister Yohei Kono of Japan today that if Tokyo did not reach agreements with the United States in the next week on opening Japanese markets, the Administration would consider imposing trade sanctions on Tokyo.
The President and the Foreign Minister met in the Oval Office for nearly an hour, accompanied by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Vice President Al Gore and the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor -- a gallery of power players meant to underscore to the Japanese visitor how seriously the Administration takes this issue.


Borden Signs Agreement for Sale to Kohlberg
Borden Inc. signed a definitive agreement yesterday to be acquired by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company for $2 billion, clearing another hurdle in the buyout firm's quest to take over the troubled consumer-products giant.
After meeting for five hours late into the night Thursday, the Borden board signed off on the agreement, subject to final approval by its lawyers on the language of the accord.
Last week, Kohlberg, Kravis offered $2 billion of RJR Nabisco stock for Borden in a complex deal.


Pneumonic Plague Is Deadliest, and Most Rare Form
The pneumonic form of plague that is epidemic in an industrial city in western India is the deadliest and most easily communicable form of the bacterial disease that was known as the Black Death in the Middle Ages.
But until the epidemic struck in Surat in India, pneumonic plague had not been heard of anywhere for decades.
Experts said in interviews that they could not recall an outbreak of pneumonic plague in the world since early in this century, and they had no recollection of where the last outbreak occurred.


U.N. Sex Harassment Hearing Lacked Fairness
To the Editor:
Ciceil L. Gross (Op-Ed, Sept. 15) paints an extremely distorted picture of Catherine Claxton's sexual harassment case at the United Nations.
I know because my associate and I had the honor to represent Luis Maria Gomez, who, as Comptroller, played a critical role in easing the organization out of its most severe financial crisis, is respected by many there as one of its most capable and fairest managers and continues to be supported by many, if not most, of the organization's women.


Congressional Memo; With Eyes on Elections, Senate Finds an Impasse
Only the United States Senate, with its arcane rules and members who are comfortable speaking at length to empty chairs, could find itself in such a mess.
Republicans kept the Senate in session all night talking about a procedural motion on campaign finance legislation.
The motion was finally agreed to this afternoon, 93 to 0, and the senators recessed for the weekend.


Observer; Why Are These Men Gloating?
Republicans are ecstatic.
They say all signs indicate the voters are sick and tired of President Clinton.
They say this could mean a Republican takeover of the Congress this year.
And even sweeter than that -- a Republican President elected in 1996.


Supermarkets for Slums
The Local Initiatives Support Corporation, a nonprofit organization created by the Ford Foundation and located in New York City, has spearheaded over the last 15 years a successful program to rebuild housing in urban slums.
The organization's novel approach has been to channel private and public money into community development corporations that take responsibility for reclaiming neighborhoods, often block by block, from drug lords and delinquents.
This week L.I.S.C. launched a second assault on ghetto blight: economic development.
It announced commitments by 10 major national corporations, including Prudential, Bank of America, and J. P. Morgan, to contribute $24 million to a fund that will help community development corporations around the country build retail shopping centers.
The fund will cover about a third of total development costs.
The balance of the money will come from other private lenders and public sources.


A Savvy Campaigner in a Kennedyesque Role


CHRONICLE
Executives of Wellman Inc., a company that recycles plastic bottles, knew just what to give Vice President AL GORE when they saw a recent photograph of him with his toes sticking out from a cast on his left leg.
They gave him cast cozies.
The cast cozies, which are made of a fabric that comes from recycled bottles, were presented to the Vice President, who is recuperating from surgery on a tendon, at a dinner of the League of Conservation Voters in Manhattan on Thursday.


Beyond Butoh, Seeming to Emerge From Stone and Return
Actions speak louder than words.
Quite a few words are needed to describe "Renyo," which Tomoe Shizune and Hakutobo presented on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater.
At least as many are required to place this event in a historical and esthetic context.
Fortunately, the impact of what happened on stage can be summarized in a sentence or two.


Becker Milk Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mitchell's Acrobatics Now Limited to Catches
Don't look for Johnny Mitchell to perform cartwheels, flips, leaping high-fives or other egotistical routines simply because he and the Jets will play in front of a home crowd in prime time Sunday night.
"This has been a big point of emphasis this season: Don't overreact," Coach Pete Carroll said today.
"We have the crowd. We want consistency."


Gtech Holdings Corp.(GTK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


CHRONICLE
Executives of Wellman Inc., a company that recycles plastic bottles, knew just what to give Vice President AL GORE when they saw a recent photograph of him with his toes sticking out from a cast on his left leg.
They gave him cast cozies.
The cast cozies, which are made of a fabric that comes from recycled bottles, were presented to the Vice President, who is recuperating from surgery on a tendon, at a dinner of the League of Conservation Voters in Manhattan on Thursday.


Leonard Feather, 80, Composer And the Dean of Jazz Critics
Leonard Feather, the dean of American jazz critics and a composer and musician, died on Thursday at Encino Hospital in Encino, Calif.
He was 80 and lived in Sherman Oaks, Calif.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said a friend, Virginia Wicks.


Horizon Healthcare Corp.(HHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Levine Paces St.
John's Romp  Mark Levine passed for three touchdowns and ran for one last night, pacing St.
John's to a 38-18 victory over visiting Monmouth.
The winners' Errin Hatwood tied a school record by returning the opening kickoff 95 yards for a touchdown, matching the record set in 1985 by Manny Tsantes against Georgetown.
Levine ran 14 yards to give St.
John's (2-0) a 14-0 lead, only to have the Hawks (1-2) rally for an 18-14 edge on Doug Rossback's scoring passes of 11 yards to Lou D'Alessio, 2 yards to Justin Garbolino and 46 yards to Marcus Winters.
Levine responded with a trio of scoring passes. (AP) SWIMMING  All Tests Negative From Championships  Speculation was rampant during this month's world swimming championships in Rome that some of the Chinese women had taken drugs.
But results of the 169 tests on all the medal winners and world record-holders came back negative, FINA, the sport's world governing body, said yesterday in Lausanne, Switzerland.
In administering the tests, FINA said it followed the same guidelines as the International Amateur Athletic Federation and the International Olympic Committee. (AP) GOLF  Lancaster Splashes Into Lead  Neal Lancaster, whose only tour victory came this year in a rain-shortened tournament, shot a second straight five-under 65 yesterday to take the lead in the soggy Hardee's Classic.
Lancaster's 10-under 130 at the Oakwood Country Club in Coal Valley, Ill., put him one shot ahead of Bob Estes.
"It's fun so far. Can you get me a couple of rainout days now?" asked Lancaster.
In May, Lancaster won the Byron Nelson Classic in a six-way playoff when the tournament was reduced to 36 holes by rain. (AP) Medalist Gains Senior Amateur Semifinals: The qualifying medalist, Bob Hullender, led the way into the semifinals of the United States Golf Association's Senior Amateur Championship with a victory in a marathon match yesterday in Nicholasville, Ky., beating Harcourt Kemp of Louisville, Ky., on the 24th hole.
The favored Hello Chicago, a California invader, finished second. (AP) TENNIS  Sanchez Vicario Advances Easily  Top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario fell behind by 1-3 before beating Marianne Werdel of San Diego, 6-4, 6-0, in the quarterfinals of the Nichirei International in Tokyo. (AP)


Where Every Football Game Is the Super Bowl
Nearly four hours before Valdosta's game with Columbia County tonight, a hard rain had started to fall, and the butterflies that had lain dormant in Kareem Wilson's stomach all week began to stir.
Wilson, the Valdosta High School quarterback, knew the Columbia game in Lake City, Fla., would be a difficult test.
When you're 17 and play football at Valdosta, every game seems like the ultimate game.
Nick Hyder, the Wildcats' head coach, likes to say Valdosta's next opponent is always the toughest.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.78
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.77
4.77
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.17
3.02
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.55
7.53
5.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.79
7.77
6.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.63
8.59
7.06
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.53
6.53
5.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Lemrick Nelson Supporters Ask Religious Institutions for Funds
Supporters of Lemrick Nelson Jr., who faces Federal civil rights charges in the stabbing death of a Hasidic Jew in the 1991 Crown Heights racial violence, are asking churches, mosques and synagogues in New York City to contribute to his defense fund.
The Rev.
Earl Kooperkamp, assistant minister of the Church of the Intercession, an Episcopal congregation in Washington Heights, said yesterday that the effort was necessary because the teen-age defendant's family had exhausted its resources in Mr.
Nelson's state murder trial in the case and he now faces "the entire weight of the Federal Government." Mr.
Nelson and his father belong to the Church of the Intercession.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  PLAGUE OUTBREAK IN INDIA
As many as 200,000 people have fled an outbreak of pneumonic plague in western India, one of the most serious outbreaks of the disease in recent years.  1


Report Finds Ames's Sabotage More Vast Than C.I.A. Admitted
Aldrich H. Ames, the spy inside the Central Intelligence Agency, exposed nearly every important operation and agent the C.I.A. had inside the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe in the mid-1980's, according to a draft of a C.I.A. report on the affair.
The internal report admits for the first time that Mr.
Ames was not boasting when he bragged at his sentencing in April that he had done far more damage to the C.I.A. than the agency admitted after his arrest in February.


Corrections
A listing in the New Jersey Weekly calendar of cultural events on Sunday about a gallery talk at the Montclair Art Museum by its director, Ellen Harris, misstated the date.
It is at 3 P.M. tomorrow; it was not last Sunday.


Correction
A headline yesterday mischaracterized a letter by Charles Fried about a Supreme Court ruling.
The Court ruled against affirmative action in the case, and Warren E. Burger was then Chief Justice.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday, with an article about the closing of a brokerage firm and its effect on some stocks, misstated the decline of one stock, Procept Inc., in some editions.
It fell 30.9 percent on Thursday, not 69.1 percent, and was down 68.2 percent for the year, not 85.8 percent.


Not His. Theirs.
To the Editor:
You report (news articles, Sept. 15 and 17) that the talk in Washington Depot, Conn., centers on "a one-time power on Wall Street and his new $900,000 house, which happens to be six feet taller than the town's 35-foot height limit."


CHRONICLE
Twenty-five women will be inducted today into the National Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, N.Y., where the first Women's Rights Convention was held, in 1848, by such feminists as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott.
Among the new members: BELLA ABZUG, GERALDINE FERRARO, OPRAH WINFREY, WILMA RUDOLPH and ANTONIA NOVELLO.


International Multifoods Corp.(IMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Simpson Judge May Restrict Coverage
Escalating a conflict over news coverage of the O. J. Simpson murder case, Judge Lance A. Ito threatened today to bar television and radio from his courtroom because of what he called erroneous reports that blood found on socks in Mr.
Simpson's house matched the blood of his former wife.
"I am contemplating terminating the media coverage in this case," the judge said on the final day of hearings before jury selection begins on Monday.
He said he would hold a separate hearing, later next week, to discuss whether to carry out his threat to bar the broadcast media or perhaps impose some other restrictions on news coverage of the trial.


Postponing of Papal Trip Stirs Talk of Successor
The old aphorism at the Vatican used to be: The Pope's alive until he's dead.
It meant, simply, that whatever the state of his mortality, the Pope could not be seen to be enfeebled or impaired in performing the duties of an office whose aura and authority could not be diminished.


Mayor Warns Of Big Cuts In the Budget
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani warned yesterday of "substantial reductions" in spending to keep New York City's budget balanced, and said he was considering steps like reducing welfare payments to single adults and cutting back city contracts to private companies.
Administration officials also said that savings might be found in increasing the number of prisoners in the city's jail dormitories by using bunk beds.


JAZZ
Going After a Specific Mood With an Arsenal of Techniques Iridium
The greatest weakness of the current legions of gifted young jazz musicians is conceptual: having learned the essentials of improvisation, they overlook the structure of a performance.
The saxophonist Wess Anderson is different; he produces music that goes after a specific mood.


CBS Buys 2 UHF Stations To Serve Atlanta and Detroit
CBS Inc., under pressure to keep its national television network intact by finding stations in two of the country's largest cities, announced yesterday the purchase of two small UHF stations in Detroit and Atlanta.
That the stations are little-watched properties with no local news operations reflects the network's limited options at a time when it has lost longtime affiliates in key markets.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Chamber Ensemble Expands Its Repertory  Stuyvesant High School Theater


Visa Wins a Key Round in Antitrust Suit by Dean Witter
Visa U.S.A. won a key round in court yesterday in its effort to fend off an antitrust suit brought by Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company.
The suit had been widely watched even beyond the banking industry because of the high damages at stake and the significant legal issues it raised.
A Federal appeals court in Denver yesterday reversed a jury verdict that Visa had violated antitrust laws by prohibiting Dean Witter from issuing Visa cards.
Dean Witter said yesterday that it would appeal.


Veteran Players Preaching Solidarity
If the union is going to have a pep rally, it doesn't hurt to have veteran cheerleaders like Dave Winfield, Eddie Murray and Cal Ripken Jr.
Speaking from a combined experience of 53 years in the major leagues, Winfield, Murray and Ripken yesterday told their younger colleagues the importance of remaining solid throughout a work stoppage like the one that has halted the season for 52 days and 669 games and wiped out the World Series.


Holly Corp.(HOC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Simms Rejects Cardinals' Offer
Steve Beuerlein started the first two games at quarterback for the Arizona Cardinals this season, and they lost both.
Jim McMahon started the third game, hurt an ankle and a knee, and they lost that game, too.
Jay Schroeder will probably start their next game, a week from tomorrow against the Minnesota Vikings.
Rich Gannon, who tried out with the Cardinals Wednesday, was sent away.


Fuller (H.B.) Co.(FULL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Shop Owners Have Right to Quality of Life Too
To the Editor:
Having done a commendable job of fighting crime in New York, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani now plans to start fighting private vices instead.
In the name of improving the city's "quality of life," Mr.
Giuliani has proposed sweeping new zoning regulations that would force many sex-oriented businesses to shut their doors (news article, Sept. 18 and letters, Sept. 17 and 19).


Venal and Lust-Ridden? Step Right Up.
What to make of Handel's early opera "Agrippina," with its epic treatment of bumbling court intrigue, its mock-heroic portrayal of a tiny constellation of historical figures, each more venal, lust-ridden or simply contemptible than the last?
Scheme crowds upon scheme in near-farcical profusion in the rewritten history of Handel's librettist, Cardinal Vincenzo Grimani, the central one being Agrippina's plot to have her young son, Nero, share, if not usurp, the throne of her husband (the boy's stepfather), the Roman Emperor Claudius.
Perhaps best to make light (not to say fun) of it, the way Oxford Early Opera did in a semi-staged performance at the Mannes College of Music on Wednesday evening.
This smart little English company was founded last year by Christian Curnyn and Magnus Richardson to afford opportunities to young professionals.


United States Surges to the Lead in Sweden
An opinion poll published early last year reported that the Swedes consider Goteborg their friendliest city.
After one day of competition in the Davis Cup semifinals, the Americans are not about to disagree.
The Swedes in this coastal community could hardly have been more welcoming, particularly Stefan Edberg, a former paragon of attacking tennis with an enviable Davis Cup resume who has fallen on leaner times.


Innocence Beyond The Erotic Glimmer
A very young woman dressed in a schoolgirl's uniform steps onto the stage of a strip club called Exotica.
Eric, a disk jockey with a voice as creepy as it is suggestive, introduces her as Christina, "a sassy bit of jailbait," and says she will dance at your table for $5.
Eric's crass words seem at odds with this extravagant place.
The men wear suits and ties, the lush jungle decor evokes a Rousseau painting after innocence has been lost, and everything is nearly respectable.
Somehow, Eric and Christina will have to cross paths with Thomas, a meek, bespectacled man whom Canadian customs officials have been watching through a one-way mirror as he enters the country.
Early in Atom Egoyan's brazen "Exotica," the director deftly drops in the ideas that come to haunt the film: eroticism, secrecy and the skewed way we look at things.
Nothing is what it seems, least of all the film we're watching.
Despite its lurid-sounding subject, "Exotica" turns out to be less erotic than eerie.
It raises moral questions of guilt and responsibility, plays with post-modern ideas about perception and, by the end, even involves blackmail and murder.


Club Med Inc.(CMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Fassbinder on the Painfully Tight Bonds of Marriage
Social comedy doesn't get any nastier than "Martha," Rainer Werner Fassbinder's pitch-black satire of bourgeois marriage and patriarchal dominance in modern Germany.
The 1973 film, which will be shown today at noon at Alice Tully Hall as part of the New York Film Festival, follows a pathetically obedient wife on her path to destruction at the hands of a sadistic husband.
With a title character who is named after Martha Hyer, a star of 1950's Hollywood melodramas, and whose address is Douglas Sirk Boulevard, the film is also a grimly farcical homage to the sort of pulpy, overwrought soap opera that used to be cranked out by Universal-International.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Command of the Keyboard Need Not Be Faint Praise  Kosciuszko Foundation


No Headline
"They're trying to go by whatever way they can -- by train, by car, bus, truck, anything." -- PRAKASH MEHTA, describing people fleeing a plague in India.  [ 5:1. ]


U.S. Will Aid Haiti To Revive Economy And Monitor Police
The United States will take a series of steps to help Haiti improve its economy, including making a $200 million contribution this year to an international aid effort and increasing the amount of food it is sending to needy Haitians, Administration officials said yesterday.
Restrictions on flights to Haiti and on financial transactions will also be lifted, they said.


We Need Thinkers Instead of Memorizers
To the Editor:
In all the arguments over what it means to get a degree from the City University of New York (letters, Sept. 15 and 20, and Op-Ed, Sept. 8), we seem to lose sight of the fact that what we really need are flexible, confident, curious and motivated people who can speak, listen, think, read, write, calculate, ask questions, analyze, imitate, work, cooperate, forget the outmoded and learn the job on the job -- very basic skills indeed, the foundation of which can be found in most children.


Auto Workers Pushed to the Limit
With customers clamoring for cars and trucks, the domestic auto makers have been pushing their hourly workers at a record pace, and the strain is unmistakable.
Today, the Ford Motor Company said that partly because workers at a parts plant refused to put in more overtime, it had to stop production this week of some popular pickup trucks and large cars.
The General Motors Corporation is facing a threatened strike next week over the exhausting grind at a colossal assembly and parts-making complex known as Buick City.


Yellowstone Is More Valuable Than Gold
To the Editor:
Re "Blocking the Yellowstone Mine" (editorial, Sept. 18) and "Mine Won't Threaten Yellowstone Park" (letter, Sept. 10) by Joseph J. Baylis, president of Crown Butte Resources: I grew up 35 miles northeast of the area where the Canadian company Crown Butte Resources and its partner, Noranda Inc., plan to operate New World gold mine.
The site is 2.5 miles from Yellowstone Park, 1.5 miles from the Absaroka-Beartooth Wilderness Area and in one of the world's most fragile and stunningly beautiful places.


Belfast Journal; When It Comes to Peace, You Spell It B-I-N-G-O
Three weeks after the start of the Irish Republican Army cease-fire, the signs of peace in Belfast are as easy to find as the New Vic Bingo Hall downtown.
Vera Gormley, who sells betting cards there, says the cease-fire is encouraging more and more people to come into the bingo hall at night to try their luck now that it seems unlikely that I.R.A. bombs will still be exploding from time to time next door at the Grand Opera House.


In His Words: Mayor Sizes Up The Candidates
Following are excerpts from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's statements on WABC radio yesterday.
George Pataki doesn't take positions that tell me what he's going to do as Governor of New York.
I need to know; I'm not just a private citizen.
I run a city and I have the interests of the city at heart.
And this is what this all has to do with. . . .


Western Union Buyer Ruled Not Liable for Pension Fund
Judge Novelyn L. Winfield of Federal Bankruptcy Court in Newark ruled yesterday that an Atlanta company that won a bankruptcy auction for Western Union Financial Services should pay $1.193 billion, its highest offer, and be exempt from responsibility for the company's pension fund obligations.
Although the hearing appeared to be the next-to-last chapter in a months-long bidding war for Western Union, a new hurdle emerged that could delay the venerable company's exit from bankruptcy still longer.


DANCE
Sexual Desire and Gender Roles Wrapped Up in Paper  La Mama E.T.C.


Family Mourns Man Killed by Police
On the day the United States soldiers landed here, Benykel Dede's wife said, she begged him not to venture out to the port.
But Mr.
Dede told her there was no way he was going to miss the arrival of the Americans, who he thought would bring peace with them.
Paulana Jean-Dede warned her husband that there could be trouble.
He reassured her that there would be none.
"The Americans are here," she recalled him saying.
"Don't worry about anything."


Company Briefs
AMERICAN MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS INC., Arlington, Va., has declared a 3-for-2 stock split, payable Oct. 28 to holders of record Oct. 7.
FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORP, Los Angeles, a bank holding company, has received Federal Reserve approval to acquire Sacramento Savings Bank for approximately $331 million.


Judge Ito's Rebuke: The Fury Was Clear, but the Focus Wasn't
With little to go on but some angry, ambiguous words from the bench, it is unclear whether Judge Lance A. Ito wants to stop -- and thinks he could stop -- all press coverage of the O. J. Simpson case, just electronic coverage, just electronic coverage inside his courtroom or just coverage from KNBC, the Los Angeles television station responsible for what Judge Ito called false and prejudicial reports about the case.
KNBC incurred Judge Ito's wrath on Thursday by having reported the day before -- erroneously, both Judge Ito and Marcia Clark, the prosecutor in the case, said -- that DNA tests had detected Nicole Brown Simpson's blood on socks found in her former husband's home.
In the judge's eyes, the station compounded its sin by reiterating that assertion on Thursday.


U.S. Military Police Begin Patrolling Streets
American military police began their first road patrols in the Haitian capital today, as their commander worked on a plan to station M.P.'s in local police precincts.
Col.
Michael Sullivan, commander of the 16th Military Police Brigade, met for a second time today with the Haitian police commander, Lieut.
Col.
Michel Francois, who is widely held responsible for much of the violence that the Haitian police and military have inflicted on the population over the past three years.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about job cuts planned by the Northrop Grumman Corporation included erroneous totals supplied by the company in some copies.
The work force is to be reduced by 8,650 jobs, or 18.2 percent, not 9,000 jobs, or 20 percent.
The reductions will affect 150 jobs from the electronics unit in Hawthorne, Calif., not 500.


Jordan Allowed to Play In Arizona Fall League
No surprise: MICHAEL JORDAN will be allowed to play in the Arizona Fall League.
The Chicago White Sox were granted an exemption by the commissioner's office yesterday to add an extra player: Jordan.
The decision had been delayed for two weeks because of baseball's labor problems.
The league runs from Oct. 6 to Dec. 1 and is made up of six top prospects from each of the 28 teams.
The White Sox did not originally list Jordan, so they asked for permission to include him.


Municipal Bond Group on the Minus Side
As the Federal Reserve has ratcheted up interest rates this year, most investors in municipal bond funds have seen their returns slip into negative territory.
Among the top 10 municipal bond funds for the last three years, the only ones to manage a total return of at least 1 percent in the latest 12 months are Franklin High-Yield Tax-Free Income and United Municipal High-Income, both of which hold lower-quality and unrated bonds.
"That yield has been able to offset capital losses," said Jeff Kelley, associate editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds.
Franklin, which still has high yields from older bonds, has also benefited from its buy-and-hold strategy, he said.


Inmac Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 30


Thousands Flee Indian City In Deadly Plague Outbreak
As many as 200,000 people have fled the city of Surat in western India after an outbreak of pneumonic plague that medical experts described as one of the most serious reported in the world in recent decades, officials here said today.
Less than 48 hours after the first confirmed death from the disease, officials in the industrial city said that 24 people had died and 137 others were being treated in hospitals.
But unofficial reports, including accounts from doctors working in Surat, said that at least 100 people had died, and that the toll was expected to rise as house-to-house searches turned up scores of new patients.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section on Thursday with the Parent &amp; Child column, about parents' involvement with their children's schools, misidentified a volunteer at Public School 87 in Manhattan.
She is Angela Tripi-Weiss, who runs an arts program, not Mary Stetten Carson, who runs a science program.


U.N. Sex Harassment Hearing Lacked Fairness; Flawed Institution
To the Editor:
The kind of ordeal described in "Catherine Claxton vs. the U.N." on Sept. 15 is not limited to the United Nations Secretariat.
As Women's International Network News has documented and reported for years, all United Nations agencies and international bodies, including the World Bank-International Monetary Fund, the Development Program, the Children's Fund, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization and the International Labor Organization, are exempt from equal-employment laws and thus immune to all sexual harassment and discrimination complaints by women.
Ms.
Claxton's courage to stand up against this corrupt and obsolete system of employment is to be congratulated.


A Flight Delay for Interactive Video
The attempt to equip airplanes with interactive video has suffered the equivalent of an aborted takeoff.
Northwest Airlines said this week that it was removing the system from its aircraft because some units kept breaking down.
And two other carriers, Virgin Atlantic Airways and China Airlines, said they were struggling to correct problems with interactive systems on their planes.


U.N. Eases Curbs on Yugoslavia After Serbian Peace Concessions
The Security Council voted today to ease sanctions on Yugoslavia for 100 days in response to a pledge by the President of Serbia to support a peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina, halt the shipment of war supplies to the Bosnian Serbs and accept civilian monitoring of the Serbian-Bosnian border.
At the same time, the Council approved two additional resolutions intended to punish the Bosnian Serbs for continuing to carry out a "persistent and systematic campaign of terror" while interfering with United Nations relief and peacekeeping operations.
Financial and commercial activity as well as all political talks with Bosnian Serbs would be frozen until they agree to a peace agreement reached on July 6 and backed by Russia, Europe and the United States.


Bridge
One top-ranked American team was eliminated at the NEC World Championships here Thursday, while two others made astonishing comebacks.
In the Rosenblum Open Teams contest, the star team of James Cayne of Manhattan, Chuck Burger of Southfield, Mich., Mike Passell of Dallas, Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., Bob Goldman of Dallas and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., had seemed well placed, but could only score 47 percent in its last three matches and fell short.


Working to End Landlord Role, New York Faces Hurdles
Some nights, Diane Dawson lies awake wondering if the noises she hears are drug addicts creeping into the empty apartments scattered throughout her building in Mott Haven, the Bronx.
The doorless entrance is like a welcome mat to squatters; because of constant vandalism, the owner has given up trying to keep doors or locks on the building.
Brenda Crandall, who lives with her son and daughter in a seven-unit building in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, never knows if there will be water for their showers in the morning.
The superintendent tells her that the aging plumbing system and boiler are almost beyond repair and that he has not been able to get money for a replacement.


Hills Stores And Bidder End Fight
A large shareholder of the Hills Stores Company yesterday agreed to end its bid for control of the regional discount store chain, drawing to a close a fight that pitted some of Wall Street's sharpest investors against each other.
Dickstein Partners L.P., which owns 9.5 percent of the Hills common and preferred shares, agreed to stop soliciting shareholder support for its plan to replace four of Hills's eight directors and push through a $125 million program to repurchase stock.


Carter and Christopher to Meet In Georgia to Discuss Frictions
Secretary of State Warren Christopher will meet with former President Jimmy Carter in Georgia on Saturday morning in an effort to iron out the misunderstandings between them, State Department officials said today.
The meeting will take place either in Atlanta or in Plains, Mr.
Carter's hometown, the officials said.


A Liberty Ship Comes Home


Photographs Of Balkans Draw Fire
A new photography exhibit on the war in the Balkans that opened on Thursday at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum is drawing criticism from Serbian-American groups and some Jewish organizations.
The exhibit, "Faces of Sorrow: Agony in the Former Yugoslavia," is the museum's first exhibit dealing with events outside the time of the Third Reich.
Sponsored by Time magazine and Life magazine, the exhibit contains 69 color and black-and-white photographs taken by photographers from the two magazines and other news outlets.
While the exhibit depicts all sides in the war in the former Yugoslavia as victims, the bulk of the pictures show results of atrocities committed by Bosnian Serbs against Muslims and Croats in Bosnia.


2 Officers of 30th Precinct Are Indicted in Theft
Two officers from the 30th Precinct in Harlem were indicted yesterday on charges of stealing more than $1,000 from a small safe taken as evidence in a burglary, and then trying to cover up the theft.
The officers, Stephen Setteducato and Danny Parson, were the 14th and 15th members of the 30th Precinct arrested since April in an investigation into police corruption.
The Mollen commission, which looked into the corruption, ultimately reported a pervasive pattern of corruption in the 30th and several other precincts.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Legislation to overhaul the nation's telecommunications laws to permit open competition between telephone and cable television companies collapsed in the Senate.
The bill's chief sponsor, Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, blamed opposition from the regional Bell companies.  [ Page 1. ] Detroit automotive workers are stressed out, union leaders contend, as the car makers order record overtime to meet demand for cars and trucks.
The Big Three auto makers are reluctant to hire more workers, even though they are sacrificing sales.  [ 33. ] The F.D.A. proposed requiring scientists to disclose whether they have a financial stake in the outcome of research on drugs being considered for Government approval.  [ 7. ] Companies  Dickstein Partners will end its bid for control of Hills Stores, halting a fight between some of Wall Street's smartest investors.
Dickstein, which owns 9.5 percent of Hills' stock, is also ending its demand for a $125 million stock repurchase program.  [ 33. ] CBS Inc. is buying small UHF stations in Detroit and Atlanta.
The purchase of inexpensive, little-watched properties with no local news reflected pressure to keep its national network intact.  [ 33. ] D. Blech &amp; Company's customer accounts and some assets are to be transferred to Josephthal Lyon &amp; Ross, a regional brokerage firm and investment bank.
David A. Blech was unable to save his biotech investment boutique from the one-two punch of a sagging market and an onslaught from short-sellers.  [ 33. ] Northwest Airlines is abandoning its attempt to equip planes with interactive video because some units have been unreliable.
Dean Witter said it would appeal.  [ 35. ] Markets  Gold prices briefly surged above the key $400-an-ounce level on fears of growing inflation, but closed at $399.60 an ounce.  [ 44. ] Treasury bond prices fell, sending the yield on the long bond up to 7.79 percent.
The gold price rise fueled concern that inflation would accelerate and the Fed would raise rates again.  [ 41. ] The stock market declined for a fourth consecutive session, and the fifth in six days, on interest-rate worries, sending the Dow Jones industrial average down 5.38 points to 3,831.75.
For the week, the loss was almost 102 points.  [ 34. ] The dollar was little changed amid signs of progress in trade talks between the United States and Japan.  [ 44. ] Your Money  Investors should never buy stocks from brokers they do not know, S.E.C. officials say.
Former employees of Stratton Oakmont, which settled S.E.C. charges, are now working at other aggressive firms that the S.E.C. calls boiler rooms.  [ 31. ] Bonds issued by emerging nations are being snatched up by managers of a dozen new mutual funds, who say they see great growth ahead.
Investing.  [ 31. ] There are no simple rules for how much life insurance to buy.
The basic purpose is to be sure that if a breadwinner dies, dependents will have enough money, and family circumstances vary.  [ 32. ]


Beliefs; A language barrier at the world population conference involved much more than words.
The language spoken at most sessions of the recent International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo was English.
But the participants were unknowingly speaking three different languages, said William F. Vendley, executive director of the World Conference on Religion and Peace, who was an official nongovernmental representative at the meeting.
The result, he contends, was sometimes a broadening of perspectives and sometimes sheer Babel.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the Annenberg Foundation's $50 million grant to New York City schools misstated the terms.
The grant requires a two-to-one match of the funds by other philanthropies and individuals, not a one-to-one match; thus the gifts would total $150 million, not $100 million.
The article also misstated the role of the Annenberg Institute at Brown University in awarding grants.
The institute advises the Annenberg Foundation on choosing beneficiaries; it does not oversee the awards.


CHRONICLE
MARILYN BERGMAN, the Oscar, Grammy and Emmy winning songwriter, has been elected the first female president of the International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers.
The organization works to protect the intellectual property rights of authors, dramatists, composers and artists.
In April, she was elected the first female president of Ascap, the American society.
The international group's election took place in Washington at a four-day meeting that ended on Thursday with a performance called "A Celebration of American Music," on the South Lawn of the White House.
"We did it in a foot of mud," Ms.
Bergman said.
"Because of the weather, it was touch and go whether we would have it or not."


After White House Shuffle, Most Old Hands Stand Pat
The White House today announced a long-awaited reshuffling of its staff, a move that was intended to help shape President Clinton's image as bold and decisive but has instead given an impression of indecision and last-minute invention.
After nearly three months of plotting by Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, what would have been the centerpiece of the plan, the installation of a new primary press spokesman, was eliminated at the last minute Thursday night.
Mr.
Clinton decided to keep Dee Dee Myers as his press secretary for now, and to give her greater authority, after being told that she would resign by the end of year.


Sanders Charge Ruling
A grand jury decided yesterday against indicting DEION SANDERS on a felony charge related to a confrontation with an off-duty police officer at Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati.
A Hamilton County (Ohio) grand jury instead indicted Sanders on a first-degree misdemeanor of failing to comply with a police officer's order.
The Cincinnati Reds outfielder was originally charged with misdemeanors after driving his motor scooter away from an officer at the stadium, but the police later added a felony count.


National Data Corp.(NDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


F.D.A. Seeks Financial Disclosure by Researchers
The Food and Drug Administration today proposed to require scientists to disclose whether they have a financial stake in the outcome of research they do on drugs being considered for Government approval.
"There is a growing recognition in the academic and scientific communities," the proposal said, "that certain financial arrangements between clinical investigators and product sponsors, or the personal financial interests of the clinical investigators, can potentially bias the outcome of clinical trials" on the safety and effectiveness of drugs.


Lasorda Pact Extended
The Los Angeles Dodgers gave Manager TOM LASORDA a contract extension through the 1995 season yesterday.
Lasorda has spent 45 years in the Dodger organization, and has managed Los Angeles for the past 18 seasons.


Bullish Bond Funds Mine Emerging Nations
THE managers of a dozen new mutual funds say they see great growth ahead in many emerging markets, and so they are plunking down money to snatch up . . . bonds.
Bulls buying bonds?
Curiously, yes.
While stocks are the standard way to cash in on growth, managers know that debt works, too.


In Spite of His Crimes, Neighbors Re-Elect Him
Ronald Jackson likes to compare himself with Marion S. Barry Jr. and Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Mr.
Jackson, 50, has been convicted twice of using his position on the local public housing board for illegal gains.
And twice, his neighbors and constituents have returned him to office as their tenant representative.


Messier's Frustration Continues To Grow
Mark Messier arrived in New York yesterday afternoon looking tan and fit and totally relaxed.
But he and his family are growing more and more frustrated with the Rangers' failure to participate in any substantive contract talks over the past five days.
According to Doug Messier, Mark's father and agent, the Rangers have refused to discuss dollar figures since the changing of the guard at Madison Square Garden earlier this week.
He was compelled to call Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, yesterday morning to ask what was causing the delay.


Sports of The Times; Hockey Must Compromise For Its Sake
HERE's one thing I never say anymore: "These people can't be that stupid, can they?" I stopped saying that when I realized that Richard Ravitch and Donald Fehr in the same room with their entrenched positions were doomed to produce the end of baseball as we have known it.
So I won't say "These people can't be that stupid, can they?" about Gary Bettman and Bob Goodenow, the two officials who will decide the fate of hockey.
Not hockey as we have known it, because that was a provincial product run from musty offices in old cities, but hockey as it could be.


McLennan Gets His First Crack at No. 1
If the Islanders are a team of many questions, perhaps the biggest one is: Can Jamie McLennan be a No. 1 goaltender in the National Hockey League?
The Islanders seem to think so.
On Thursday, they traded Ron Hextall, who was a disappointment last season, to the Philadelphia Flyers.


Blurring Truth and Fiction in Rural Iran
In Abbas Kiarostami's film "Through the Olive Trees," Hossein Rezai, a nonprofessional actor with soulful eyes and a streak of stubbornness that is as big as his ego, plays a love-smitten bricklayer whose would-be fiancee (Tahereh Ladania) refuses to acknowledge his existence.
Complicating matters is the fact that the two have been cast as newlyweds in a movie about earthquake survivors in northern Iran.
The film, which will be shown at Alice Tully Hall tomorrow evening at 6:45 P.M. as part of the New York Film Festival, is the story of one persistent man's pursuit of a woman who believes he is beneath her.
It is also a richly textured quasi-documentary portrait of a rural Muslim society in which the people display a remarkable resilience in the face of catastrophe.


Discount Auto Parts Inc.(DAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Franklin Quest (FNQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


2 U.S. Bridge Teams Clash in Women's Finals
Bridge teams headed by Marinesa Letizia of Chicago and Sally Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., clashed here today in the final of the World Women's Teams for the McConnell Cup at the NEC World Championships.
Halfway through the 64 deals, Letizia led by 20 imps.
In semifinal play on Monday night, the Letizia team, which includes Judi Radin, Sue Picus, Jill Blanchard and Rozanne Pollack, won easily by 78 against a team headed by Claire Tornay of Manhattan.
The Woolsey team, which includes Karen Allison, JoAnne Casen, Dori Cohen, Joann Glasson and JoAnn Manfield, built up a big lead but barely survived a stretch drive by Jo Morse of Tucson, Ariz., and her team.


A Reading Upsets Beckett's Estate
With an unauthorized, staged reading of an unproduced play by Samuel Beckett scheduled to be presented in New York City on Monday, the playwright's estate is once again at the center of a storm of controversy.
In 1947, immediately before he wrote "Waiting for Godot," Beckett finished his first full-length play, "Eleutheria," in French.
The title means freedom in Greek.
The earlier play still has not been published or produced, although excerpts from it appeared in 1986 in the French journal Revue d'Esthetique.
For at least 20 years, the work has been written about and discussed by Beckett scholars.
The reading by a group of actors at the New York Theater Workshop, before an invited audience, is to be the first public airing of the play.


BILL TO REVAMP COMMUNICATIONS DIES IN CONGRESS
A sweeping effort to rewrite the nation's telecommunications laws, intended to permit open competition between telephone and cable television companies, collapsed today in the Senate amid feuding between rival industry groups.
The bill was pronounced dead by its chief sponsor, Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina.
Blaming opposition from some regional Bell companies, which argued that the legislation was stacked against them, Senator Hollings said he would not have been able to push his bill through before this session of Congress ends next month.


Rwandans 'Back' in Land Parents Fled
When Penninah Mbabazi drove into Kigali in mid-July, barely a week after the capital had fallen to the rebel army, she stopped to check out a deserted and looted building that had once been a nightclub.
Within a week she rounded up a power generator, furniture, liquor, 21 employees and some pirated music tapes, and the club was back in business.
On weekends as many as 500 Rwandans gyrate to the rhythms of Zairian, rock and rap music under blue, red and green disco lights at "Kigali Night."


The North Effect on the G.O.P.
Oliver North has two talents rarely, if ever, combined in the same political candidate.
He can squirt water through the gap in his front teeth and strike a target 10 feet away.
He also has a rare gift for splitting a political party that normally tolerates almost anyone identified as a Republican.
Mr.
North is the G.O.P.'s official senatorial candidate in Virginia.
He faces the Democratic incumbent, Charles Robb, and J. Marshall Coleman, another Republican who is running as an independent.
But much of G.O.P. firmament cannot abide Mr.
North, including one former President, largely because he misled Congress about the Iran-contra affair.


A Poet's Season
Why does it matter that Friday was the first day of fall?
Well might you ask, and an answer leaps quickly to mind.
It means the year is on the glide path toward days of supreme delight, a time of abundance and dwindling down.
No one ever captured the moody, dichotomous charm of these months better than John Keats in his ode "To Autumn," and the official arrival of the season provides an excuse to contemplate one of the English language's finer short lyrics.
"Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness," Keats said in the first of 33 lines devoted to images of harvest bounty.
So it comes as a mild shock to discover that he wrote the poem on Sept. 19 -- technically part of summer, even in England.
Well, precision was not the stock in trade of Romantic poets.
They dealt in the more generous measures of seasonal change and the heart's long turnings.


INSIDE
Simpson Judge v. Press
Escalating a conflict over coverage of the O. J. Simpson case, the judge threatened to bar some news media from his court.
But his language left questions about whose coverage was being threatened.
Articles, page 7.
A Gift Destroyed
An $80,000 all-weather miniature soccer field -- a gift from the Government of Norway to Red Hook, Brooklyn -- lasted 10 days before vandals ruined it, setting fire to its artificial surface.
Page 21.
2  Arts


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI HOLDS BACK ON PATAKI SUPPORT Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani stepped up his criticism of his party's gubernatorial candidate, Senator George E. Pataki, saying that Mr.
Pataki has taken positions that would hurt New York City.
He vowed that he would not endorse Mr.
Pataki unless the Republican candidate proposes specific fiscal policies that will benefit the city.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  DRUG UNIT RETURNS TO SITE OF UNREST The last time the troubled Street Narcotics Unit of the 120th Precinct raided the Park Hill Apartments on Staten Island, the results were deadly.
A man suspected as a small-time drug dealer, Ernest Sayon, suffocated in their custody, setting off a civil disturbance for days.
When they returned this week, the officers appeared to take special care to speak to residents and even suspects courteously, without the hint of using brutal force.
Page 23.
DEAD BABY DISCOVERED AT AIRPORT A 30-year-old Englishwoman attempting to board a plane bound for London was arrested at Kennedy International Airport after a Port Authority police officer noticed an unusual bulge under her coat and discovered a dead newborn girl, the police said.
Page 23. 2 MORE OFFICERS IN HARLEM ARE INDICTED Two officers from the 30th Precinct in Harlem were indicted on charges of stealing more than $1,000 from a safe taken as evidence in a burglary and then trying to cover up the theft.
They were the 14th and 15th members of the precinct arrested since April in an investigation into police corruption.
Page 23.
DONATIONS SOUGHT FOR NELSON DEFENSE Supporters of Lemrick Nelson Jr., who faces Federal civil rights charges in the stabbing death of a Hasidic Jew in the 1991 Crown Heights racial violence, are asking churches, mosques and synagogues to contribute to his defense fund.
Page 22.
REGION  TAKING THE RACE AT A JOG For weeks, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, has campaigned as if he wereprecisely where he wanted to be in the polls.
While his Democratic rival, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, has frenetically crisscrossed the state playing wounded incumbent as underdog, elaborately detailing his 12-year record and imploring supporters to give him one more term, Mr.
Pataki has been a study in campaign minimalism.
Political Memo, Page 24.
VOTING RIGHTS RULING OVERTURNED Siding with Bridgeport, Conn., officials, the United States Supreme Court overturned a lower court ruling that had required the city to redraw City Council districts to meet Federal voting-rights requirements.
Page 24.
DESPITE CRIMES, NEIGHBORS RE-ELECT HIM Ronald Jackson likes to compare himself with Marion S. Barry Jr. and Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Mr.
Jackson has been convicted twice of using his position on the White Plains Housing Authority for illegal gain.
And twice, his neighbors and constituents have returned him to office as their tenant representative.
Page 25.
WOMAN ADMITS SHE FAKED ABDUCTION A New Jersey woman, whose son disappeared and was later found dead, admitted in a court hearing that she had faked her own abduction to Detroit earlier this year.
Page 25.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman...23


Political Memo; Pataki's Race for Governor Has the Pace of a Jog
For weeks, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, has campaigned as if he were precisely where he wanted to be in the polls.
While his Democratic rival, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, has frenetically crisscrossed the state playing wounded incumbent as underdog, elaborately detailing his 12-year record and imploring supporters for one more term, Mr.
Pataki has been a study in campaign minimalism.


Irving M. Felt, 84, Sports Impresario, Is Dead
Irving Mitchell Felt, a highly successful businessman who led the drive in the 1960's to build a new Madison Square Garden on West 33d Street, died at his home on Thursday.
He was 84.
Mr.
Felt, for whom the Garden's Felt Forum, now the Paramount Theater, was named, also had wide influence over the New York metropolitan area's sports world.


Robert Brown, 66; Ex-Convict Helped To Fight Prostitution
Robert Brown, an ex-convict who drew on his experiences to help law-enforcement authorities combat juvenile prostitution in Times Square in the 1970's and 1980's, died on Tuesday in Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 66 and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he had suffered from a long illness.


Mitchell Ponders Fate of the Health Bills
Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader who gave up a Supreme Court nomination to try to enact national health insurance, spent another day today trying to figure out whether, and especially how, to bury the legislation.
So many health care deadlines had already been missed -- for announcement by the President, for action in committees, for votes on the House and Senate floors -- that Mr.
Mitchell's taking another day or so to reveal the fate of the issue had a certain consistency.


Lakers Sign Ceballos
The final details of his contract worked out, CEDRIC CEBALLOS became a member of the Los Angeles Lakers yesterday.
"We feel this is a great acquisition," said JERRY WEST, the Lakers' executive vice president.
"Cedric is one of the most explosive young scorers in the N.B.A., as well as a fine rebounder for his size. He also plays with a very exciting style and should be a fan favorite here for years to come."


Rabbi Joseph B. Glaser, 69; Led Reform Group
Rabbi Joseph B. Glaser, executive vice president of the Central Conference of American Rabbis, the association of Reform rabbis, died on Wednesday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 69.
The cause was lung cancer, said Francine I. Urist, a member of the conference's staff.


Court Allows Delivery of Spent Nuclear Fuel to South Carolina
An appeals court panel gave permission late yesterday for the Energy Department to bring to South Carolina two boatloads of spent nuclear fuel, overturning an earlier order granted at the state's request.
But South Carolina officials still hope to win an appeal before the radioactive material arrives.
The Energy Department plans to ship the spent fuel, now on two freighters at an undisclosed site in the Atlantic, to the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant in South Carolina for storage.
The fuel was made in the United States and used in research reactors in four European countries.
The department wants it back because it could be used to make nuclear bombs.


Bailey Joins Pacers
The Indiana Pacers and the former Indiana University star DAMON BAILEY have agreed to terms, the team's president, DONNIE WALSH, said yesterday.
The terms weren't disclosed. (AP)


Jaclyn Inc.(JLN,A) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Sudbury Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a business group's study advocating a new emphasis on basic academic training misidentified the term for placing all disabled children in standard classrooms.
The practice is called inclusion, not intrusion.


What Students Propose On School Violence
To the Editor:
On Sept. 16, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines and Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of Teachers, visited Sheepshead Bay High School.
Sadly, the visit was prompted by a shooting incident.
They came to my chemistry class and spoke with my students.


School Is Born in Love Of a Distant Drumbeat
ROBERT LEVIN was having lunch with some friends and his old musical master, Godwin Agbeli, at a Chinese restaurant on Broadway.
Mr.
Levin, who is 35, was mentioning that when he attended Wesleyan University 18 years ago, his parents were less than thrilled that he had decided to major in Ghanaian drumming.
"Certainly, they would have preferred me to be a lawyer or a doctor," he said.


Blech Moves Its Accounts To Josephthal
In the end, David A. Blech, the biotechnology financier, was unable to fight off the one-two punch of a sagging market and an onslaught from the short-sellers who started going after his firm's stocks last spring.
The survival struggle of his investment boutique, D. Blech &amp; Company, ended in the early morning hours yesterday with an agreement to transfer the firm's customer accounts and certain assets to Josephthal Lyon &amp; Ross, a regional brokerage firm and investment bank with headquarters in New York.


In Senate Race, Robb Attacks North for Endorsing Display of Confederate Flag
Unable so far to profit from former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder's decision to quit the Virginia Senate race, Senator Charles S. Robb today accused his Republican opponent, Oliver L. North, of intolerance and racial divisiveness for endorsing the open display of the Confederate flag.
Mr.
North promptly responded by characterizing Mr.
Robb's remarks as a desperate and cynical effort to raise campaign money.


Kennedy's Wife Is Giving Him a Political Advantage in a Difficult Contest
An exuberant Edward M. Kennedy was on the campaign trail, telling the crowd about the new woman at his side.
"I want you to meet the love of my life -- Victoria Reggie Kennedy!" bellowed the 62-year-old senior Senator from Massachusetts, whose penchant for partying in the decade between his divorce from Joan Bennett Kennedy and his re-marriage two years ago has been lampooned on late night television.
Then, standing on a picnic bench, he leaned over and kissed his wife.


Tiptoeing on the Promenade


In Red Hook, No Field, No Dreams; A Gift for Children Came From Norway. Vandals Destroyed It.
The reporter for the Norwegian national television network led the camera to an empty, unused wading pool in Red Hook Park in Brooklyn earlier this week.
He kicked an empty can across the concrete and spoke solemnly into the microphone.
"This is where Norway Field once was," he said. "Now, it is gone."


Top Trader Leaves Salomon
One of Salomon Brothers' top traders of bonds backed by home mortgages, Patrick McMahon, has left the firm "by mutual agreement," Salomon said yesterday.
Robert Baker, a spokesman for the firm, declined to say why Mr.
McMahon left.
Mr.
McMahon said that his departure was by mutual consent and that he had no hard feelings toward Salomon.
He declined to make any further comment.


Dow Drops 5.38 as Market Loses Almost 102 for Week
The stock market declined yesterday for the fourth consecutive session, and the fifth in six days, as traders continued to worry about another interest-rate increase.
"The mood of the market leaves a lot to be desired, as bulls, bears and Fed watchers all appear to be nervous," said Alan Ackerman, executive vice president of Reich &amp; Company.
"And this is taking a toll on confidence and capital commitments."


Singapore Executes a Dutch Engineer Arrested on Drug Charges
A Dutch-born engineer was hanged here today on narcotics charges, the first Westerner to be executed under Singapore's draconian drug laws.
The Singapore authorities carried out the execution of the engineer, Johannes Van Damme, 59, despite appeals from Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands and from the Dutch Foreign Ministry, and despite reports linking Mr.
Van Damme to the Dutch intelligence agency.


Woman's Body Found in Trailer
Investigators yesterday were trying to identify a woman whose body was left in the back of a truck trailer in Greenwich Village after she was apparently sexually assaulted and strangled, the police said.
The woman, dressed in a green and purple jogging suit, was found by a truck driver shortly after 2 A.M. on Tuesday as he began hauling the trailer from a loading dock on Morton Street.


U.S. Plans $200 Million in Aid for Haiti
Eager to revive Haiti's moribund economy, President Clinton will soon announce that the United States will contribute about $200 million this year to an international aid effort and will lift the ban on flights and financial transactions with Haiti, Administration officials said today.
And to improve living conditions immediately in the hemisphere's poorest nation, Mr.
Clinton announced today that the Agency for International Development would start providing 1.3 million meals a day to needy Haitians, up from the 1 million a day it has been serving in recent weeks.


The Missing Messenger
Did all the commotion over Dee Dee Myers have anything to do with what ails the Clinton Administration?
On Thursday night, Ms.
Myers was widely reported to be on her way out of the White House press secretary's job.
On Friday afternoon, she was still in it, with enhanced access and status.
This appears to be a triumph for Ms.
Myers over other White House aides who believed that she and the press had somehow robbed President Clinton of the credit he deserves.
The whole sequence radiated indecision and improvisation.
But there are other messages to be gleaned from this messy struggle over whether to fire the messenger.
For example, there is a limit to how long any press secretary can disguise fundamental organizational conflicts.
In that regard, the Haitian adventure has been fascinating.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and former President Jimmy Carter have been engaged in some kind of public encounter therapy.
It began with Mr.
Carter telling The Times's Maureen Dowd that he did not talk to State while serving as the nation's top diplomat during the negotiations in Port-au-Prince.


Dead Baby Discovered At Kennedy
A 30-year-old Englishwoman attempting to board a plane bound for London was arrested yesterday at Kennedy International Airport after a Port Authority police officer noticed an unusual bulge under her coat and discovered a dead newborn girl, the police said.
The woman, who refused to pass through an airport metal detector, was about to be searched by security personnel when she confessed that she was carrying the dead infantin a plastic bag, the police said.


Criticizing Pataki, Giuliani Seeks Details on His Plans to Aid City
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday stepped up his criticism of his party's gubernatorial candidate, Senator George E. Pataki, saying that Mr.
Pataki had taken positions that would hurt New York City.
He vowed that he would not endorse Mr.
Pataki unless the Republican candidate proposed specific fiscal policies that would benefit the city.
Mr.
Giuliani has asserted before that Mr.
Pataki will have to earn his endorsement by providing details about his governmental approach to New York City.
But the Mayor went beyond that yesterday by attacking Mr.
Pataki's legislative record.
And like an opposing candidate, he did so by plucking specific votes from Mr.
Pataki's Senate and Assembly career that he said showed Mr.
Pataki "trying to deprive New York City."


Drug Unit Returns to Job At Site of Unrest on S.I.
Charging from two unmarked cars with their handguns drawn, four police officers plowed through the double glass doors of a Staten Island apartment house lobby and arrested two suspected drug dealers without a struggle just before midnight on Thursday.
"Hands on the wall!" one of the officers shouted to the suspects, both teen-agers, as the police briskly searched their loose-fitting dungarees and hooded sweat shirts.
"What's in those pockets?"


Public &amp; Private; Don't Ditch Dee Dee
At lunch they sat talking in a booth at the restaurant across from their office building, three women in soft suits, somewhere between their Wunderkind days and middle age.
It was worth their jobs, they said, to be identified any more specifically than that; they were even afraid to see their line of work in print.
For they had been waxing sarcastic about the "white boys": that is, the men who run the company.
The chairman, the president, the vice presidents -- except for the V.P. for human resources, that being the designated female job.
The big guys, the ones who make the decisions and the policy and who have no women or minorities in their ranks.
It was a commonplace gripefest among professional women, laced with resignation, a little contempt and some bitterness.


Firan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26


United States Surges to the Lead in Sweden
An opinion poll published early last year reported that the Swedes consider Goteborg their friendliest city.
After one day of competition in the Davis Cup semifinals, the Americans are not about to disagree.
The Swedes in this coastal community could hardly have been more welcoming, particularly Stefan Edberg, a former paragon of attacking tennis with an enviable Davis Cup resume who has fallen on leaner times.


POP
The Appeal of the Average: Haggard but Still a Survivor Irving Plaza


Shop Owners Have Right to Quality of Life Too
To the Editor:
Having done a commendable job of fighting crime in New York, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani now plans to start fighting private vices instead.
In the name of improving the city's "quality of life," Mr.
Giuliani has proposed sweeping new zoning regulations that would force many sex-oriented businesses to shut their doors (news article, Sept. 18 and letters, Sept. 17 and 19).


A Flirtation Across the Borders of Cuban Ideology
The unlikely friendship between two men in Havana who couldn't be more different -- one a middle-aged, gay counterrevolutionary and the other a young, heterosexual Communist -- is the story of "Strawberry and Chocolate." But the film's most amazing aspect is that it is a breezy charmer about a relationship shaped by severe political struggle.
The gay, well-educated Diego (Jorge Perugorria) buys ice cream at an outdoor cafe and contrives to sit at a table with David (Vladimir Cruz), a student whose education, from books and life, hasn't gone very far.
David's fiancee has married another man, leaving him a virgin.
When Diego later mentions John Donne, David asks, "Is he a friend of yours?" Diego is charmed.


Exel Limited (XL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Michigan Has Seen Colorado At Its Best
If there was ever any question about whether the Michigan Wolverines would follow the advice of their coach -- that the victory at Notre Dame was just one part of a long process -- that issue was resolved late last Saturday night.
The Wolverines were off, which gave them a chance to watch Colorado embarrass Wisconsin.
They were watching their immediate future, and what they saw was stunning.
They had the opportunity to see the Buffaloes intercept four passes in the first half.
They watched Colorado score 55 points, the Buffaloes' most ever against a ranked opponent, including four touchdowns by Rashaan Salaam.
Kordell Stewart passed for 249 yards and led an effort that turned a 10-point margin into a 38-point victory.


Joan Wolff, Art-Gallery Director, 64
Joan Wolff, the director of the Allan Stone Gallery in Manhattan for 25 years, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
She was 64.
The cause was cancer, said Claudia Stone, a daughter of the owner of the art gallery.


Most Devils and Isles Expect a Lockout
The day after Commissioner Gary Bettman said the start of the National Hockey League season would be postponed if a new collective bargaining agreement could not be reached by opening day next Saturday, the Devils went about their business as usual.
All the players reported to Byrne Meadowlands Arena for practice today before tonight's exhibition game against the Islanders.
None of the Devils was surprised by Bettman's announcement.


Paige Macdonald, Francis Matthes
Paige Frances Macdonald, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon J. Macdonald of Piscataway, N.J., was married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in New Brunswick, N.J., to Francis Stephenson Matthes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephenson Matthes of Greenwood, Del.
The Rev.
Joan Fleming, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Emanuel Cruz, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
The bride, 27, is an associate at Farr &amp; Cunningham, a law firm in Harrisburg, Pa.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
She and her husband received law degrees from Widener University.
Her father is a professor of neuroscience and cell biology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in Piscataway.


Martha in Present Tense
THEY CAME FROM ALL OVER THE country in the 1930's to study and perform with a woman they knew little of, a woman whose dances were so starkly geometric that wags speculated that if she gave birth it would be to a cube.
The woman was Martha Graham.
The dancers were part of an early Graham company referred to simply as the Group.
Together they worked long hours filled with exaltation and despair, love and anger and, most of all, the sense that something new and important was being done.
Dance in America was growing and changing.
Martha Graham was in the vanguard of that change with dances that were, like her, impossible to ignore.
Some of those dances will be performed in "Radical Graham," a two-week season of performances by the Martha Graham Dance Company that opens the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday.
The event, which marks the centennial anniversary of Graham's birth, includes dances from the 1920's to 1958 and a few more recent pieces.


A Plan to Cut Inspections Would Endanger the Public
To the Editor:
In a money-saving effort, New York Buildings Commisioner Joel Miele is proposing a change in the city's inspection of electrical systems that would jeopardize the lives of New Yorkers.


Darcy Jacobs, David Sparrow
Darcy Jacobs, a copy production editor at Glamour magazine in New York, is to be married today at the Roslyn (L.I.) Country Club to David Gregory Sparrow, the managing editor of Sporting Goods Dealer, a trade magazine in New York.
The ceremony is to be performed by Judge Joyce L. Sparrow, who retired from the Queens County Family Court and is an aunt of the bridgroom.
The bride, 29, graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College.
She is a daughter of Margot and Harry Jacobs of New York.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
The bride is the great-granddaughter of the late Israel Miller, who founded the I. Miller shoe stores.
The bridegroom, 30, graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
He is the son of Marcia and Robert Sparrow of Hollis Hills, Queens.
His father is a partner in Sparrow, Sparrow, Singer &amp; Shreiber, a law firm in Kew Gardens, Queens.
The couple met when they both ran in a Corporate Challenge race in Central Park.


SLIPPERY SLOPE IN YOSEMITE
What we see in "Slippery Slope in Yosemite" (Sunday, Sept. 4) is no surprise.
Experiments have shown repeatedly that warning signs and labels have little effect.


Britain's Liberals in a Crisis: Finding Out Where They Are
Judging by a raucous party conference that ended this week in the English Channel seaside resort of Brighton, the Liberal Democrats, long proud of their niche position as a small but honorable band at the vortex of British politics, are caught in an identity crisis.
At the urging of the party's youth wing, the delegates approved some sensitive party positions.
They called for decriminalizing the use of marijuana.
They favored a minimum wage.
And they nearly came out for abolishing the monarchy after the reign of the current sovereign, pulling back instead to seek a "radical trimming" in the $15 million in public financing for royal expenses.


SUNDAY, September 25, 1994; Butterfly Poaching
"I plan on really cleaning house on Rocky Mountain butterflies next year," wrote one of three men indicted recently in a large butterfly poaching ring.
"Am bringing 20,000 envelopes and I expect to fill them all up!"


No Headline
"These apartheid statues, they all must go. In a revolution, you have won when you have taken the capital. And that is what we are doing." PETER MOKOBA, a member of Parliament who represents the African National Congress.  [ 19:1. ]


Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
IT IS THERE IN THE EYES THAT PEER SO sweetly from her portrait hanging in Alice Tully Hall.
The well-known philanthropist, who died last December at the age of 91, could always spot a phony, whether it was a person or a chair.
It was a talent that stood her well in so many years of living.
Her art and furniture, to be auctioned by Christie's starting Oct. 13, is valued at more than $30 million.
You could almost imagine Tully now, frankly flattered yet flustered by all the attention.
Her 14-room penthouse in the Hampshire House, overlooking Central Park South, is so idiosyncratic and personal a nest that public scrutiny might have been unbearable.
Masterpieces by Corot, Canaletto, Delacroix, Degas, Monet, Picasso and Renoir are propped up in niches, on vanities and in bathrooms, sometimes nearly obscured behind vases full of her favorite red carnations.
For all its high-style, 18th-century French furniture, the apartment is quaint in a grandmotherly way, made all the more so because of the animals -- whole sanctuaries of them, in bronze, crystal, glass, porcelain, even plastic.


Political Leader of I.R.A. Begins a Tour of the U.S. in Boston
Gerry Adams, the leader of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, arrived here today for a two-week tour of the United States, and called for more efforts to bring peace to Northern Ireland.
"There is a unique opportunity for peace," Mr.
Adams said.
"There is a unique opportunity for a lasting peace." But he did not pledge to make the cease-fire that the I.R.A. declared three weeks ago permanent, something the British Government has insisted on.


Simms to Call Signals if the Cards Ante Up His Number
Buddy Ryan laid it on thick less than three weeks ago, explaining that the Giants were better off with Dave Brown than Phil Simms at quarterback.
To which Simms replied, "That's Buddy."


Lesley H. Abrams, John C. Nicholson
Lesley Holland Abrams, a managing director at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York, was married last evening to John Cullen Nicholson, a senior vice president at Lehman Brothers in New York.
The Rev.
Leo J. O'Donovan, the president of Georgetown University, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Ann's Church in Wilmington, Del.
Mrs.
Nicholson, 30, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Abrams of Wilmington.
The bride graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a senior partner in Richards, Layton &amp; Finger, a Wilmington law firm.
Her mother, Duane Abrams, is an interior designer in Wilmington.


THIS BUD'S FOR YOU
The best garden should be a personal expression.
It shouldn't matter if the owner of a gas station hasn't studied the principles of Gertrude Jekyll.
As I drive into my local service station, I enjoy seeing "those discarded radials potted up with impatiens." They take the edge off the bleakness of an asphalt landscape.
Also, whenever I stroll through the parks and gardens of Paris, I appreciate the carpet of color.
Yes, acre upon acre of perennial beds would be lovely.
However, the French are already more heavily taxed than we are, and the bedding-out of public parterres with annuals that are almost maintenance-free provide color and beauty without causing another revolution!
PHILLIP B. FISHNER Bayside, Queens


Feast of the Tabernacles:


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Magnetic Levitation Train Gains in Germany
The world's fastest train, which runs along a test track near this placid farm village near the northern Dutch border, has been little more than an object of amusement and fascination, a destination for weekend visitors and wistful engineers.
But today, the German Parliament gave final approval to a bill that could take the train, which runs on the technology of magnetic levitation, beyond the demonstration phase and into long-distance service.
Contractors said after the vote that the world's first magnetic levitation train could go into service in 10 years, linking Germany's two largest cities, Berlin and Hamburg.


Danielle N. Voogt, Jeffrey H. Kotzen
Danielle Nicole Voogt, the daughter of Paulette and Ronald Voogt of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening at the St.
Regis in New York to Jeffrey Howard Kotzen, the son of Linda and Dr.
LeRoy Kotzen of Ridgewood, N.J.
Rabbi Burt Siegel performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
James Gardiner, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in it.
The bride, 26, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a law degree from New York University.
Next month, she is to become an associate at Chadbourne &amp; Parke, a New York law firm.


SUNDAY, September 25, 1994; Raising a Defense Fund
Stacey Koon, the former Los Angeles police sergeant now in prison for the beating of Rodney King, has a defense fund complete with mass mailings to finance his court appeal.
Those who receive the letter and want to respond are offered several ready-made replies to check off.
"YES, I agree. You got a raw deal. It's not fair for you or Laurence Powell to be the scapegoat for ambitious and cowardly politicians. I am enclosing a note to your wife, Mary." Sympathy, no money.


Columbia Gets a Tie But Misses Much More
Columbia 28, Lehigh 28
Columbia rallied to draw even with Lehigh in the final seconds yesterday, but an extra-point attempt that could have won the game was blocked.


After Shaking Hands With the Devil in Haiti; Mouse That Roared?
To the Editor:
Re your Sept. 22 front-page reference to the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as the mouse that roared: What a crudely and cruelly conceived description you offer readers.
It is hard to imagine an epigram so accurately conveying the level of condescension and racism that has guided American policy toward that most unfortunate island of Haiti and its popularly elected president.
It is hard to imagine how one phrase could so neatly satirize the aspirations of an entire people and its leader and demean their demand to be treated with dignity and respect.
ANNE POIRIER  Berkeley, Calif., Sept. 22, 1994


A Case For Clouseau
To the Editor:
As Mr.
Bernstein points out, cracking the quiz-show case hardly needed Sherlock Holmes; Inspector Clouseau could have handled it.
Coming across the contestant Herb Stempel required just a short trip to a newsstand.
He had confessed the whole story of the rigging of "Twenty-One" in The New York Journal-American.
The fraud was first revealed when Mr.
Stempel voluntarily went to The Journal-American and revealed all the tacky details.
The paper then ran a series of front-page articles.
I remember them well because the man responsible for their publication was the managing editor, my father.


TODAY IN The City
THE SCHOOL SEARCH
The right to choose a school remains an elusive goal for many parents.
Still, the savvy parent can often make the system work. (With a guide to the performance of more than 600 elementary schools.)
The City, section 13 (distributed in most of New York City).


Calvert Saunders, C. A. F. Griffin
Mariah Calvert Claud Saunders, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Saunders 3d of New York, was married yesterday in Locust Valley, L.I., to Christopher Ashley Foley Griffin, the son of Patty C. Burkes of Locust Valley and John M. Foley of Columbia, Md.
Bishop Richard F. Grein of New York performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown.
Mrs.
Griffin, 26, is known as Calvert.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Virginia.
Until recently she was a fund-raising manager at the United Nations Association, a nonprofit organization in New York.
Her father is a general partner in Saunders Karp &amp; Company, merchant bankers in New York.


Marley's Ghost Rides the Trolley
In a political harangue far from the nonpartisan confines of this space, I disparaged some action of the First Lady with this metaphor: "The clank of falsity goes to the top."
This criticism elicited a spirited response, which I enjoyed reading, from the Clintons' private attorney, David Kendall of Williams &amp; Connolly.
Then, a few days later, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr.
Kendall denied another accusation from another source, charging it had "the unmistakable and clanging ring of falsity."


New Direct Student Loan Program Can't Live Up to Its Claims; Reducing Default
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 19 news article on the Direct Student Loan Program stated: "When banks give out money, the checks are issued directly to the students, who then use the money for tuition, rent and other expenses."


What's a Flying Female Gypsy Moth? It's Trouble
ONE day last July, Donna Moramarco, a Cornell Cooperative Extension agent in Plainview, L.I., was working in the insect lab when she noticed a huge gypsy moth laying eggs on an alcohol bottle.
Then she noticed it flying around the room.


RAVING BEAUTY
Fashion writing is, well, fashion writing: frothy, fluffy, not to be taken seriously.


Ballet Theater and SUNY Team Up
COMBINE spacious stages, ample rehearsal rooms and eager students with dancers of proven talent, masterful teachers and a whiff of Manhattan and the mix is irresistible.
So said officials of Purchase College here and the American Ballet Theater recently as they announced with sudden fanfare that they would begin a five-year partnership this fall.
"This was one of the most delightful 'non-negotiation' negotiations we've ever had," said Christopher Beach, director of the college's Performing Arts Center.
"It's a great fit for both of us."


Chili Fiesta Promises Hot Fun in Garden
GET your red hot chili peppers here.
Well, there will be not just red hot, but Peruvian purple, Hungarian yellow wax, Scotch bonnet and even habanero chilies (the hottest of them all).


Sept. 18-24: Disquiet in South Africa; Zulu King Ousts A Powerful Associate
King Goodwill Zwelithini, the titular monarch of 7 million Zulus, finally worked up the nerve to jilt his royal cousin, the powerful nationalist leader, Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi.
Since the 1970's, Mr.
Buthelezi has controlled the king's purse, written his speeches, vetted visitors and appointed bodyguards.
More recently, he has made the king the rallying symbol of an ethnic political movement that captured control of one provincial government and won three seats in President Nelson Mandela's unity Cabinet.
Now the king feels his interests will be better protected if he is more independent of Mr.
Buthelezi and friendlier with Mr.
Mandela.


Tours of Former Papal Palace
The Quirinale Palace in Rome, the official home of the President of Italy, will be open to the public starting Oct. 2 every Sunday between 9 A.M. and 1 P.M.
Groups of visitors will be led through the palace, the former summer retreat of the Popes and official residence of the Italian kings.
The tour, which includes much of the piano nobile, or first floor, starts from the vast courtyard by Domenico Fontana, and moves through the rooms frescoed in the early 17th century for Pope Paul V Borghese, then the gallery decorated for Pope Alexander VII under the direction of the great Baroque master Pietro da Cortona.
The tour of the piano nobile also visits the Sala del Diluvio with its decorations by the Carracci family, the Scalone d'Onore with its imposing fresco of "Christ in Glory Among the Angels," by Melozzo da Forli, the Cappella Paolina, a chapel the same size as the Sistine chapel, and the chapel of the Annunciation, which has frescoes by Guido Reni.
Furniture from four centuries, Roman mosaics, ceramic vases, bronzes and paintings are scattered throughout.
The Quirinale palace, built on the highest of the seven hills of ancient Rome, was begun in 1573 by Gregory XIII to serve as the summer residence for the popes.
Over the years the palace grew both in size and in the wealth of its collection.
It was finished under Clement XII (1730-40), but as early as 1587 Sixtus V began living there during the hot Roman summer months.
The palace remained a summer residence of the popes until 1870; it then became the home of the Savoy kings, a role it served until 1946, when the republican constitution designated the President of the Republic its new resident.


Company to Halt Improper Clinic Referrals
After a two-year grand jury investigation, the Government said today that a major health care company had agreed to pay $500,000 and halt "improper practices" involving doctors who send Medicare patients to clinics in which the doctors have invested.
Under a settlement to be announced on Monday, the company, T2 Medical of Alpharetta, Ga., near Atlanta, says it will change the way it does business to guarantee that doctors are not paid for referring Medicare or Medicaid patients to such clinics.


In Quest for Perot Constituents, Cuomo Attacks, Pataki Parries
Behind in the polls and facing a crowd of angry, independent voters, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo let loose a blistering attack today on Senator George E. Pataki, accusing him of raising taxes as Mayor of Peekskill, achieving nothing in the Legislature and unseating the only Republican woman in the Senate.
For his part, Mr.
Pataki, appearing before the same crowd about a half hour after Mr.
Cuomo left, seemed content to play the serene front-runner, and his treatment of the Governor was far more gentle than Mr.
Cuomo had received from some disaffected constituents.


Victoria E. Ward, Raoul F. Hennin
Victoria Edith Ward, a daughter of Nancy and Robert Ward of Kinnelon, N.J., was married there yesterday to Raoul Francois Hennin, a son of Patricia and Patrice Hennin of Woolwich, Me.
The Rev.
Elaine Kebba performed the ceremony at St.
David's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Hennin, 25, graduated from Yale University.
Until recently she was the circulation manager at PC Week, a magazine in New York.
Her father is the president of Carelli, Glynn &amp; Ward Advertising in Butler, N.J.
Her mother is the president of Anserve Inc., an answering service in Pompton Lakes, N.J.


Chinese Cuisine As Smogasbord For the Intellect
There were burning questions about peanut oil.
Should you really be using it? (yes) and how much? (enough).
There was a long debate on just how hot is hot when it comes to heating a wok. (Until it steams, it was revealed, although most cookbooks won't say so, because editors fear liability suits that could result from a kitchen that burns to the ground.)


Vezna Gottwald and Jim Tozzi
THE bride wore red. And so did the bridegroom.
No one who knows Vezna Gottwald and Jim Tozzi expected them to have a conventional wedding.
Graduates of the Rhode Island School of Design, where they met, Ms.
Gottwald, 23, and Mr.
Tozzi, 26, are film makers who have made videos for bands like Mercury Rev and Queen Sarah Saturday.
Their first significant collaboration was Ms.
Tozzi's senior-year film, "Lush Puppy," an erotic variation on "Alice in Wonderland." "We set it to three songs by the British group My Bloody Valentine," Ms.
Gottwald said.
"We got written up in the school paper for making the cheapest film ever made at the school."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
COOKIE ART
Turning a dream into reality was the impetus for the painted cookies produced by Chris Hoffman for an exhibition marking American Folk Art Day in Mount Kisco.
The cookies will be on view Saturday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. at the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts.
Unless one's taste runs to auto paint, watercolor, oil pencil and sealant, it is not advisable to eat the cookies, but they are for sale as pendants and pins, or for display.


Unlimited Visibility
Seeing clear to relaxation


Victoria A. Sher, John T. Hecht
Victoria Ann Sher, the daughter of Judy and Allan Sher of Santa Monica, Calif., is to be married today to John Tobias Hecht, the son of Celina and Thomas Hecht of Holliswood, Queens.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk is to perform the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Sher, 27, is a painter in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.F.A. degree in painting from the University of Iowa.
Her father retired as the chairman of Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards, a securities firm in Los Angeles.


The New Money: Patient and Realistic
In the late 1980's, speculation bottomed out around Tompkins Square Park, and the commercial investors that had hoped for million-dollar profits fled in droves.
But Alex Lokshin saw the future.
"We believed that, no matter what, Avenue A was going to eventually become the heart of the East Village," said Mr.
Lokshin, who, along with his brother and three other investors bought 10 properties near the avenue.


Walking Vienna's Other Ring
THE old city of Vienna is laid out like a spider web, encircled by a series of such streets as Opern ring, Parkring and Schottenring that trace the boundaries of the medieval city walls.
Two trolleys, the No. 1, running counterclockwise, and the No. 2, going clockwise, travel this route constantly, making it a popular tourist circuit.
One thread farther out on the web, traversing what was once open fields beyond the city walls, lies a second ring.
Less well known to visitors, this outer ring affords one of the best walking tours of Vienna, providing a cross-section of Vienna's architecture, culture and history, not to mention its cuisine.


For Information About Fertility
My husband is among the 34 men  [ "Calcium Blockers Are Found to Impede Pregnancy Chance," Aug. 28 ]  whom researchers have identified, in addition to the original 10, as those who have taken hypertension medicine and have had fertility problems.
We are grateful that the media has told this story; it is how we learned that a chance still existed to have a biological child of our own.
We have been trying for four years.
That included temperature charts, fertility drugs, sonograms, blood being drawn, numerous invasive exams, surgery, emotional exhaustion, work schedules being shuffled around and, ultimately, two attempts at I.V.F. that resulted in not one embryo.
No one could tell us why.


Church Begins Drive to Restore Historic Theater
THE 125th anniversary celebration this weekend for St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Jersey City -- a parish with a rich history of welcoming immigrants, from the Irish in 1860's to the Haitians, Ghanaians and Jamaicans today -- will also begin a drive to refurbish the parish's historic 700-seat theater.
The theater, an architectural gem built within the walls of St.
Patrick's Elementary School, was designed in Renaissance Revival style in 1909.
The theater was fashioned after the Shubert Theater on Broadway.


New York's High Taxes
George Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, looked at a report on state taxes last week and declared that New York taxes "are out of control" -- a condition he attributes in part to alleged spendthrift policies over the past 11 years by his opponent, Gov.
Mario Cuomo.
Mr.
Pataki's remedy is to cut a bevy of personal and corporate taxes, though he conveniently sidesteps telling anyone by how much or how he intends to pay for this beneficence.
Never one to miss an election-year trick, Governor Cuomo chimed in with his own tax-cut package.
He too put off telling voters whose programs will be gored.
The candidates are right that New York taxes are sky high.
Last week's report by the State Business Council confirms what many other studies also show: state and local taxes, measured as a percentage of personal income, are 40 percent higher in New York than the national average.
Only Alaska is higher and Hawaii close behind.
But oil companies pay over 85 percent of Alaska's taxes; tourists pay a large share of Hawaii's.
In New York, New Yorkers pay most of the taxes.


Dining and (of Course) Wining in Burgundy
TEN DAYS before my best friend and I were to leave for France last May, our travel agent called to tell us there were no rooms to be had in Paris for less than $250 a night in that busy month.
It didn't take long, then, for us to decide to head for the provinces.
Bypassing our extravagant agent, I reserved a car for an entire week for a flat $149 from Jet Vacations, a subsidiary of Air France, which had coincidentally issued the ticket I had gotten as a birthday present.
Once in Paris, we stopped at the tourist office on the Champs-Elysees, scooped up free information on regions within a few hours' drive and settled on Burgundy for all the most consuming reasons: wine, mustard, cheese, escargots.
We travel to eat.


A March Against AIDS


Clothes for A New Destination
There's a guy in Vermont who is a business broker; he sells businesses from his pickup truck.
They're not stacked up in the back like melons at some roadside fruit stand.
Instead, he's outfitted himself with a cellular phone and a portable fax, and left room on the passenger side for his laptop.
The back of the truck is reserved for taking the family on hayrides on the weekend.
A business partnership was formed in Queens.
He used to cut hair for Vidal Sassoon.
She's a licensed psychotherapist.
Together they started a catering company specializing in barbecue ribs.


Sept. 18-24; Twin Volcanoes


Freeze
Winter doesn't get to only those snowbound along the Tundra.
Was anyone around last March?
It's tough hailing a cab if you're frozen stiff.


The 'Crusty Kids,' Denizens of the Edge
They began gathering around noon on Friday in front of a black iron door near Seventh Street, one of several grimy spots along Avenue A where they know they will find kindred spirits.
One woman, 27, who calls herself Sweet Leaf Dudley, says she has been living on the avenue and sleeping in East River Park for four years now, struggling with a heroin habit.
"I kicked it last Friday," she announced.


Guess Who's Coming to Diplomacy?
IN a memorable cartoon at the end of the Carter Presidency, Pat Oliphant drew Jimmy Carter fishing and reading in a canoe on a lake, with the caption: "Mr. Carter returns to low-profile tranquillity in Plains." Sneaking up behind, out of the weeping willows, was a giant, buck-toothed rabbit -- the "Killer Rabbit" that the President once claimed he fended off with a paddle.
In Mr.
Oliphant's pixilated world, Mr.
Carter grew smaller, as his Presidency faltered, while the rabbit grew larger.
But in one of those wondrous twists of history, Mr.
Carter is no longer a shrinking figure on the world stage.
The former President has grown larger and more cunning than even his old cotton-tailed tormenter.
Now, in the public imagination, it is Bill Clinton and his Secretary of State, Warren Christopher, who seem to grow smaller.


Is It Time To Recall the Bad Old Days?
AS the fall leaves begin to appear, the bond market is again tumbling, pushing the yield on 30-year Treasuries to the highest level of the year.
The summer hope that interest rates would stop rising has been squashed amid talk of strengthening economies around the world.
There is concern over weakness of the dollar and fear that the Federal Reserve is once again going to tighten credit.
Yet the stock market has managed to stay blissfully above most such concerns.
To be sure, it had a bad week last week, after initially ignoring the latest spike in interest rates.
But the Dow Jones industrial average is only a few percent below the record high set earlier in the year.


Pinch Hitters
To the Editor:  What about the misuse of animals?
Hollywood has a history of putting the wrong creature in a film, either because the right one is not easily available or, more often, because it is difficult to train.
For example, in "The Deer Hunter," when a deer is being hunted in the Pennsylvania woods, it is a European red deer, a species that never gets any closer to Pennsylvania than western Scotland.
Now comes "Andre," a film in which the entire premise is wrong.
When Hollywood decided to film this heartwarming tale, it was quickly discovered that the real Andre was a harbor seal, a winsome animal that cannot raise itself up on its flippers, cannot "clap its hands" and is barely trainable.
Moreover, harbor seals cannot rotate their hind flippers forward and have to hunch along like big furry inchworms.
Not at all what they needed for an adorable "seal" in a Hawaiian shirt and a beret.


Time May Be Right for Raising the Golden Roof
GOLD is off to the races again.
For the fourth time this year, gold is threatening to burst through the $400 level.
On Friday, the price of gold in London jumped $2, to $395.70 an ounce, a 1994 high, after a steady run-up since Aug. 16.
Gold did not make $400 an ounce in early January, when it hit $395.25.
And it sagged after touching the $390 level in March and June.


Living in America, New Zealanders Get Together
WHEN Garry Knight took up residence in Norwalk last year he had no idea there were other expatriate New Zealanders in the area.
That is, until a chance encounter with Shirley Condon of Rowayton at the Good Food Store in Darien.
Mr.
Knight and his wife, Nina, who is American, were demonstrating their non-electric yogurt maker.
Mrs.
Condon, who had been looking for a food scale, paid attention when she heard the machine was invented in New Zealand.
"Really," Mrs.
Condon said, "I'm a Kiwi." And they started comparing notes.


Madmen of Style
There are two basic options in male attire: there's taste, and there's tasty.
Taste is easy.
Take something old (a vintage garbardine shirt), something new (an RRL gabardine shirt, the one without the thrift shop stains), something borrowed (Joan of Arc wore khakis) and something blue (Levi's), and any man can be married to taste -- safe, classic, all-flattering, timeless taste.
But tasty, the realm of the deeply garish, requires courage.
Tasty types all have one thing in common -- they're crazy for clothes, they revel in them.
This is what separates them from showboat wannabes, like Michael Jackson with his half-hearted "Music Man" uniforms.
Sadly, rock stars are rarely tasty: they dress by rote in standard-issue bicycle shorts, tattered Edwardian cutaways and those Rising Sun headbands that Axl Rose favors -- the Kiss kit.
Rather, the tasty instinctively embrace the legacy of Bugsy Siegal and Louis XIV, with a splash of Liberace.
They let 'em know who's coming -- from three blocks away.


Apartheid Is Demolished. Must Its Monuments Be?
With the passions of centuries, the purging ritual that comes with revolution has begun in South Africa.
The statue of the father of apartheid was yanked from its pedestal in the Afrikaner stronghold of Bloemfontein this month, and the black victims of a hated Government began eyeing the paintings of wigged lawmakers on Parliament walls and the busts of prime ministers that may be the next to go.


Lisa F. Salvatore, Michael D. Horn
Lisa Francis Salvatore, a daughter of Marion and Thomas Salvatore of Glen Cove, L.I., was married there yesterday to Michael Douglas Horn, a son of Lucy and Irving Horn of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Msgr.
Thomas Hartman performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She and the bridegroom, 28, are staff lawyers in the criminal defense division of the Legal Aid Society of Brooklyn.
She graduated from Colgate University and received her law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
He graduated from Vassar College and received his law degree from Yeshiva University.


2 Chamber Series Differ in Approach
TWO chamber music organizations, Ossining Friends of Music and Performers of Westchester Music, take widely divergent approaches, but both provide invaluable service to music lovers in the county.
After 40 years of presentations, Friends of Music has enough clout -- and a large enough hall -- to engage such world-class artists as the Emerson String Quartet, the clarinetist David Shifrin and the violinist Ani Kavafian, all of whom will be appearing later in the season.


Compelling Simplicity at the Right Price
THE Ridgefield Coffee Company, on Ridgefield's main thoroughfare, is a good deal more than its matter-of-fact name suggests.
Unlike most coffeehouses or bars, it avoids the plastic-wrapped sandwiches and sweets trundled in from an outside vendor.
Achef, formerly at Hay Day, and staff dish up freshly made omelets, salads, pasta dishes and sandwiches.
The space itself is handsome, with high ceilings, white walls, huge framed French posters, floor-to-ceiling cherrywood cabinets and a counter display case full of luscious looking desserts.
Along the counter is an assortment of newspapers for perusing over breakfast, lunch, or a soupbowl-size cup of coffee.


Corrections
A picture of the Potala Palace in Lhasa, Tibet, on Sept. 11 carried an erroneous credit.
It was from Ginette Vachon/Stock Shop.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
'Celeb Lock' on the Court
FINDING the court was as challenging as finding the line for players in the Cartier Grand Slam tennis tournament last weekend.
The tournament was in the Hamptons, in several Hamptons.
Contestants played on 22 private courts in the backyards of some of the most prominent residents on the East End.
With the $275 entry fees going to the American Cancer Society, charitable tennis lovers like Peter Jennings of Bridgehampton and ABC News allowed strangers the use of their courts.
"It's for a wonderful cause," Mr.
Jennings said.
"Why wouldn't one lend his court?"


THIS BUD'S FOR YOU
How dare Michael Pollan disparage the lovely rainbow of impatiens?
Would the upper-class perennial fare better under daily visits from Manhattan's dog population?


Correction
A picture caption on Sept. 4 about a tomato-throwing contest in Bunol, Spain, misstated the age of the tradition.
The town's late-August festival has been held for centuries, but the tomato throwing began about 50 years ago, not 900 years ago.
The tomato was not introduced to Europe from Mexico until the 16th century.


Men in Uniformity
In the infinitely less complicated world of my childhood, there was a board game called Mystery Date.
While I've forgotten most of the rules, what I do remember is a front door that lay in the center of the board like the hatch leading to a dungeon.
As Mystery Date's television commercial explained, you opened the door and discovered your date.
"Is he a dream?" the voice-over asked the girls playing the game as they ooohed.
"Or a dud?" At which point the girls went: "Awwwwwww." The only thing separating the crudely cartooned Dream from the Dud, however, was his clothes.
Dream wore a tux; Dud wore the kind of nerdwear that intimated a lifetime commitment to Ted Baxter.
No matter who the girl was whose luck ran out, the response was always the same: She'd grab the little door and slam it in Dud's face.
These days, as a fashion critic watching men's wear shows, I sometimes play the Dream or Dud game as a reality check.
Models are, as the profession demands, great looking, with corresponding physiques.
Just as with the board game, it's the clothes that make the difference.
If you slammed the door on any of these men, it would be because of what he's been made to wear on the runway.
And clothes that can turn Dreams into Duds are too powerful for mere mortals.


What's the Opposite of Grunge?
An early fall look: suits with longer jackets worn by impeccably groomed women.
It may look out of step with the mix-and-match sportswear generation, but these punctiliously turned-out suits remain the backbone of new fall wardrobes for women who wear the clothes of couture designers.
While jacket lengths may fluctuate, these stylish women long ago decided the most flattering hem length for them was just above the knee.
For shorter skirts, Chanel solved the proportion problem by creating an uninterrupted line with "stocking shoes" in tweed (right and above).
The news is in the subtlety of change: one jacket, far right, suggests a corsetlike fit; the chalk-stripe beauty, above, could dominate a board room full of London bankers.
A whimsical note is the cutout back filled in with net on a black suit, center.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Kind of Like a Video ATM To Charge Movie Tickets  Technology just keeps moving ahead.
Remember when moviegoers had to wait in line to buy tickets?
Now, they can just call 777-FILM, charge the tickets to a credit card and the tickets will be waiting at the theater.
All thanks to a Manhattan-based company called Moviefone.


Giving Up Is Hard to Do
A YEAR ago last week, President Clinton promised the nation "health care that is always there." The country doesn't have it, and isn't getting it any time soon.
Yet the health care issue "is always there" for the Senate, because it cannot figure out how to bring the yearlong fight to an end.
By August it was clear that no bill assuring universal coverage would be passed.
But all this month the senators who wanted to insure everyone, and a bipartisan group (the self-styled Mainstream Coalition) that wanted something less than that but still something substantial, struggled to find common ground.


A Thief's a Thief
To the Editor:
I appreciate The New York Times's editors' note  [ in the main news section, on page 2 ]  explaining that the reviewer of my book "Brecht and Company: Sex, Politics, and the Making of the Modern Drama" was not asked the newspaper's standard conflict-of-interest question, a question that would have immediately disqualified him.
Martin Esslin could almost have been describing the Aug. 7 review when he wrote some years ago, "Brechtian criticism seems to me one of the last remaining areas of pure medieval scholasticism, where statements in classical texts have a higher evidentiary value than experimental proof."


In Defense Of Urban Renewal
Richard B. Greene's letter, "A Revival Plan for New Haven" (July 17) states that Mayor Richard Lee destroyed New Haven in the 50's and 60's, that entire neighborhoods were bulldozed away and ugly concrete buildings were erected in their stead.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 11 about fitness centers in New York hotels misstated the telephone number for reservations at the Waldorf-Astoria.
It is (800) 445-8667.


A Playboy Bunny for the 90's to Clasp to Its Bosom
From drag queens on the front lawn to muscle boys in the game room, they flocked to the Playboy mansion last weekend to redefine an outmoded cultural icon, the Playboy bunny.
And despite the remnants of Playboy's party-mongering past -- celebrities, playmates in the grotto and bunnies in the driveway -- the outre proceedings may have signaled either the end of an era (for heterosexual men) or the beginning of a new one (for gay men) within the Playboy dynasty.
But in either case, the pajama-clad Hugh Hefner, now 68, didn't really care.
"What is the 90's?" Mr.
Hefner asked, sounding philosophical as he clutched a Jack Daniel's on the rocks.
"It's retro: everything that's old is new again. As we approach the millennium, we'll look back and wish we had it back."


POSTINGS: Remodeled, With a New Entrance; N.Y.U. Building Gets New Address: 1/2 5th Avenue
In a reasonable world, the first building on the east side of Fifth Avenue would be No. 1.
But this is Greenwich Village, where West Fourth Street intersects West 11th Street and you can find yourself at the corner of Waverly Place and Waverly Place.
And so, the third building on Fifth Avenue is No. 1.


Melissa Cornell, C. S. Hartigan
Melissa Anne Cornell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald R. Cornell of Woodcliff Lake, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Scott Hartigan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Hartigan Jr. of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick E. Brown performed the ceremony at St.
Gabriel the Archangel Roman Catholic Church in Saddle River, N.J.
Mrs.
Hartigan, 25, graduated magna cum laude from Boston College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is a law clerk for Judge William C. Meehan of New Jersey Superior Court in Hackensack.
Her father is the president of Ray Saoud Farms, a food distributor in Saddlebrook, N.J.


Bus Fare Dips $1 to Attract Livery Riders
For the last two weeks, riders taking the Bx22 bus to the Castle Hill subway station in Parkchester have paid only $1.50 for a round trip -- instead of $2.50.
The $1 fare cut is the Transit Authority's small investment in recapturing thousands of riders and millions of dollars lost to illegal livery vans operating in sections of the city that are underserved by public transportation.


A Man Goes Into a Bar, See, and Recites: 'The Quality of Mercy Is Not Strained'
POETRY is, among other things, a technology for remembering.
Like the written alphabet and the printing press and the digital computer, it is an invention to help and extend memory.
The most obvious examples are mnemonic verses ("Thirty days hath September. . . .") or genealogical and property records like those chanted by the masterly griots Alex Haley consults in "Roots." Language that takes on certain striking physical attributes (rhyme being only one such possibility) becomes not only memorable but also memorizable.
But this fact may touch our lives far more profoundly than jingles for remembering how many days there are in June.
The buried conduits among memory and emotion and the physical sounds of language may touch our inner life every day, with a subterranean reach as powerful in its way as the art of the griot.
Poetry, a form of language far older than prose, is under our skins.


Paris In the Village
Gaultier's perfume party evokes a French street market, Sept. 19.


Spending for the Thrill of It
Doug Matthews's team plays for the 1994 United States Open polo championship on Sunday, a half-million-dollar investment that will return, if he wins, such lucrative rewards as a trophy and a higher personal rating within the sport.
There will be no winners' and losers' purses, no sponsor stipends, no network payoffs, no merchandising receipts, no proceeds from the gate.
The four-man team he calls Aspen, together since March in preparation for this particular event, will disband on Sunday, win or lose.


An Unseen Hand Makes Way for the Maestro
ON THE DESK IN JOHN Grande's unspacious basement office at the Metropolitan Opera, in a file folder that happened to be open during a recent visit there, is a list of the current Met abridgments for Rossini's "Barbiere di Siviglia." It gives the page and measure numbers for each cut (explaining whatever musical changes may be required to bridge the gap) as found in the Schirmer edition of the vocal score.
It is followed by another version of the list, coordinated to the new Ricordi edition.
Then comes a third version, tallied to the old Ricordi edition.
Each list gives 26 cuts in all.
There are no mistakes in the page and measure numbers.
Whoever is conducting "Barbiere" -- it's David Atherton in the season that opens on Monday evening with another Two Tenors gala -- is real, real glad he did not have to make these lists himself.


With Eye on Russia, Lithuania Courts NATO
A study by French experts several years ago concluded that the geographical center of Europe is in Lithuania, precisely 16 miles north of the capital.
Therein lies the country's principal political problem: the search for a proper balance among the concerns of powerful neighbors.
Four years after declaring its independence from the collapsing Soviet Union, Lithuania is close to signing an agreement that will make it an associate member of the European Union.
It is also taking steps to establish a new military role while carefully looking over its shoulder at a suspicious Russia.
Like almost every former Communist country in Central and Eastern Europe, Lithuania dreams of membership in NATO.
But out of respect for Russia, it is not pressing its case too forcefully.


Turf Toe Crashes The Party For Jets
It hurts even when they walk. But the Jets will have to run tonight against Chicago.
The run was to be the backbone of the Jets' season: give the ball to Johnny Johnson two dozen times a game, hand it to burly Brad Baxter for the tough 2 or 3 yards, bring in the flashy Adrian Murrell to change the tempo.


EUROPE: THE NEW SEASON -- Restored Treasures; Germany: A Berlin landmark gets Lagerfeld touch
The Schlosshotel Vier Jahreszeiten, a small luxury hotel in Berlin, has just opened after a $20 million renovation of what was once a grand private home.
Built in 1912 for the lawyer and art collector Walter von Pannwitz, a close adviser to the last German kaiser, the palatial building in the tree-shaded residential Wilmersdorf section of Berlin is just 10 minutes by taxi from the city center.
It was an undistinguished hotel, the Gerhus, from 1957 to 1991, when it was bought by a group of investors that owns several hotels in Germany and closed for renovation.


As the Hemline Turns
IF short skirts are the answer, what precisely is the question?
Whether women are too dumb to choose a hemline to suit, or to decide that different lengths can coexist in one wardrobe?
Or whether women should dress to please themselves or to please men?
Oh, please!
Yet, here we are in another fall season when the subject of skirt lengths is still an issue.
Hemlines, far more than the ins and outs of bosoms or shoulder pads, seem to have become a perennial focus of fashion anxiety.
Women inquire where skirts should be this winter.
Or they hope that designers are not "going to make us shorten our skirts," as though there were a subversive fashion plot against the female sex.


Hearing a Poet, but Understanding Little
WHAT you need is a sophisticated cat.
It mustn't run wild, think itself a dog and have problems so difficult and different," Barbara Guest wrote in "The Countess From Minneapolis" in 1976.
And earlier, and in a very different tonal mode


The Myth of Mythic Significance
To the Editor:
Sara Maitland's review of Gail Godwin's novel "The Good Husband" (Sept. 4) is well within the bounds of reasonable criticism until the last paragraph.
Here Ms.
Maitland says, "As a writer and a reader, I would like it to be possible to reinfuse the social novel, the domestic novel of manners . . . with mythic significance." That is quite a bit to ask of any novelist, as Ms.
Maitland must realize, for she goes on to say, "I am not certain that it can be done."


Desperately Seeking a School
THESE are tales from the school-choice wars in New York City, and they often are not pretty.
So withering is the competition that the battle starts now for the school year that begins 12 months hence; so high are the stakes -- a good public education in a long-suffering system -- that many parents, unable or unwilling to pay for private school, feel that to lose is to be forced to leave New York.
Many others, who can't afford to leave even if they yearn to, end up hopelessly heartbroken.
For two months last fall, Gloria Jacobs plunged into the dizzying search for a junior high school for her daughter, Alexa.
She talked to dozens of parents.
She signed up for tours of seven schools, slipping away for a couple of hours each week from her editing job at Ms. magazine.
At the same time, she was searching for a nursing home for her father.


Fitting Designer Districts Into Off-the-Rack Democracy
THE districts twist and turn across the landscape like political versions of a Rorschach test, likened by judges and others to the mark of Zorro in Louisiana, to General Sherman's march to the sea in Georgia, to a bug splattered across a windshield in North Carolina.
But as courts threaten the electoral gains made by blacks two years ago, when new districts swept 16 new black members into Congress, the districts have become a test for fundamental questions: What role should race play in the apportionment of political power?
How best can minorities, particularly blacks, pursue their political interests?
In an increasingly diverse America, how important is it for cultural diversity to translate to political diversity?


Building a Bulb Border, Layer by Layer
THERE are conventional ways to do things, but there is also your way.
Take bulb planting, for instance, a familiar routine for this time of year.
A rather maverick way once developed out of desperation.
It was one of those years when the planting kept getting put off by other priorities.
The daily list of chores grew longer and longer, bulbs kept arriving by mail and a pile of bulb-filled bags began accumulating.


Great Voices and Gilded Cages
A GREAT POP VOICE, LIKE A beautiful face, is a gift from on high.
The fortunate few who possess that gift have only to begin singing to stir up a physical and emotional chemistry that has little to do with words.
When they sing, an ingrained sob in the voice bodies forth a world of dreams and sorrows and invests it with an aura of heroic suffering that connects with the yearnings of the audience.
Barbra Streisand, Luther Vandross and Anita Baker, three singers who have just released new albums, rank among the dozen or so mainstream pop singers whose voices turn romantic dreams into larger-than-life musical expressions.
"Barbra -- the Concert," a recording taken from Ms.
Streisand's recent Madison Square Garden appearances, is the most complete and thrilling musical statement ever by an artist whose recording career has already reached several crests.


Energized Penn State Turns Lead Into Rout
Halftime approached today, and the 95,379 paying customers at Beaver Stadium found themselves getting something rare from a Penn State game -- their money's worth.
A sublime monotony had descended over the football season in Happy Valley.
The Nittany Lions' three previous games had been devoid of challenge and mystery.
The early season appeared to be an interminable warm-up for the Oct. 15 showdown against Michigan, where the stakes and emotions would finally run high.


Flawed Ranking
To the Sports Editor:
Andre Agassi, the United Sates Open champion, was unseeded and ranked only 20th in the world.
The ATP's badly flawed ranking system, however, prevented Agassi from receiving a higher ranking and seeded status, both of which he certainly deserved.


Rock-Star Appeal or Not, Governor Faces Tough Race in Lone Star State
Gov.
Ann W. Richards still has her rock-star appeal.
She was mobbed after speaking to a conference of Methodist clergymen here in East Texas the other day, and one minister pushed his way through to plead for an autograph on his T-shirt, a Texas curio that depicts Ms.
Richards in a white fringe-leather motorcycle suit, astride a Harley-Davidson emblazoned with the words "White Hot Mama."
That Ms.
Richards retains all of her charm was abundantly evident a few hours later at a rally in Pittsburg, another little East Texas town, where she clutched 82-year-old D. H. Abernathy, the town's Mayor for the last 41 years.
"I just love Mayor Abernathy," she said, stretching out "love" to five syllables or so and adding a wink.
"You know, we've had this little thing." The crowd roared, the Mayor beamed.


Cristina Dragomirescu, Alex Merrill
Cristina Dragomirescu, the daughter of Anca and George Dragomirescu of Jackson Heights, Queens, was married yesterday to Newton Alexander Merrill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Newton P. S. Merrill of New York.
The Rev.
David W. Good performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Old Lyme, Conn.
Mrs.
Merrill and her husband, both 26, graduated from Harvard University, he cum laude.
She expects to receive a master's degree in journalism from New York University in December, where Mr.
Merrill is studying for an M.B.A. degree and is a teaching assistant.


Dining Downtown: Tastes of TriBeCa
ARQUA ** (212) 334-1888; 281 Church Street, at White Street; $$$; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
An industrial space softened by ocher walls, with reasonably priced rustic Italian fare.
Pastas are excellent, like the potato and nut ravioli with basil sauce.
Among entrees are sauteed tuna steak with a thyme-infused wine sauce; braised rabbit and spring lamb with a balsamic reduction. (Review: 7/6/90)


Linda Garcia-Abrines and John Isaacs
Linda Marie Garcia-Abrines, a daughter of Profs.
Marie and Luis Garcia-Abrines of New Haven, was married there yesterday at St.
Brendan's Church to John Howard Isaacs, the son of Carol and Barry Isaacs of Orange, Conn.
Deacon Robert Brunell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Isaacs, 25, teaches Spanish at the Hopkins School in New Haven.
She graduated cum laude from Connecticut College and is studying for a master's degree in Spanish at Southern Connecticut State University, where her mother is an associate professor of Spanish language and literature.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a professor in the same subject at Yale University.


The Community Counselor
WHEN 2,000 new windows started imploding in Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village last fall, the residents notified the super.
Then they got really serious and called in Jack L. Lester.
Mr.
Lester is a lawyer, not a glazier, but he does do window cases -- and just about any other local issue that stirs neighborhood passions on the East Side.
He is perhaps the city's busiest lawyer in what he calls the field of community law.


Leslie Osborn, Daniel M. Wray
Leslie Jean Osborn, a fashion illustrator and designer in New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Marion Wray, the director of legislative affairs at the Offtrack Betting Corporation in New York.
The Rev.
Michael Finizio, a nondenominational minister, officiated at the Green Pond Chapel in Green Pond, N.J.
Mrs.
Wray, 28, graduated from Montreat Anderson College and from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Jean Osborn of Green Pond and the late Russell D. Osborn.


Ellen S. Kaplan, Michael E. Singer
Ellen Sara Kaplan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Kaplan of Springfield, N.J., was married last evening to Michael Elliot Singer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford R. Singer of Dallas.
Rabbi Jody Cohen-Gavarian, a cousin of the bride, officiated at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Singer, 32, is a director of quality at the American Express Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Bucknell University and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is the associate publisher of Inc. magazine in New York.
Her mother, Beth Kaplan, retired as a physical therapist at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.


EUROPE: THE NEW SEASON -- Restored Treasures; What's on where: guide to theater, art and music in 10 countries
Theater  BRITAIN: Albery Theater, St.
Martin's Lane, London WC2N 4AH; telephone (71) 369 1730 (the dialing code for Britain is 44).


Kings and Tocchet Reach Agreement
Right wing RICK TOCCHET has reached agreement with the Los Angeles Kings on a four-year contract that will pay him about $8 million.
The deal was announced Friday night before the Kings' 5-5 tie with Pittsburgh, Tocchet's former team.
Tocchet, who underwent off-season back surgery, made his preseason debut in the game.
Tocchet, 30, was acquired from Pittsburgh in July for left wing LUC ROBITAILLE. (AP)


Corrections
The Sound Bytes column last Sunday, about Omar Wasow, founder of New York Online, misstated the location of Stuyvesant High School, which he attended.
It is in Manhattan, not Brooklyn.
The column also misstated Mr.
Wasow's E-mail address; it is omar@nyo.com.


Christening for a Submarine


San Marco Gets A Make-Over
DURING the current Marcian Year, as Venetians call the ninth centennial of San Marco, visitors can see more of the sanctuary dedicated to the city's patron saint than they have for decades.
Most of the scaffolding that has masked the magnificent facade in recent years has come off, revealing the painstakingly repaired reliefs and mosaics.
Teams of art restorers toiled for several years to undo damage caused by weather and especially by the fumes from oil refineries and other industrial plants on the mainland nearby.
Work concentrated on the church's main front and atrium, which had deteriorated most, and on the flooded underground chamber.


Eden in Pittsburgh
HOUSE WORK By Kristina McGrath. 198 pp.
Bridgehampton, L.I.: Bridge Works Publishing Company.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
P.S.A.L.
COLASANTO REACHES CENTURY MARK: Head Coach Carmine Colasanto won his 100th career high school football game when LEHMAN (2-0) defeated SOUTH SHORE (1-1), 28-22.
The Lions' victory was secured when defensive back Adam Ramos batted down a South Shore touchdown attempt with just 10 seconds remaining.
Ramos, also a running back, ran for touchdowns of 58, 19 and 2 yards.
TRIFECTA: Three different running backs eclipsed the 100-yard mark as KENNEDY (3-0) roughed up NEW DORP (0-3), 42-0.
Gary Miller ran for 119 yards and a 41-yard score.
Andre Wyatt added 108 yards, including scores of 57 and 29 yards.
Peter Clark, who rushed for 100 yards, chipped in a 60-yard scoring sprint.


Robert Bloch, Author of 'Psycho' And Many Such Tales, Dies at 77
Robert Bloch, the prolific mystery writer whose novel "Psycho" was adapted for the classic Alfred Hitchcock horror film, died on Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 77.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus and the kidneys, said his daughter, Sally Francy of Los Gatos, Calif.


Ways to Use the Season's Apple Crop in Cooked Desserts
LOCAL apples are in the markets, with some farms carrying dozens of varieties.
For cooking, choose apples that are not oversweet and that don't disintegrate, like McIntosh, russets, pippins or semisweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Northern Spy apples are especially good for pies.
Rome apples are large, dry and semisweet, excellent for baking whole.
Golden Delicious retain their shape when cooked, a quality that makes them useful for tarts, but they do not have much flavor.
Apple charlotte is especially good for a dinner party because it can be made a day or two ahead.
The apples are baked in a crust made from buttered bread, which turns crisp and golden, a lovely contrast with the soft sweetness of the cooked apples.


Jane S. Kaplan, Matt Epstein
Jane Suzanne Kaplan, a Los Angeles-based producer for the ABC-TV program "Good Morning America," is to be married today to Matt Epstein, an owner of 800 Direct, a telemarketing service agency in Canoga Park, Calif.
Rabbi Zvi Dershowitz is to perform the ceremony at the Adamson House in Malibu, Calif.
The bride graduated from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Seymour Kaplan of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Jewel Kaplan.
Mr.
Kaplan retired as a vice president of ITC Entertainment, a television syndication company in New York.


Corrections
A Profile on Aug. 28 about Mark Dickstein, the investor who is trying to increase his influence with the board of Hills Stores Company, characterized his wealth incorrectly.
Financial World magazine has estimated that in 1993 Mr.
Dickstein earned $12 million, not that his net worth was $12 million.


Surat: A Victim of Its Open Sewers
Terrified patients showing symptoms of the plague thronged the city hospital here today.
Officials ordered pharmacies to give free antibiotics to anyone with symptoms after residents mobbed drug stores, forcing the police to guard delivery of new supplies.
Seven people died today in the municipal hospital, where the corridors were filled with patients.
The hospital, which is treating only plague patients, admitted 114 today.


Building a Bulb Border, Layer by Layer
THERE are conventional ways to do things, but there is also your way.
Take bulb planting, for instance, a familiar routine for this time of year.
A rather maverick way once developed out of desperation.
It was one of those years when the planting kept getting put off by other priorities.
The daily list of chores grew longer and longer, bulbs kept arriving by mail and a pile of bulb-filled bags began accumulating.


Ann S. Young, Paul W. Orr
Ann Sabina Young, the daughter of Joseph and Frances Young of Arlington, Va., was married yesterday at the Siasconset Union Chapel on Nantucket Island in Massachusetts to Paul Welles Orr, a son of Charles and Paula Orr of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
James F. English, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
Stewart Kenworthy, an Episcopal priest, took part in it.
Mrs.
Orr is the director of the office of Congressional liaison for the National Endowment for the Humanities in Washington.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father owns the Land 'N Sea Company, a real estate concern in Green Hill Beach, R.I.
Her mother is the head of the mathematics department at the Georgetown Day School in Washington.


EUROPE: THE NEW SEASON -- Restored Treasures; Italy: An underground crypt that bursts with color
From afar -- indeed, from close-up -- the hilltop town of Anagni, 40 miles south of Rome, does not look like part of the usual itinerary for foreign visitors to Italy.
Its 11th-century cathedral is modestly hidden until the traveler is almost upon it.
There is no plethora of trattorias and bars to feed and water the throngs.
Yet, since July 1, a steady stream of Italians and a handful of foreigners has been filing through what Anagni almost seems to have kept secret: the newly restored 13th-century frescoes in the crypt of San Magno below the cathedral, regarded by some experts as of the same significance to their era as Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel is to his.
The one-billion-lire restoration was underwritten by the Banca di Credito Cooperativo di Anagni, and overseen by the Government's Istituto Centrale del Restauro.


Game's Over
To the Sports Editor:
As a native New Yorker, not too much astonishes me, until this baseball season's shutdown.
Two World Wars couldn't stop it.
The Great Depression couldn't stop it.
Greed is what finally succeeded where all else failed.
Isn't it time we stepped back and re-evaluated our priorities?
ELLEN H. SIMON  New York


Rita Udo, Howard Fine
Rita Udo, a writer and independent television producer in New York, was married last evening to Howard Allan Fine, an associate at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, the New York law firm.
Rabbi Charles J. Davidson officiated at the St.
Moritz Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Fine is also a fashion and sales consultant at the D&amp;I Fashion Group in New York.
She graduated from Michigan State University.
She is a daughter of Millie and Michael Udo of Canton, Mich.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE QUEEN AND I By Sue Townsend.
Soho, $11.
There are those who believe that Britain's royal family has always lived on its subjects' charity; in this comic novel it is literally so.
After Queen Elizabeth and her kin end up in public housing, the author "takes what we think we know about the royals and lets them act according to our preconceptions," Michael Elliott said here last year.
"So they have a marvelous familiarity."


One Scats, the Other Doesn't
WISHING ON THE MOON The Life and Times of Billie Holiday.
By Donald Clarke.
Illustrated. 468 pp.
New York: Viking. $24.95.
ELLA FITZGERALD A Biography of the First Lady of Jazz.
By Stuart Nicholson.
Illustrated. 334 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $23.


Demonstrators Show Fear and Joy as They Defy Police in Support of Aristide
Haitians joyously broke into their first openly political demonstration since the military seized power three years ago, dancing through the streets, waving tree branches and shouting "Aristide has won!"
Rejoicing in the newly found security of the United States Army, whose soldiers watched from theirjeeps, trucks and tank-like Bradley fighting vehicles, thousands of Haitians massed near the port this morning to call for the return of their elected, ousted President.


Sound Bytes; He Added 'Virtual' to 'Reality'
Jaron Zepel Lanier coined the term "virtual reality" and developed the exotic "eyephones" and "data gloves" that allow a computer user to experience simulated worlds that can be generated by computer software.
In 1993 his company, VPL Inc., along with the many virtual-reality patents he had pledged as collateral, were taken over by its French investor, the electronics conglomerate Thomson-CSF.
He shrugs off the business failure with a toss of his long, blond dreadlocks, attributing it to youth and business inexperience.
Now, with the backing of private investors from the computer and biotechnology industries, he has started a company called New Leaf in Silicon Valley to develop commercial applications for complex computer simulations.
He is also working with a New York City company, Original Ventures, to develop virtual reality entertainment centers.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Weehawken; Insular With a Magnificent Skyline View
THE thin trees rustle their protection above the neighborhood called the Shades and rise up the cliffs toward the rest of Weehawken: the Heights and the Bluffs, sitting at varied altitudes ascending north along the Palisades.
It is quiet in the Shades, where reeds break through the sidewalks and tidy two-family houses are passed to the next generation of McLaughlins (many of the clan moved here from Manhattan's Hell's Kitchen in the 1950's) and other families on its four short streets in from West 19th Street and the waterfront.
Kelly Devaney, whose husband, Christopher, is the eighth child of Rosemarie Devaney, nee McLaughlin, of adjacent Chestnut Street, said: "We're all still very close, everybody. It's all very family oriented -- you know you're very secure down here."


Walking Vienna's Other Ring
THE old city of Vienna is laid out like a spider web, encircled by a series of such streets as Opern ring, Parkring and Schottenring that trace the boundaries of the medieval city walls.
Two trolleys, the No. 1, running counterclockwise, and the No. 2, going clockwise, travel this route constantly, making it a popular tourist circuit.
One thread farther out on the web, traversing what was once open fields beyond the city walls, lies a second ring.
Less well known to visitors, this outer ring affords one of the best walking tours of Vienna, providing a cross-section of Vienna's architecture, culture and history, not to mention its cuisine.


INSIDE
Plague Outbreak Easing
India said a pneumonic plague outbreak in Surat was easing, but there were fears that the illness had been spread to other cities.
Page 18.
Republican Resurgence
Even though Gov.
Ann W. Richards is still widely popular in Texas, polls indicate she may lose to her Republican rival, George W. Bush.
Page 24.
Silence on Adult Zoning
Neighbors of some topless bars are quiet about New York City's move to restrict adult stores.
So are free-speech advocates.
Page 41.


David S. Ross, Laura J. Kaltenbacher
Dr.
Laura Jean Kaltenbacher, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert Blum of South Orange, N.J., and Mr.
Philip Kaltenbacher of West Orange, N.J., was married last evening to David Scott Ross, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald Ross of Gates Mills, Ohio.
Cantor Norman Sommers officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
The bride, 30, was until recently a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received her medical degree from New York University.
Her father, a former chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, is the chairman of the Seton Company, an automobile leather manufacturer in Newark.


Japanese Take Lesson From a County Hospital
IT may be cold comfort to the thwarted architects of medical reform in Washington, but there are still some aspects of the American health-care system that other countries apparently want to emulate.
In sharp contrast to the customary pattern of American managers, engineers and professionals traveling to Japan to learn how to perform more efficiently in their jobs, a team of Japanese nurses from a Tokyo hospital recently traveled to Northern Westchester Hospital Center here as part of a national four-hospital tour to understand how to work more effectively.
Besides Northern Westchester Hospital Center, the other hospitals were St.
Luke's-Roosevelt in Manhattan, Mercy Hospital in Toledo, Ohio, and St.
Mark's Hospital in Salt Lake City.


Baby, It's Cold Outside
You can buy the thickest shearling or the downiest anorak -- you can even buy a chinchilla trench (though please don't).
But fail to protect everything else your new coat doesn't, and you're going to freeze your everything else off.
Cold hands, warm heart is a cute aphorism.
Try getting past it when you're out of fire logs.
Winter's accessories aren't options anymore.
Gloves
*
Unlined gloves are devilishly sexy, but not warm.
Cashmere and wool-lined are, and since the price isn't much higher for what's softer and lighter, go cashmere.


Who's Hot and Who's Not In the New Kremlinology
DECIDING who's who is a cruel game, particularly in Russia.
In the last Soviet-era list of the country's most prominent people, published in 1989, Raisa Gorbachev was lavishly praised as "the First Lady of the U.S.S.R." By 1992, she was introduced rather unceremoniously as "Gorbachev's wife" and her date of birth revised from 1934 to 1931.
In the new 1994 edition, her birthrate reverts to 1934, but the mention of one of her greatest sources of pride, her memoir, "I Hope," is brutally abbreviated.
The 1994 Who's Who of Russia, officially titled "The Biographical Dictionary of the Former Soviet Union," is about to be released.
And though it is not the first such guide to emerge since the collapse of the Soviet Union, it is the first Russian-language version.


At Mexican Restaurants, Hold the Fat, Not the Taste
IT is a clean, well-lighted place, this restaurant kitchen here in the sun-drenched Del Amo shopping center where, amid the banging pots and food-prep hustle, a large Southern California restaurant chain is surfing the new wave of mass-market Mexican food in America.
"It isn't hard to make Mexican food healthier," said Victor Broceaux, the 59-year-old Basque-born chef who is director of research and development for Restaurant Associates, the food company that is reinventing its Acapulco Restaurant chain.
"The challenge is to make it taste good."


Solomon's Rules for the '90's
IT used to be easy to figure out who should get custody of the children after a divorce.
For most of history, fathers did.
From the early years of this century until the 1970's, mothers did.
But in the brave new world of changing sex roles, the advent of the working mother and the nurturing father, judges are often forced to decide between two loving parents, leaving a wake of heartache and bitterness.
Several recent court rulings, among them the case of a Senate aide denied custody because a Washington judge deemed her more devoted to her career than her children, and a Michigan college student who lost custody because she put her daughter in a day care center, have terrified working mothers who feel they are being deemed unfit because they want careers.
Their fear is matched only by the relief of fathers long convinced that judges denied them custody because they were men.


Business Diary: September 18-23
COMAPNIES For Northrop Grumman Workers, the Bad News Gets Very Specific  It's no surprise, really.
The country is laying down its weapons -- well, except in Haiti -- and that's putting a lot of people out of work.
And when Northrop swallowed Grumman earlier this year, everyone knew that spelled more sizable job cuts.
But still, when the big shoe dropped last week, the numbers were stark: Northrop Grumman, as it's now known, is reducing its work force by 8,650, or more than 18 percent, by the end of 1995.
That's a "healthy response" to Pentagon cutbacks, said one consultant.
But don't talk about health on, say, Long Island.
In 1986, Grumman gave out 25,000 paychecks there, making it Long Island's largest private employer; those days are already history, of course, but the payroll will soon shrivel even more, to 3,800.
The bulk of the latest layoffs, though, will come in California -- 4,150 of them.
And that comes just after word that GM Hughes would lay off 4,400.


Meet the New Super Super Of the High-End Residence
THE classic image of a building superintendent is the jack-of-all-trades handyman who can fix the plumbing, run the boiler and handle minor repairs -- the guy who would run down to the basement with a big wrench and twist the big bolt.
Joseph Mazzucco is an example of the new breed -- the super supers, or, as they are increasing called, resident managers -- who are taking over in the larger luxury residential buildings.


Men in Uniformity
In the infinitely less complicated world of my childhood, there was a board game called Mystery Date.
While I've forgotten most of the rules, what I do remember is a front door that lay in the center of the board like the hatch leading to a dungeon.
As Mystery Date's television commercial explained, you opened the door and discovered your date.
"Is he a dream?" the voice-over asked the girls playing the game as they ooohed.
"Or a dud?" At which point the girls went: "Awwwwwww." The only thing separating the crudely cartooned Dream from the Dud, however, was his clothes.
Dream wore a tux; Dud wore the kind of nerdwear that intimated a lifetime commitment to Ted Baxter.
No matter who the girl was whose luck ran out, the response was always the same: She'd grab the little door and slam it in Dud's face.
These days, as a fashion critic watching men's wear shows, I sometimes play the Dream or Dud game as a reality check.
Models are, as the profession demands, great looking, with corresponding physiques.
Just as with the board game, it's the clothes that make the difference.
If you slammed the door on any of these men, it would be because of what he's been made to wear on the runway.
And clothes that can turn Dreams into Duds are too powerful for mere mortals.


Kim A. Weild, A. B. Hood 9th
Kim Alison Weild, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Weild 3d of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Alexander Bridport Hood 9th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hood 8th, also of Pelham Manor.
The Rev.
Katherine A. Simons performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Southold, L.I.
The bride, who is an actress in Los Angeles, studied at the School of American Ballet and graduated from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner at Pennie &amp; Edmonds, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Drue Weild, and the bridegroom's mother, Kate Hood, managed the H &amp; R Block office in Mount Vernon, N.Y., until last year.


First Priority
A jacket announces your intentions. Find one that speaks your language.


Technology; Shrink Wrap Goes Really Big Time
IT is the hurricane season, when an insurance agent's fretfulness turns to thoughts of roofless houses filling with rain.
For insurance companies, protecting storm-damaged homes from rain can save billions of dollars in additional claims for walls, floors and furnishings destroyed by water.


What Nassau Omitted On Mitchel Field Case
A letter by Nassau County Attorney Owen Walsh  [ Outside Counsel: Need for Defense," Aug. 28 ]  cites "ethics" as the reason for the county's retainer of 17 outside law firms to defend a citizen suit against past and present county officials responsible for the Mitchel Field "Sweetheart Leases." Mr. Walsh neglects to disclose these facts, which refute his claim that the suit was frivolous and yet required the defense services of 18 law firms.
First, the suit was brought because District Attorney Denis Dillon's report issued in October 1989 on the Mitchel Field leasing scandal concluded that county taxpayers stood to lose over $2.7 billion because of Nassau County's abuse of public power during the reign of the officials named in the suit in the award of "sweetheart" 99-year leases of Mitchel Field public lands to politically connected insiders.
The District Attorney found no criminal wrongdoing but invited the type of civil action brought by the citizen plaintiffs under the Federal civil rights law.


Colleges Update Buildings for New Needs
COLLEGE freshmen arriving on New Jersey campuses in the fall of 1994 are using some of the same dormitory and classroom buildings as their predecessors in 1964, 1944 or even 1904.
Now, however, those buildings must serve the needs of a new generation of students who are accustomed to using computers in their course work and watching cable television in their leisure time.
New regulations and environmental concerns mean that campus buildings also have to be barrier-free, energy-efficient and uncontaminated by radon gas or easily crumbled asbestos.
Above all, building maintenance, repair and renovation must not break institutional budgets.
Creating 21st-century learning environments within early 20th-century buildings is a formidable task for administrators at public and private colleges.


Editorial Notebook; A Gathering of Lawyers
The personalities and emotions in the O. J. Simpson case have drawn obsessive public attention and generated a fierce debate about justice and press coverage.
Quite apart from the emotions of the case and the huge audience it attracts, the accompanying legal jousting has provided an unusual opportunity for students of the law to observe the skills of the lawyers and to second-guess their strategies and tactics.
Half a dozen high-priced attorneys register on the side of O. J. Simpson, only two for the prosecution.
The County of Los Angeles is playing David to the defendant's Goliath.


Corrections
A picture caption about Fine Line Features last week misidentified the director of the film "Death and the Maiden." It is Roman Polanski, not Mike Nichols.
Mr.
Nichols directed the Broadway play.


In White Plains, Fear of Losing More Than Macy's
For years, downtown merchants here have watched their business slip away, as corporations shrank during the recession and the city's shopping malls drew business away from downtown streets.
The announcement on Wednesday that Macy's would close its 45-year-old store in the heart of downtown was yet another cause for uncertainty.


Sept. 18-24: The Junta's Gambit; Burmese Dissident Meets With Her Jailers And Smiles
It was a picture many Burmese thought they would never live to see: the imprisoned dissident leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, smiling as she sat next to the two generals who run Myanmar, the nation formerly known as Burma.
Afterward the junta released a statement describing the meeting, which lasted at least an hour, as "cordial" and then quickly escorted Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi back to her lakeside home where they have placed her under house arrest since 1989.
But the simple fact that the meeting had occurred boosted the credibility of the 49-year-old dissident, whose campaign for democracy won her the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 and the undying loyalty of millions of Burmese.


Will Americans Ever Appreciate Nanni Moretti?
WITH "CARO DIARIO," THE Italian film maker Nanni Moretti -- and the film's American distributor -- hope the long drought in the United States will end.
Though the 41-year-old director has made six feature films since 1976 (all of which he wrote, directed and starred in) and a documentary, and though he is regarded as a comic genius at home (where he is compared to masters ranging from Charlie Chaplin to Woody Allen), he is nearly unknown in this country.
Explanations vary for why this should be, but most film executives believe that Mr.
Moretti's previous works -- idiosyncratic films that analyze contemporary Italian society in comic fashion -- have been simply too Italian.
A full appreciation of their humor often depends on a working knowledge of Italian politics.
For example, his 1989 film, "Palombella Rossa," offers a thoughtful critique of the Italian Communist Party (now known as the Democratic Party of the Left) that is developed through the ruminations of a water-polo player with amnesia.


Drawings of the Masters
An exhibition of the collection of Eugene and Clare Thaw opens at the Pierpont Morgan Library, Sept. 20.


A Coveted General Rides Toward '96 Without a Banner
His peacemaking exploits in Haiti have reminded Republicans that Colin L. Powell is a hot political property.
To tell the truth, they needed no reminding; they can read the polls.
Nor do they expect an early statement of interest in the 1996 campaign from the retired general.
What they long for, what they think they deserve, is some sign, however encoded, that he actually is a Republican.


Janet S. Schnol, Donald Chandler
Janet Sarah Schnol, the daughter of Helen and Daniel Schnol of Ponte Vedra, Fla., is to be married today to Donald Gordon Chandler, a son of Drs.
Alice and Horace Chandler of New Paltz, N.Y.
Rabbi Jonathan Eichhorn is to officiate at the Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz.
Mrs.
Chandler, 35, works in Princeton, N.J., as a contributing editor of Publishers Weekly magazine.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, who is retired, owned Shirt-tex, a textile manufacturer in New York.
Her mother retired as an administrative assistant at the E. P. Dutton publishing company in New York.


The Executive Computer; In the On-Line Market, the Name of the Game Is Internet
AS the largest and oldest of the commercial on-line computer services, Compuserve Inc.'s Compuserve Information Service is like a staid reading room compared with a growing assortment of younger and flashier cyberspace hangouts like Prodigy Services and America Online.
But with membership at 2.25 million, and growing at 80,000 a month, Compuserve, is still the place to be for many modem users.
Compuserve, founded in 1979, offers a broad range of general-interest services like news from The Associated Press, Roger Ebert's movie reviews and the deliberately misspelled Eaasy Sabre airline ticketing service.


Toni L. Andrews and Ray A. Cameron
Toni Lynne Andrews, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene S. Andrews of Monroe, Conn., was married yesterday in a Bahai ceremony to Ray Anthony Cameron, the son of Thelma Lewis of Fort Worth.
The bride, 29, graduated from Harvard University and is studying for a Ph.D. in clinical psychology at Teachers College of Columbia University.
Her father is the director of diversity at the General Electric Company in Fairfield, Conn.
Her mother is a nurse at Bridgeport (Conn.) Hospital.


Rap Group Branches Out and Enters the Merchandising Field
FOR fans of hip-hop, the clothing is as much a part of the style as the music.
Followers have Karl Kani, Cross Colours and Russell Simmon's Phat Farm to thank for that.
Now they have Naughty Gear, a line of clothing bearing the logo of the popular rap group Naughty by Nature.
The rap trio, Vinny Brown, Treach and D. J. Kay Gee, opened their store, Naughty Gear Inc., on July 1.
The 1,200-square-foot space on Halsey Street displays racks of hooded sweatshirts, shorts, boxers, clocks, bed sheets, children's clothing and active wear.


Medical Experts Fear Refugees May Spread India Plague
Officials in the city of Surat said today that the number of people dying from an illness described as pneumonic plague had begun to decrease.
But medical experts said there was a high risk that the 300,000 people who are said to have fled Surat might have already spread the disease to other parts of India.
The death toll from the plague outbreak, believed to be the first confirmed incidence of pneumonic plague anywhere in the world for decades, continued to be disputed.


Cindy Osman and Daniel Herron
Dr.
Cindy Jane Osman, an assistant professor of pediatrics at Boston City Hospital/Boston University, and Dr.
Daniel Martin Herron, a resident in general surgery at New England Medical Center in Boston, were married yesterday in Waltham, Mass.
Tom Ferrick, a humanist chaplin at Harvard University officiated at the Lyman Estate.
Dr.
Osman, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Brown University, from which she also received her medical degree.
She is the daughter of Nancy and Dewaine Osman of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
Her father is the vice president of corporate planning at the Unisys Corporation, the computer company, in Blue Bell, Pa.
Her mother is a clinical social worker at Women in Transition, a women's counseling organization in Philadelphia.


Political Subtext In a Fairy Tale From a Feminist
Maria Luisa Bemberg's greatest fear during the making of her new film, "I Don't Want to Talk About It," which opens on Friday, was that she would humiliate her leading lady.
In approaching the story of an older man (played by Marcello Mastroianni) who falls in love with an adolescent dwarf, the 71-year-old director says she was obsessed with protecting Alejandra Podesta, the newcomer who plays the dwarf.
"For her, unfortunately, fiction and reality are dramatically connected," Ms.
Bemberg says.
"And when she goes back to her home, she's still the character."


Error-Prone Florida State Shakes Off North Carolina
If one measure of a great football team is the ability to play a mediocre game and still deliver a sound beating to a ranked team, then Florida State -- the defending national champion -- is still a great team.
Because on a muggy night in the Florida panhandle, in front of a record crowd of 78,111 at Doak Campbell Stadium, Florida State got away with one.
The Seminoles, ranked third in the nation, beat 11th-ranked North Carolina, 31-18, and looked ordinary in the process.


Health Care Obstructionists Target Families
To the Editor:
Re your Sept. 11 and 18 letters on the California single-payer health-care ballot question:


RAVING BEAUTY
Call me humorless.
Call me uptight.
Call me a feminist.
But please, do not ever call me "a piece," which in this context, as everyone with the possible exception of Patricia Volk and her editor knows, is not "a slang word for gun" ("Raving Beauty," Sept. 4).


'Pump Boys' Revue Revived in Mamaroneck
SOME years back, a roadhouse-type, short-order and short-lived restaurant with tacos, tortillas and tequilas on special opened alongside a filling station.
With the name Mexico Next to Texaco, it inevitably brought on waggish comments about how both establishments gave you gas.
Juxtaposing two places where folks go to fill up was a quirky variation on the mimicking of make believe by real life.
In this case, the make believe part -- "Pump Boys and Dinettes," a country-western revue -- won the longevity prize.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Jack L. Lester sees himself as a sort of a legal Mr.
Fixit, his grass-roots clients' best defense against the city's Goliaths.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  What's a local business district to do to compete with the mega-stores?
In Forest Hills, they hired a Parking Angel.


In Teacher Contracts, Money's the Word
WITH mixed emotions in Mount Vernon earlier this month, 900 teachers returned to work after a one-day walkout, having agreed to an 8.5 percent salary increase over four years -- far less than they had hoped for.
"It's no great contract, and there are no big dollars involved," said Geraldine J. Hegwood, president of the Mount Vernon Federation of Teachers, "but realistically, this is a hard time for teachers."


A La Guardia for La Guardia Place
Not so long ago, part of La Guardia Place was a messy dog run facing a forlorn and mostly empty stretch of shops, seemingly untouched by the nearby bustle of New York University and Washington Square Park.
Nowadays, the block between West Third and Bleecker Streets is a shady oasis lined with sidewalk cafes and active storefronts.
Next month it will finally get a long-awaited monument, a statue of Fiorello H. La Guardia.
And like the feisty former mayor (1934-45) it honors, the statue boasts a history of vituperative debate.


Murder or Suicide in Russia? Student's Death Is a Mystery
The death of an exchange student from Connecticut, whose body was found in Moscow last week outside his university dormitory, remained a mystery yesterday, with the Russian police calling it a suicide and a coroner's report using the word murder.
The body of Anthony Riccio, 21, of Glastonbury, Conn., was found on the ground Tuesday evening outside the Russian State Humanities University.
Mr.
Riccio, a junior at Brown University majoring in Russian studies, had arrived in Moscow on Sept. 10 for a one-year exchange program sponsored by Middlebury College in Vermont.


Shelly A. Zurlo, Joseph S. Galli
Shelly Ann Zurlo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Zurlo Jr. of Cedar Grove, N.J., was married yesterday to Joseph S. Galli, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Galli of Pittsburgh.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Galli, 29, graduated from Villanova University.
She is the assistant treasurer of Brown, Harris, Stevens Inc., real estate managers and brokers in New York.


SUNDAY, September 25, 1994; O'Keeffe Art to Be Unveiled
A few years ago, a woman brought 28 watercolor paintings wrapped in brown paper to Gerald Peters, a Santa Fe art dealer who handled the paintings of Georgia O'Keeffe during the last 10 years of her life. (She died in 1986.)
What was in the wrapping were unknown works painted by the artist between 1916 and 1918 when she was head of the art department at West Texas Normal College (now Texas A&amp;M) in Canyon, Texas.
For the next 70 years, the paintings were kept hidden by the woman's grandfather, a friend of O'Keeffe.


After Shaking Hands With the Devil in Haiti; What Carter Saw
To the Editor:
I was astounded by your interview with former President Carter (front page, Sept. 21), in which he speaks in such positive terms about Gen.
Raoul Cedras, a man largely responsible for the murder, rape and abuse of thousands of innocent Haitians.


Home Isn't Sweet Home After 58 Victories
As Washington split end Eric Bjornson watched the final seconds tick off tonight in the gathering darkness of the Orange Bowl, he fought back tears.
"It was overwhelming," he said.
"I couldn't believe it. I wanted the moment to last forever."


Entertainment Versus History
To the Editor:  By criticizing the historian's role Robert Redford plays so thoughtfully in representing a memorable American experience with "Quiz Show," Richard Bernstein serves Clio poorly even as this splendid film's producer-director does so well  [ "For $64,000, What Is Fiction?," Sept. 4 ] .
Mr.
Redford makes no claim to the historian's mantle.
But his story is essentially factual, not fictional, though his evocative and finely honed portrait of our 1950's national engagement -- and then disillusionment -- with television and its moral vacuum remains a candidate for Academy Awards, not yet for a Pulitzer Prize in history.
But Mr.
Bernstein is dead wrong in finding "irony" here, drawing a particularly specious parallel between the dramatic licenses taken by Mr.
Redford and the flagrant deceptions of avaricious network officials, advertisers and quiz-show producers.


Special Today: Men's Fashions/Magazine Part 2
Special reports in this issue include:
Clothes for a second career.
The jacket: A man's first priority.
Employment Advertising/Section 10


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
FRIDAY'S JOURNEY Written and illustrated by Ken Rush.
Unpaged.
New York: Orchard Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) TAXI!
TAXI!
By Cari Best.
Illustrated by Dale Gottlieb.
Unpaged.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


Back to Family From Life on Death Row
In a scrapbook with Tweety Bird on the cover were the keepsakes of a 12-year-old girl: birthday wishes from a doting grandmother, a get-well card from a Sunday school teacher, a dazzling report card from the fifth grade, and letters from her father on death row.
For five years, the girl was able to see her father, Joe Burrows, only in the visiting room of an Illinois penitentiary.
"Daddy, can you put me under your shirt and sneak me back there with you?" the girl, Carrie, asked tearfully at one visit.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Patricia Bell, Isaac Palmer
Patricia Jean Bell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Bell of Farmingdale, L.I., was married yesterday to Isaac Palmer, a son of the late Rabbi and Mrs.
Charles Palmer.
Don R. Johnson, the senior leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride is studying for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
She graduated from the State University College at New Paltz and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


WHERE HAVE YOU GONE, ROBERT FRANK?
Robert Frank is truly the master of photography and film of our time ("Where Have You Gone, Robert Frank?" by Richard B. Woodward, Sept. 4).
His work has always been an inspiration to me.
I wish there could have been many more pages of his photographs.
EVE SONNEMAN New York


Mary M. Rice, James C. Lott 3d
Mary Margaret Rice, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick F. Rice of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to James Cropsey Lott 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Lott of Lebanon, N.J.
The Rev.
Edmond J. Trench performed the ceremony at Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Roman Catholic Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Lott, 29, works in New York as the North American director of operations for Intexdesign, a London-based textile design company.
She graduated from Adelphi University.
Her father, now retired, owned Rice Construction, a former company in Manhasset, L.I.
Her mother, Kathleen L. Rice, is a clinical social worker at the A. Holly Patterson Geriatric Center in Mineola, L.I.


Yet Another Evolution For 'Singin' in the Rain'
SOMETHING QUITE SURPRISING happens during the first-act finale of "Singin' in the Rain," which is being given an enthusiastic, glitzy revival at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, N. J. It's not because the audience applauds the gracefully cascading rain that drenches the set in which the hero sings and dances the title tune.
After all, rain, which in life is often as inconvenient as it is necessary, boggles the mind of a theatergoer susceptible to special effects.
And, as special effects go, rain is certainly as much fun as a crashing chandelier, a hovering helicopter or a twirling beast who turns into a prince before your eyes: the water falling on the stage is real.
It soaks the actor, who is also real and must return to the stage a few minutes later dry as a bone.
There's a bifocal kind of pleasure in witnessing this conjunction of soggy physical fact and blissful fiction.
Even while you wonder how it's done, you respond to its emotional impact within the show's loveliest production number.


New Direct Student Loan Program Can't Live Up to Its Claims
To the Editor:
Your efforts to explain the burgeoning new Federal Direct Student Loan Program bureaucracy (news article, Sept. 19) appear to accept questionable representations by the Education Department.


Meghan Culbertson and Adam Mekler
Meghan Sumner Culbertson, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Culbertson of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Lamar Adam Mekler, a son of Marianne MacKenzie and Arlen Mekler, both of Wilmington, Del.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at Emmanuel Episcopal Church, where he is the rector.
Ms.
Culbertson, 26, is keeping her name.
She and her husband are studying for doctorates at Drew University, she in theology and he in English literature.
She graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree in theology from the Episcopal Divinity School.
Her mother, Deborah R. Culbertson, is the director of continuing studies at Goucher College in Towson, Md.


A LONG GOODBYE
Wherever Susan V. Seligson's friend Frank is now, he should be proud of her story "A Long Goodbye" (Hers, Sept. 4), which moved me to tears and laughter.


INDUSTRY LEADERS WARN AGAINST RISE IN INTEREST RATES
The nation's manufacturers, declaring that their businesses are prospering and their hiring is up, urged the Federal Reserve today not to raise interest rates again this year.
They said higher rates would endanger their prosperity.
In taking this position shortly before a Federal Reserve meeting to consider another rate increase, the National Association of Manufacturers directly challenged a basic tenet of the central bank's policy.
While most Fed officials insist that rising inflation poses the greatest danger to the economy and should be prevented, even at the cost of an economic slowdown, the manufacturers take the opposite view.
They even prefer a little inflation, which gives them leeway to raise prices.


Justice Souter Emerges
NO PUBLIC DOCUMENT -- AND PROBABLY only a single very private one -- marks April 23, 1992, as one of the more momentous days in recent Supreme Court history.
Nothing of apparent note transpired at the Court that Thursday; oral arguments had taken place the day before and the Justices' weekly private conference, where they vote on cases, would not begin until Friday morning.
In his chambers on the far southeastern corner of the main floor, the Court's then-second-newest Justice spent the day in contemplation, pondering one of Wednesday's cases.
A large portrait of Harlan Fiske Stone, a New Hampshire-born Republican Justice later named Chief Justice by a Democratic President, dominated the room.
Many visitors would note that the office, unlike those of other Justices, had no computer terminal; only a few -- particularly those visiting toward dusk -- would realize that the office also had not a single electric desk lamp.
Only late in the day did the Justice reach a firm conclusion.
Even though this was the case of the year, and perhaps of the decade, as of the day before, he had not -- just as he had told the United States Senate and the American people almost two years earlier -- decided what he would do.
On Wednesday, during oral argument of the case, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v.
Casey, he had listened intently from his seat on the bench as Planned Parenthood's attorney, Kathryn Kolbert, began her argument:
"Whether our Constitution endows government with the power to force a woman to continue or to end a pregnancy against her will is the central question in this case.
"Since this Court's decision in Roe v. Wade, a generation of American women have come of age secure in the knowledge that the Constitution provides the highest level of protection for their childbearing decisions.
"This landmark decision, which necessarily and logically flows from a century of this Court's jurisprudence, not only protects rights of bodily integrity and autonomy but has enabled millions of women to participate fully and equally in society."
But now Roe's survival was very much in doubt, as was starkly revealed by the Pennsylvania anti-abortion regulations under review in Casey.
Three years earlier, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Byron R. White, Antonin Scalia and Anthony M. Kennedy had signaled their desire to overrule Roe at the first available opportunity, and few observers doubted that the Court's newest and most controversial member, Clarence Thomas, was eager to join them as the fifth and decisive vote.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who three years earlier had infuriated Scalia by refusing to provide a fifth vote to jettison Roe, interrupted Kolbert with the hour's first question, and she was soon followed by Scalia, Kennedy and Rehnquist.
Pennsylvania's attorney general, Ernest D. Preate Jr., representing Gov.
Robert P. Casey, followed Kolbert to the lecturn, but almost before he could begin, Justice Harry A. Blackmun, the 82-year-old author of the Court's landmark 1973 abortion decision, asked whether Preate had even read Roe.
Then O'Connor peppered Preate with a series of skeptical questions, followed by John Paul Stevens, a firm supporter of Roe, and even by Anthony Kennedy, before Scalia jumped in to provide some cover.
Only as Preate's time was about to expire did the 52-year-old David Hackett Souter speak up to ask Preate a statistical question about the Pennsylvania provision that would require married women facing unwanted pregnancies to notify their husbands, even if they were separated or estranged, before seeking an abortion.
Then, after United States Solicitor General Kenneth W. Starr, representing the anti-abortion views of the Bush Administration, succeeded Preate to second the attack on Roe, Souter pressed Starr to concede that if his position prevailed, states could outlaw all abortions except perhaps those where a pregnancy directly threatened a woman's life.
None of Souter's comments had telegraphed a clear position on either Casey or Roe.
Had any abortion-rights activists been inclined to interpret his exchange with Starr as promising, they had only to remember how Souter's encouraging comments from the bench 18 months earlier in the abortion "gag rule" case of Rust v.
Sullivan had proved utterly misleading.
Souter had joined Rehnquist, White, Scalia and Kennedy in a 5-4 decision upholding statutory restrictions on what doctors in federally financed clinics could say to female patients.
Not for many years will any outsiders likely see any notes that may have been taken that following Friday morning when the Justices met to vote on Planned Parenthood v.
Casey.
But while seven Justices indicated that they would uphold most of the Pennsylvania restrictions, only four -- Rehnquist, White, Scalia and Thomas -- wanted to explicitly vitiate Roe.
O'Connor, Kennedy and Souter, however, all believed the restrictions could be upheld at the same time that Roe was left standing.
While Rehnquist himself undertook the drafting of Casey's apparent majority opinion, Kennedy's surprising stance gave Souter and O'Connor the opening toward an intermediate outcome for which they had been hoping.
Well before Rehnquist's opinion was circulated to other Justices in late May, Kennedy privately joined Souter and O'Connor in preparing an extensive separate statement.
Sometimes all three Justices, sitting on the couch in Souter's office, would jointly review their progress, and their cooperation led to a stunningly unexpected result: Rather than Rehnquist and Scalia having five votes to void Roe, there were five votes -- Souter, O'Connor and Kennedy, plus Blackmun and Stevens, to uphold Roe.
In early June, Souter, O'Connor and Kennedy distributed to their colleagues initial copies of their joint opinion.
As David Savage later wrote in The Los Angeles Times: "Rehnquist and Scalia were stunned. So, too, was Blackmun." And so, on Monday morning, June 29, 1992, the final day of the term, commentators were unprepared for the result in Planned Parenthood v.
Casey.
Not since the famous 1958 Little Rock school desegregation case of Cooper v.
Aaron, when all nine Justices signed a ringing reaffirmation of Brown v.
Board of Education, had any Supreme Court opinion been presented to the American people as formally authored by more than one Justice.
But now, symbolically invoking the powerful precedent of Cooper, Justices O'Connor, Kennedy and Souter issued their plurality decision in Casey as an explicit trio opinion.
" [  T  ] he essential holding of Roe v. Wade should be retained and once again affirmed," they wrote in language that also spoke for Blackmun and Stevens.
When announcing decisions from the bench, Justices usually offer a summary or read brief excerpts.
On this morning, however, each of the three -- first O'Connor, then Kennedy and finally Souter -- orally delivered major portions of the trio opinion.
Journalists quickly realized they were witnessing an unprecedented event.
The most eloquent section of the opinion was the discussion of Roe and the principle of stare decisis -- Latin for judicial respect of existing precedent -- that had been crafted principally by David Souter.
Souter's words in Casey spoke not only for the Court, but also for the essence of America's judicial heritage and for the very core of Souter's own judicial background.
That background had not been fully understood by the commentators and Senators who had debated what his 1990 nomination meant for the future of Roe and other fundamental rights.
If they had, what was now happening in Casey would not have come as a surprise.
Souter's analysis reflected a realism not always found in high court pronouncements:
"For two decades of economic and social developments, people have organized intimate relationships and made choices that define their views of themselves and their places in society, in reliance on the availability of abortion in the event that contraception should fail. The ability of women to participate equally in the economic and social life of the Nation has been facilitated by their ability to control their reproductive lives."
Then Souter moved to the core of his argument, two paragraphs that rank among the most memorable lines ever authored by an American jurist:
"Where, in the performance of its judicial duties, the Court decides a case in such a way as to resolve the sort of intensely divisive controversy reflected in Roe and those rare, comparable cases, its decision has a dimension that the resolution of the normal case does not carry. It is the dimension present whenever the Court's interpretation of the Constitution calls the contending sides of a national controversy to end their national division by accepting a common mandate rooted in the Constitution.
Souter closed by reiterating that Casey, and Roe, were about far more than simply abortion: "A decision to overrule Roe's essential holding under the existing circumstances would address error, if error there was, at the cost of both profound and unnecessary damage to the Court's legitimacy, and to the Nation's commitment to the rule of law. It is therefore imperative to adhere to the essence of Roe's original decision, and we do so today."
Harry Blackmun's concurrence accurately termed the Souter-O'Connor-Kennedy joint opinion "an act of personal courage and constitutional principle," and Blackmun added that "what has happened today should serve as a model for future Justices and a warning to all who have tried to turn this Court into yet another political branch."
Casey was a watershed event in American history, the most institutionally significant decision for the Court since Brown.
Although some abortion-rights activists failed to acknowledge their victory, expert observers like Laurence H. Tribe, the Harvard law professor, emphasized that the trio opinion "puts the right to abortion on a firmer jurisprudential foundation than ever before."
But the significance of Casey lay not just in its constitutional resolution of the 20-year battle over Roe, nor in its long-term importance to the Court's own institutional reputation; Casey also signaled the unexpected failure of the right-wing judicial counterrevolution that the Reagan and Bush Administrations had hoped to bring about by naming staunch conservatives to the Federal bench.
After Casey, hard-right commentators like the columnist Robert Novak unleashed vituperative assaults on the trio of Republican Justices who had redeemed Roe, particularly the Roman Catholic Justice Kennedy.
Gary L. McDowell, a Reagan Justice Department aide who had helped former Attorney General Edwin Meese articulate his harsh denunciations of Federal judges, lamented how "all that had been so vigorously fought for by Reagan and Bush, all that had been achieved, was suddenly lost."
But there is one other remarkable thing about Casey, both in the context of today's uncertainty about where the Court is heading and in the context of 1990's debate over how "stealth nominee" David Souter would vote on Roe: namely that it is impossible to find anyone who has long known Souter who was surprised by his resolution of Casey.
How could something so obvious to those who know Souter best have eluded 1990's army of politicians and prognosticators?
In that seeming puzzle lies the rich story of a humble yet utterly self-confident man who, far from being an odd recluse from another age, possesses both exceptional intelligence and a warm circle of friends.
DAVID HACKETT SOUTER, THE ONLY CHILD OF a quiet bank officer and an equally reserved homemaker, was born in Melrose, Mass., on Sept. 17, 1939; in 1950, the Souters moved to an old family homestead in the rural village of East Weare, N.H., a few miles west of Concord.
Souter's father worked at a Concord bank.
Weare was too small to have its own secondary school so David commuted to Concord High School, from which he graduated in 1957 and won admission to Harvard.
Following Harvard, Souter received a two-year Rhodes scholarship to Magdalen College at Oxford, where he completed a bachelor's degree in jurisprudence before entering Harvard Law School in 1963.
Upon graduation in 1966, he happily returned home to New Hampshire to take an entry-level position with the well-respected Concord firm of Orr &amp; Reno.
Law-office work gave Souter few opportunities for courtroom experience, and in late 1968 he eagerly enlisted as one of about 20 state assistant attorneys general.
His first few years in the Attorney General's office were devoted more to criminal than to civil cases, but the most important development in Souter's young career came in 1970 when Gov.
Walter Peterson of New Hampshire named Warren Rudman, previously his own legal counsel, to a five-year term as the state's new Attorney General.
Rudman quickly came to appreciate Souter as a "lawyer's lawyer" and within a few months named Souter his deputy.
A gregarious politician, Rudman delegated much of the running of the office to Souter.
Rudman's own mentor, Governor Peterson, was defeated for re-election in the 1972 Republican primary by Meldrim Thomson, an unpredictable conservative.
Thomson's victory set off a decade-long ideological battle among New Hampshire Republicans, and although Rudman and Thomson quickly reached a grudging accommodation, one of Souter's main responsibilities was to insure the utmost professionalism in the office.
As Souter explained to one young lawyer joining the staff: "We don't win cases. We don't lose cases. We try cases."
In 1976, with Rudman's term as Attorney General expiring, Rudman convinced Thomson to name Souter as his successor.
Souter responded to the appointment by stressing that "the legal issues I feel most strongly about are not political ones." When reporters asked if he viewed the Attorney General's job as a steppingstone to a judgeship, Souter replied, "I'd have to decide if I were temperamentally suited to it."
As Attorney General, Souter named another Rudman protege, Thomas D. Rath, as his own deputy.
Souter maintained a polite distance from Governor Thomson but, as the state's top law enforcement official, nonetheless was drawn into various controversies.
When antinuclear demonstrators descended upon a partly constructed power plant at Seabrook on the New Hampshire coast, Souter took the lead in overseeing their arrests and prosecution.
When legalized casino gambling was proposed for New Hampshire, Souter spoke out forcefully in opposition and later termed his successful effort "my greatest crusade."
Souter was popular with his staff, both because of the glowing professional reputation his and Rudman's appointments had won for the office and because of his friendly humility and wry humor.
Outside the office, Souter -- who was living with his now-widowed mother in Weare -- pursued hiking and mountain climbing.
His long walks around Weare expanded to serious treks up New Hampshire's Presidential peaks.
Early in 1978, Governor Thomson sought to fill a vacancy on the five-member New Hampshire Supreme Court with former Congressman Louis C. Wyman, but the Executive Council, the Colonial-era body charged with ratifying judicial nominations, declined to approve Wyman and several councilors suggested naming Souter to the seat.
Thomson resisted and, seeking to eliminate Souter as an alternative to Wyman, offered instead to nominate Souter to a newly authorized judgeship on the Superior Court trial bench.
Faced with the choice, Souter hesitated.
Thomson was not going to name him to the high court, and under longtime New Hampshire norms, almost every Justice appointed to the Supreme Court had been promoted from Superior Court.
Souter could remain Attorney General for another two and a half years, but there was no reason to believe that whoever might be governor in 1980 would offer him a judgeship.
With some ambivalence about becoming a trial judge simply as a steppingstone to an appellate post, Souter accepted Thomson's offer to nominate him and name his close friend Tom Rath his successor.
Souter's ascension to Superior Court also marked other milestones.
First, his departure as Attorney General allowed him to begin dating a female lawyer in the office, Ann Cagwin.
His romantic interest in Cagwin, his closest friends attest, was the most serious attachment of his life.
No American is more discreet about his private life than David Souter, but when his relationship ended with Cagwin, who is now married and living in Maine, its demise left Souter emotionally crushed.
Second, Souter's less burdensome workload as a judge allowed him to become the unpaid president of Concord Hospital's board of trustees.
Before long, Souter was scheduling his Superior Court vacations so he could handle hospital affairs.
For five years, the board presidency was "virtually a second job" and Souter later confessed that "at times the hospital's regulatory problems seemed to consume all of my time not otherwise spent on the bench or asleep."
Souter enjoyed the personal interactions his judgeship offered, particularly those with citizens serving as jurors.
As a jurist, however, Souter was hard-nosed.
For instance, he rejected a plea bargain that would have released on probation a young woman who had stolen a .357 Magnum revolver and instead sentenced her to nine months' imprisonment.
He also was decidedly more rule-oriented than was generally the case under New Hampshire's informal courtroom customs.
Word spread quickly, one lawyer recalls, that "you really had to know what you were talking about" when you appeared before Souter.
Even in Superior Court, that lawyer explained, Souter "was really an appellate judge sitting as a trial judge" and Souter filed many extensive though never publicly printed written decisions.
The most significant of these was a 1981 ruling in State v.
Barney Siel, in which Souter quashed several subpoenas issued to reporters by a local court acting at the behest of a criminal defendant.
The New Hampshire Supreme Court later unanimously affirmed Souter's decision, commenting that "we adopt the well-reasoned position that the trial judge developed at length in his rulings."
But perhaps the best insights into David Souter's early years as a judge come from a posthumous appreciation he wrote concerning Laurence I. Duncan, a former New Hampshire justice.
Duncan was a solitary, almost withdrawn man, with few close friends beyond his immediate family.
Throughout Souter's years on the trial bench, Warren Rudman remained among his closest friends.
Rudman won election to the United States Senate in 1980 after defeating a fellow Republican, John Sununu, in a hard-fought primary.
After Sununu supported Rudman in the general election, Rudman returned the favor two years later in Sununu's successful gubernatorial campaign.
Rudman never concealed his opinion that Souter was "the finest constitutional lawyer I've ever known," and when New Hampshire Supreme Court Justice Maurice P. Bois retired in mid-1983, Rudman immediately told Sununu that David Souter should be elevated to that court.
Sununu interviewed Souter and two other candidates before sending Souter's name to the Executive Council, which unanimously approved the nomination.
Souter told reporters that the past five years had been "a very happy time," and later he would view his trial court tenure as the best experience of his professional life.
But the promotion was exactly what he had long aspired to.
A few days before his 44th birthday, David Souter was sworn in as the junior member of the New Hampshire Supreme Court.
The court that Souter joined in September 1983 contained two relatively young Thomson appointees, Charles G. Douglas and David Brock, and two older, less conservative men, the former Democratic Gov.
John W. King and the political independent William F. Batchelder, who both had been named to the bench by Thomson's Democratic successor, Hugh Gallen.
While Brock was not especially conservative, Douglas's far more pronounced ideology nonetheless featured a libertarian streak that in some criminal cases made the youthful senior justice paradoxically appear to be the court's most liberal member.
THE COURT WAS LOCATED IN A MODERN BUT somewhat isolated building across the Merrimack River from downtown Concord.
At the end of each week in which cases had been heard, the justices would convene and take "straw votes" on each one.
Then, in keeping with court tradition, the justices would draw lots from an antique silver pitcher in which the cases' docket numbers had been placed.
If a justice drew a case in which he anticipated dissenting, the number would be returned to the pitcher and he would draw again, but otherwise each justice was responsible for writing the court's opinion in whichever cases he drew, irrespective of their subject matter or his preferences.
The court's egalitarian case assignment method obviated any battling over opinion-writing duties and forced justices to be generalists rather than specialists.
Unanimity was the norm, and when written dissents were filed, no angry words ever appeared.
In part, the justices' collegiality stemmed from the justices' regular interactions with one another; each working day the five would lunch together at the court.
The relative infrequency of dissent was also a product of the court's docket.
Zoning disputes, commercial conflicts, utility rate increases and scores of routine criminal appeals -- many involving family and/or sexual violence -- constituted the regular staples of the New Hampshire court.
Souter quickly settled into the appellate routine.
Reading the briefs in each case the week before oral argument, he would scribble questions on the covers.
Prior to Souter's arrival, Chuck Douglas had been the most vocal member of the bench, but Souter soon equaled and then exceeded Douglas.
Some lawyers, especially those representing criminal defendants, came to resent the persistent grilling they often received from the junior justice.
James Duggan, the state appellate defender who appeared before the court more regularly than any other attorney, emphasizes that while Souter "would really hammer people," he nonetheless "was a pleasure to argue in front of" because his questions always focused on each case's toughest issues.
Especially in Souter's first year, he was slow to circulate drafts of opinions, in part because he, unlike most judges, did all his own writing rather than relying upon his two clerks.
In one 1984 case, State v.
Meister, in which the justices unanimously applied a 1981 precedent, Souter (whose own ruling as a trial judge had been reversed in the 1981 case by a 3-2 vote) filed a concurrence explaining that although he still agreed with the 1981 dissenters, "the consequences of what I believe was an unsound conclusion in that case are not serious enough to outweigh the value of stare decisis."
Souter's strong preference for judicial restraint, even in instances where his four colleagues felt differently, emerged most dramatically in two cases that raised the court's most hard-fought issue.
The first, State v.
Forrest Ball, had been argued before Souter's arrival.
Souter believed that Ball's call for an expansive application of the New Hampshire Constitution could not be pursued without doing significant damage to the state constitution's text and traditions.
In 1985, the Ball issue arose again in a case that highlighted Souter and his colleagues' differing perspectives on law enforcement.
Donald Koppel and Norman Forest were 2 of 18 drivers whom the Concord Police Department had arrested for drunken driving during a six-month series of roadblocks that had stopped some 1,700 motorists.
Both men appealed their convictions, arguing that the wholesale roadblocks -- in which all drivers, not just erratic ones, were pulled over and questioned -- violated the prohibitions against unreasonable searches and seizures contained in both the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
All four of Souter's colleagues found that contention persuasive and concluded, in an opinion authored by David Brock, that "the State has failed to show that drunk-driving roadblocks produce sufficient public benefit to outweigh their intrusion on individual rights." Following Ball, they insulated their ruling from any United States Supreme Court review by declaring that "our holding rests solely on our interpretation of the New Hampshire Constitution."
Souter's dissent reflected considerable exasperation.
Noting that the roadblocks delayed the average driver only some two minutes, Souter concluded that "the value of the roadblocks . . . significantly outweigh [ s ]  the minimal disadvantage to the delayed drivers." There was no gainsaying that Souter had lost the analytical war over Ball, but a few years later his defense of D.W.I. roadblocks was vindicated by the United States Supreme Court in a case from Michigan.
Souter's colleagues and attentive lawyers appreciated his intellectual precision, but Chuck Douglas was not alone in viewing Souter as less inclined to favor individual rights claims than his colleagues.
The state's appellate defender, James Duggan, and his then-deputy, Joanne Green, lost far more appeals than they won, and Green rues how Souter's opinions impressed her even when the outcomes were unwelcome: "I hated the fact that I agreed with his logic."
Douglas's departure left Souter as the court's most powerful intellect.
"He is by his nature a force at the table," one colleague explains.
"When he came to the table, he had done his homework and knew his position." Souter's fellow justices, realizing Souter's "wonderful sense of humor," sometimes would tease him about the almost superstitious regularity of his behavior.
Souter's habit of eating yogurt or cottage cheese and an entire apple, core and all, for lunch provided one splendid opportunity when someone brought in an article highlighting how apple seeds were potentially poisonous.
As two still-sitting members of the court tell the story, from that day forward David Souter swallowed no more apple seeds.
Even a decade later, Souter is known to challenge the apple seed story in precise but good-natured detail: the article wasn't a news clipping brought in by another justice; it was a Dartmouth Medical School item Souter himself saw.
The trace poison on the seeds was cyanide, not arsenic.
Most important, since the article said seeds were harmful only in large quantities, he did not change his apple-eating habits, which continue to this day.
Souter's politely formal playfulness could manifest itself in thank-you notes handwritten in Latin or a bar of soap left on a clerk's desk the day after she had uttered a four-letter word.
IN MID-1986, CHIEF JUSTICE KING RETIRED, opening the door for what threatened to be the emotional climax of Souter's professional life.
Brock, as the senior associate justice, was widely expected to be Governor Sununu's choice, given the controversy that had marked King's 1981 promotion over a more senior colleague in violation of unwritten tradition.
Senator Rudman, however, mounted what one participant called "quite an effort" on Souter's behalf, and inside the court no one doubted that Souter was very interested in the center chair.
One equally desirous colleague says the Chief Justiceship was Souter's "life ambition" and that Souter wanted it "in the worst way." A second justice agrees that "David wanted to be Chief Justice," but adds that "everyone wanted to become Chief Justice."
Sununu held 45-minute interviews with both Brock and Souter and then, in advance of the announcement, called Souter to say he was choosing Brock.
Publicly, Souter suffered no embarrassment, for he had not been named as a possible choice, and news reports simply noted how "Brock Nomination Signals Return to Tradition of Seniority." Privately, however, Souter was deeply disappointed, and perhaps acutely wounded.
One close observer called it "something of a slap," since Souter already was "intellectually the leader," and another court insider thought Souter "deeply resented" Brock's selection.
But Souter was inclined to think that things always happen for the best, and in the wake of his greatest professional disappointment, he began to ponder whether there might be life after the New Hampshire Supreme Court.
Few cases on the court's docket offered scintillating fare, but in one energetic 1987 dissent from his colleagues' unwillingness to follow a 1973 precedent, Souter emphasized that "only the weightiest of reasons could justify a refusal to honor the expectations" of those who "should be entitled to rely on the 1973 decision of this court."
Such opinions aside, however, for Souter the late 1980's was a time of increased introspection.
Some intimates believe Souter initially was ambivalent about the Federal judgeship, but by the time that Bownes did "go senior" in the winter of 1989-90, any hesitation had disappeared.
The First Circuit would offer a greater variety of cases than New Hampshire, and Boston -- the First Circuit's home city -- featured cultural attractions and was a manageable drive from Weare.
A brief, almost pro forma hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee was soon followed by unanimous Senate confirmation, and on May 25, 1990, David Souter was sworn into office by First Circuit Chief Judge Stephen Breyer.
SOUTER SPENT THE EARLY summer setting up his new office in Concord's Federal building and in June he traveled to Boston for his first sitting as a circuit judge.
Then, early one Sunday afternoon in late July, a telephone call interrupted him at his Concord office: C. Boyden Gray, George Bush's White House counsel, explained that the President wanted to see Souter on Monday and Souter should fly to Washington that evening.
Souter had heard Friday's news of the retirement of Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan and he knew that three years earlier Rudman had placed his name on the Reagan White House's list of Court prospects prior to the nomination of Justice Anthony Kennedy.
Gray's call, however, was totally unexpected, as was the prospect of a face-to-face Presidential interview the next day.
Souter's first reaction was to phone Rudman: "What have you done to me now?" he asked his longtime patron.
Rudman gave him a pep talk and explained how Gray had called on Saturday to request a recommendation letter; Souter was on a Presidential short list of just four names.
Then, a few minutes later, Souter called Rudman back: was it possible to fly directly from Manchester to Washington?
Yes, Rudman said.
Finally, after some reflection, Souter called for a third time: the White House ought to know that he would not discuss how he might rule in future cases.
Rudman assured him no such questions would be posed and told Souter he'd take him to the airport for his 6 P.M. flight.
An aide to Attorney General Dick Thornburgh met Souter's plane and took him to another staff member's home to have dinner and spend the night.
The next morning, Thornburgh's aide took Souter to the White House, where Boyden Gray asked him personal background questions aimed at exposing any skeletons.
Unbeknown to Souter, Federal appellate Judge Edith H. Jones of Texas was also in the White House, undergoing similar scrutiny; over the weekend George Bush had narrowed his short list to two by deleting Federal appellate Judges Clarence Thomas and Laurence Silberman, both of Washington.
At 1:30 P.M., Souter was ushered into the Oval Office for a 45-minute meeting with Bush, Thornburgh, Gray and the White House chief of staff, John Sununu, who as New Hampshire Governor had named him to the state Supreme Court but had also preferred David Brock for Chief Justice.
Bush and his aides had already interviewed Jones, and at the conclusion of the Souter meeting, those four, joined by Vice President Dan Quayle, spent an hour debating the pros and cons of each finalist, with Bush asking Quayle and Sununu to make the case for Jones and Thornburgh and Gray for Souter.
Jones had a more conservative reputation than Souter, but Bush's aides feared that her ideological renown would hamper confirmation and the President had been highly impressed by Souter's intellectual seriousness.
Bush spent almost an hour pondering the choice privately before deciding, and at 4:15 P.M.
Souter was summoned back to the Oval Office to be offered the nomination.
At 5 P.M., with a visibly stunned David Souter at his side, George Bush announced the selection in the White House press room.
Souter's transformation from obscurity to national celebrity was the greatest emotional shock he had ever experienced.
That evening, Warren Rudman took his dazed friend to dinner before Souter turned in on a cot in Rudman's Southwest Washington apartment.
Having anticipated only a one-day visit to Washington, Souter had just the suit he'd worn on Monday, plus a second tie, to carry him through the following three days of senatorial courtesy calls.
Only on Friday did a shellshocked David Souter return home.
After a visit to his mother, who now lived in a Concord retirement community, Souter spent one night in Weare before heading to Tom Rath's lake-front summer home to escape the journalists descending upon Concord.
Reporters failed to distill any clear ideological messages from Souter's New Hampshire Supreme Court opinions, but some seemed unable to grasp even the vast political difference between being a protege of Warren Rudman rather than of Meldrim Thomson or John Sununu.
Rudman proclaimed that "history will prove this to be one of the greatest nominations of all time," but he admitted that Souter led "an almost monastic life." Rudman emphasized that if Souter "has any fault . . . it's that he's worked too hard all his life." Some journalists were more interested in Souter's personal life than in his professional record, andSouter's closest friends soon became intensely angry at several reporters' preoccupation with Souter's "bachelor" status.
Souter found the intrusive media scrutiny traumatic.
"This is the biggest mistake I've made in my life," he told one friend, and to another he confessed that "this has been the worst week of my life." By early August, with Senate Judiciary Committee confirmation hearings scheduled for mid-September, more and more speculation focused upon Souter's position on Roe v.
Wade.
New Hampshire's other United States Senator, Gordon Humphrey, an extreme conservative who barely knew Souter, anticipated that he would vote to overturn Roe.
But the more astute James Duggan observed that even if Souter disagreed with Roe, "Whether he would be willing to overturn the decision . . . is a different proposition entirely." Liberal publications trumpeted the news that the conservative Free Congress Foundation had distributed a memo quoting John Sununu as telling one of its leaders that Souter's nomination was "a home run" for conservatives.
Privately, as Sununu recently told this author, his belief that Souter would not uphold Roe was based upon "very detailed" confidential assurances from W. Stephen Thayer 3d, Souter's conservative junior colleague on the New Hampshire Supreme Court.
When the Senate Judiciary Committee hearing began on Thursday, Sept. 13, Senators and reporters quickly realized that Souter was an impressively erudite nominee.
Souter spent three full days in front of the 14-member committee, and amid all the concepts and issues he was asked to address, two, in retrospect, stand out as most revealing: liberty and precedent.
Most specifically, Souter stressed that in the due process clause language of the 5th and 14th Amendments, "the concept of liberty is not limited by the specific subjects" listed in the Bill of Rights.
In protecting personal liberty, Justices had to search for "principles that may be elucidated by the history and tradition of the United States. And ultimately the kind of search that we are making is a search for the limits of governmental power."
Souter's comments about precedent were potentially inseparable from the looming issue of Roe.
He highlighted the concept of reliance: "Who has relied upon that precedent and what does that reliance count for today?" If a court reconsidered a precedent, it was important for judges to ask "whether private citizens in their lives have relied upon it in their own planning to such a degree that, in fact, there would be a great hardship to overruling it now."
In his second day of testimony, Souter addressed Roe directly.
Legal observers reacted favorably to Souter's testimony, with Walter Dellinger, then a Duke University law professor, commenting that Souter was "the most intellectually impressive nominee I've ever seen." Most Senators agreed, and in late September the Judiciary Committee ratified Souter's nomination by a vote of 13-1.
On Oct. 2, the full Senate followed suit by a margin of 90 to 9, and on Oct. 8, 1990, David Hackett Souter was sworn in as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.
Unfortunately for Souter, the Court was already one week into its 1990-91 term, and from the first day he arrived, Souter found himself playing an unwinnable game of catch-up.
There was a huge volume of petitions to review and briefs to read, and Souter's relative unfamiliarity with Federal statutory issues made the process all the more difficult.
He soon realized he was facing the most difficult professional challenge of his life.
Throughout the fall, Souter continued to room with Rudman before taking his own apartment at the same complex, but he spent almost all of his waking hours, on weekends as well as weekdays, at the Court.
Asked about his Washington social plans by a New Hampshire magazine, Souter acknowledged that "I'm not a very sociable individual except among a fairly close circle of friends," most of whom lived in New Hampshire.
And, he added, "I'm not going to change my personality as a result of getting a new job."
Souter's friends appreciated that the transition to Washington was more difficult than he had anticipated.
Given Souter's "reverence" for the Court, Tom Rath explained, Souter was not only "in awe of the challenge" but also felt that "his first test was to satisfy himself that he was worthy" of the job.
Those who saw him thought he looked more exhausted than ever before; those who phoned him could sense he was worried about keeping up with the caseload.
Rath identified the stress succinctly: "David Souter's harshest critic is David Souter."
By the spring of 1991, journalists were wondering if Souter was foundering; prior to late May, only one case in which he had written an opinion had been decided, and as of mid-June, he had issued only five more opinions.
Finally, in the last week of the term, another half-dozen Souter opinions appeared.
At the end of the term, a spent David Souter headed home to New Hampshire, grateful for a three-month respite from Washington.
When he returned in September to begin the new term, he was fully prepared.
The difference quickly showed in the pace and scale of Souter's output, and by the time Casey was argued in late April 1992, Souter had found his equilibrium.
Even though he missed New Hampshire, he loved the Court and was a well-liked figure within the Court building.
Casey was the most important case of the 1991-92 term, but there were other impressive Souter successes.
He, Kennedy and O'Connor also came together, again joined by Blackmun and Stevens, in a crucial establishment clause case, Lee v.
Weisman, where they struck down the recital of religious prayers at public-school graduation ceremonies.
Souter also stepped to the fore in humorously taking on the rhetorical excesses and interpretive shortcomings of Antonin Scalia, the intellectual leader of the Court's right wing.
Indeed, of the term's 108 cases, Souter dissented in only 8.
But Casey was the highlight of many a year, and both before the decision came down, as well as after, David Souter did not for a moment doubt the correctness or the importance of the trio's achievement.
IN THE IMMEDIATE aftermath of Casey, no one who knew David Souter well, irrespective of their position on abortion, was surprised by what Souter and his two allies had said and done.
From Chuck Douglas ("I was not surprised by the Casey decision") to James Duggan ("It should not be a surprise to anyone that David Souter is not voting to overturn precedent") to all of Souter's close friends, the reactions were virtually identical.
What Casey boiled down to, Tom Rath said, was "how the judiciary can bind a society together." David Souter, he told one questioner, "has a vision of the Court as a moderating influence," as "a conciliator and legitimizer," and that perspective repre-sented "the essence of David Souter. That's the David Souter I've heard many a night on porches."
Another close friend, echoing how Casey "wasn't a surprise," especially given "David's respect for precedent," stressed that people did not appreciate how "David's a judicial conservative, not a political conservative." Jane Cetlin Pickrell -- the former clerk who had received the thank-you note in Latin, and the bar of soap -- felt similarly.
He "may have had doubts about Roe," because "we debated that at some point," but "I knew what he would do with Roe v. Wade," and Casey had proved her correct.
David Souter was happy to have the constitutional battle over abortion behind him.
The 1991-92 term had been vastly different from 1990-91, and in Casey the Court had triumphantly passed a crucial test.
Given the workload, there was no way around having his clerks do some opinion drafting, but the amount of ink he added to almost every line of their drafts left the clerks with no doubts whose opinions they really were.
Neither the 1992-93 or 1993-94 terms would prove as significant as 1991-92.
The most striking statistic of 1991-92, as Casey exemplified, was the degree to which Anthony Kennedy had shifted away from Rehnquist and toward Souter and O'Connor.
But in the following year, as Kennedy reverted to greater agreement with the Chief Justice, Souter found himself on the minority side of far more split decisions.
In New Hampshire, some defense attorneys were pleasantly stunned by Souter's majority opinion in a Miranda-related criminal case, Withrow v.
Williams.
But Souter's most important opinion of 1992-93 was a concurrence in Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye Inc. v.
City of Hialeah, a free-exercise clause challenge to a municipal prohibition of animal sacrifices that was targeted against Santeria religionists.
Souter's long concurrence in Lee v.
Weisman a year earlier had signaled his special interest in the First Amendment's separation of church and state, but Souter's Lukumi Babalu concurrence was striking in how it explicitly called for the Court to reconsider its reigning free-exercise clause precedent, a 1990 decision entitled Employment Division v.
Smith.
At his confirmation hearing, Souter had said only that "my own religion is a religion which I wish to exercise in private and with as little . . . expression in the political arena as is possible," but he now made it clear that Smith insufficiently protected religion from government intrusion.
Since earlier cases contained "a free-exercise rule fundamentally at odds with the rule Smith declared," there now existed "an intolerable tension in free-exercise law." Quoting Felix Frankfurter's reminder that stare decisis "is a principle of policy and not a mechanical formula," Souter's message was obvious -- Casey's affirmation of Roe notwithstanding -- that Smith was a disposable precedent.
The 1992-93 decline of the Souter-O'Connor-Kennedy trio led some observers to highlight how Kennedy had moved back rightward, but Paul Barrett of The Wall Street Journal contended that actually the "most striking development" was Souter's "emerging liberal streak."
Once the 1993-94 term got under way, evidence seemed to mount that Barrett's characterization was no overstatement.
James Duggan believed a Souter concurrence concerning the use of uncounseled convictions for cumulative sentencing in Nichols v.
U.S. was almost "180 degrees different" from a 1984 Souter opinion, State v.
Cook.
A few weeks later, one New Hampshire Supreme Court insider, reacting joyously to a Souter concurrence on behalf of fellow Justices Blackmun, Stevens and Ruth Bader Ginsburg in a Miranda-oriented military murder case, Davis v.
U.S., vehemently exclaimed that "that was not the David Souter that sat on this bench!"
But the most dramatic 1993-94 evidence of Souter's increasingly influential intellectual leadership of the Court's six mainstream members was the growing number of combative references that Antonin Scalia was directing to him in multiple opinions.
Supreme Court insiders emphasize that in person, the two justices "like each other" and "kid around," but based upon the written record, there is little doubt that Scalia now realizes -- much as Felix Frankfurter did after the advent of Earl Warren and William Brennan -- that he has decisively lost the struggle for intellectual leadership of the Court to someone who was not supposed to be a major player.
In one late June habeas corpus ruling, Heck v.
Humphrey, three contentious Scalia footnotes criticized Souter by name; three days later, in one of the term's leading cases, Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v.
Grumet, Scalia in angry dissent dismissed Souter's majority opinion as "facile" and petulantly invoked Souter's name again and again in criticizing the outcome.
Seemingly both provoked and bemused, Souter responded that "Justice Scalia's dissent is certainly the work of a gladiator, but he thrusts at lions of his own imagining."
The 1993-94 term witnessed Souter's highest output of his four years on the Court -- 25 opinions (8 majority, 12 concurrences and 5 dissents), more than double the number he wrote his first year.
In part, Souter's increased productivity reflected what he told friends was a lesson he had learned in each of his three judgeships: only after three years does one get fully up to speed.
But even though Souter was now completely at ease, the results of the 1993-94 term showed that he and his three most regular allies -- Blackmun, Stevens and Ginsburg, who had been together in 11 of the year's 14 5-4 cases -- had been the losing foursome in 8 of those 11, prevailing only in 3 criminal cases where they were joined by Kennedy.
And if one looked at the 35 cases where Blackmun and Rehnquist had come out on opposite sides, perhaps Souter's "emerging liberal streak" was no exaggeration at all: While Ginsburg had sided 19 times with Blackmun and 16 with Rehnquist (and O'Connor only 7 with Blackmun and 27 with Rehnquist), Souter had been with Blackmun in 24 of the cases and with Rehnquist in only 11.
Right-wing Court watchers rued Souter's evolution.
Thomas Jipping of the Free Congress Foundation, reminding the conservative Washington Times that "John Sununu told me directly that Souter would be a 'home run' for conservatives," offered a sarcastically dismissive metaphor: "The first term, I thought he might be a blooper single. After last year, I thought he was a foul ball. Now I think he's a strikeout."
But Linda Greenhouse of The New York Times saw it differently: "Souter's brand of moderate pragmatism and his willingness to engage Justice Scalia in direct intellectual combat is probably as responsible as any single factor for the failure of the conservative revolution."
A CHAGRINED JOHN Sununu readily concedes that he is "very surprised" -- and deeply disappointed -- by David Souter's evolution.
In sharp contrast, however, former President Bush tells this author that he is proud of Souter's "outstanding" service and "outstanding intellect." Some antagonists, Bush recalls, greeted the nomination by dismissing Souter as "a predictable, extreme right-winger." Now Bush quietly exults over "how wrong his critics were. This quiet decent man will serve for years on the Court, and he will serve with honor always and with brilliance."
The arrival of new Justice Stephen Breyer will make for few changes in the Court's basic lineup.
In controversial cases, Breyer likely will take his predecessor Harry Blackmun's place in the Souter-Stevens-Ginsburg quartet.
If none of those justices leave prior to the 1996 Presidential election, the eventual timing of William Rehnquist's departure as Chief Justice -- generally expected to occur after, rather than before, the 1996 balloting -- looms as the next turning point in the Court's history.
Whoever replaces Rehnquist as Chief Justice -- and whoever as President gets to make that choice -- will be responsible for piloting the Court into the next century.
One of Souter's former New Hampshire judicial colleagues argues that Souter in his four Washington years has undergone "a remarkable jurisprudential transformation" into a "kinder, gentler" judge.
Virtually all of Souter's personal friends reject that characterization as overstated; Tom Rath firmly contends that "I don't think David has changed as a judge."
But if Souter is indeed evolving as a jurist, personally little has changed from his days in Concord.
"He was the same person as Attorney General as he is now," says one former assistant and longtime friend.
Warren Rudman attests that Souter's "wonderful dry sense of humor" remains unchanged, and someone who has come to know him well since 1990 stresses that "he's a very funny fellow." Tom Rath insists that "David Souter hasn't changed a bit" and recalls how this past New Year's, Souter joined the Raths and another couple for a five-hour dinner of lasagna and wine.
"It was exactly the same" as years past, Rath says almost in amazement.
"He's still David" and "his real life is here."
But spending nine months a year in Washington rather than Weare has of course changed Souter some.
One recent acquaintance expresses mild surprise at "how well informed he is about the way the world is," and an old friend explains that "he's become much more contemporary" in his cultural awareness.
Asking if a listener knows the New Hampshire Supreme Court story about a befuddled Souter saying that the only Garfield he'd heard of was a President, not a cat, the friend explains that Souter now is able -- with prompting -- to name all of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Another difference in Souter's Washington life is the importance that running has assumed in the relatively few waking hours when he's not at the Court.
Souter aims to run at least four nights a week at Fort McNair's outdoor track, only a block or so from his apartment, but even while jogging within McNair's guarded walls, one can sometimes hear the sounds of real-world gunshots not far away.
One change that Souter dislikes intensely is being recognized in public.
If David Souter has a real secret, it's the diary -- the daily journal he has kept since age 13.
In 1990, both The Los Angeles Times and The Concord Monitor mentioned it in passing, and former colleagues on the New Hampshire court nervously joke about what it may have on them.
Friends say Souter's diary writing -- which is largely devoted to recounting stories told by others, rather than the day's events -- has increased sharply in Washington, in part because of the inspiration provided by such memorable storytellers as the late Thurgood Marshall.
Intensely worried that widespread awareness of the diary could result in a burglary, Souter keeps none of it in Weare or in his Washington apartment.
Souter reveres the Court, and while he sees few newspapers, when clerks or friends show him published critiques of his colleagues -- whether right-wing columnists trashing Anthony Kennedy or neo-liberals disparaging the careers of Byron White and Harry Blackmun -- Souter can react angrily.
And Souter's respect for the Court's institutional privacy extends to deep dismay at any personal publicity.
"He doesn't like his friends speculating about his judicial opinions," stresses one intimate, catching himself doing just that.
"David is a much better politician than people give him credit for," one of his closest friends volunteers in explaining Souter's influence and success on the Court.
Reluctantly, several acquaintances confess that Souter privately has talked about the possibility of stepping down at age 65 -- 10 years hence -- but none of them take the comment seriously.
Personally happy and professionally fulfilled, David Souter likely will help lead the Court well into the second decade of the 21st century.
Says one friend, "A man more comfortable with himself would be hard to find."


Building a Bulb Border, Layer by Layer
THERE are conventional ways to do things, but there is also your way.
Take bulb planting, for instance, a familiar routine for this time of year.
A rather maverick way once developed out of desperation.
It was one of those years when the planting kept getting put off by other priorities.
The daily list of chores grew longer and longer, bulbs kept arriving by mail and a pile of bulb-filled bags began accumulating.


MaryAnn E. Orr, Richard Nash Jr.
MaryAnn Eva Orr, a daughter of Patricia H. Orr of Langhorne, Pa., and Edward C. G. Orr of Malvern, Pa., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Richard Barry Nash Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nash of East Granby, Conn.
The Rev.
Canice Connors performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
The bride, 32, is a senior attorney at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in Washington.
She graduated from Smith College and received her law degree from Suffolk University.


Before Neo-Realism Or Robert Altman, There Was Renoir
IF "JEAN RENOIR HAS CREATED the most alive films in the history of the cinema, films that breathe 40 years after they were made," as the director Francois Truffaut once said, what makes them still vital in 1994, the centennial of Renoir's birth?
A viewing of even a few of the Renoir classics being shown through Oct. 20 at Film Forum 2, in New York, and from Oct. 22 through Nov. 27 at the Museum of Modern Art, answers that question.
For those who think that antiwar films began with "Platoon," released in 1986, a glance at "Grand Illusion," from 1937, would be illuminating.
Those who assume Robert Altman was the first to tell a complex cinematic tale via intersecting characters and narratives, as in "Nashville" and "Short Cuts," should check out Renoir's 1939 classic, "The Rules of the Game." Those who think that neo-realism began in 1940's Italy should see "Toni," from 1935.
And those who believe that the French New Wave directors of the 1960's were pioneers in celebrating female sexuality -- especially women who choose to love more than one man -- shouldn't miss Renoir's 1952 film "The Golden Coach," in which Anna Magnani's earthy character juggles three men simultaneously.


18 Holes-in-One
To the Sports Editor:
Here are 18 reasons pro golf is the best spectator sport:


Wendi Dritz, Courtney Wood
Wendi Jo Dritz, a daughter of Joan and Michael A. Dritz of Armonk, N.Y., was married last evening in New York to Courtney Lewis Wood, the son of Mona and Benjamin J. Wood of Owings Mills, Md.
Rabbi Robert Rothman performed the ceremony at the New York Palace.
Mrs.
Wood, 32, is a vice president at Nat West Securities, an investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Smith New Court Inc., an international securities firm in New York.


An Honorable Boy
THIRD AND INDIANA By Steve Lopez. 305 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.


Spending for the Thrill of It
Doug Matthews's team plays for the 1994 United States Open polo championship on Sunday, a half-million-dollar investment that will return, if he wins, such lucrative rewards as a trophy and a higher personal rating within the sport.
There will be no winners' and losers' purses, no sponsor stipends, no network payoffs, no merchandising receipts, no proceeds from the gate.
The four-man team he calls Aspen, together since March in preparation for this particular event, will disband on Sunday, win or lose.


'Gridlock Alert' Issued for Clinton's U.N. Visit
With President Clinton in New York City to address the United Nations General Assembly and to hold separate meetings with world leaders, city officials have issued a "gridlock alert" for midtown Manhattan tomorrow, the second day of the President's visit.
"There will be temporary frozen zones wherever he is traveling or staying," said Kim Serafin, a spokeswoman for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, meaning that traffic will be diverted from some streets as the President's motorcade passes as well as away from the sites of his meetings.


Haunted by History
Haunting and heartbreaking, Shimon Attie's photomontages of Jewish street life in Berlin before the Holocaust are layered in metaphor.
While doing archival research in Berlin in 1991, Mr.
Attie, a San Francisco artist, found himself wondering what became of the Jewish community there.
He projected slides of prewar German Jewish life onto housefronts standing today, using the original sites whenever possible: images of a Talmud school, Hebrew bookstore, kosher butcher, Jewish theater, Torah reading room, along with a religious book salesman and other Jewish residents, are juxtaposed with a mundane, modern railroad station, buildings, highways, cars and billboards.
In an essay accompanying THE WRITING ON THE WALL: Projections in Berlin's Jewish Quarter (Edition Braus/Phillip Galgiani, P.O. Box 457, Prince Street Station, New York, N.Y., 10012, $30), Michael Andre Bernstein, a professor of English literature at the University of California, Berkeley, eloquently discusses Mr.
Attie's photographic techniques and the emotional textures they render.
Erwin Leiser, a German writer and film maker living in Zurich, provides a moving colloquial history of anti-Semitism in Berlin before and during World War II, when synagogues were set ablaze, Jewish-owned businesses were looted and tens of thousands of Jews were transported to concentration camps.
Yet Mr.
Attie's 30 reproductions need no explanation.
Every page seems to prove that evil can't be erased, that stores, windows and lampposts bear their own witness and that Jewish ghosts remain forever ensconced in the streets where they were betrayed.
SUSAN SHAPIRO


Mary Beth Topor, Stephen S. Daniel
Mary Beth Topor, a partner in Heller Macaulay Equities in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Storrs Daniel, a vice president at Capstar Partners, an investment bank in New York.
The Rev.
Mark Stelzer, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Abbey Chapel of Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass.
The Rev.
Scott Seabury, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Daniel, 34, graduated from Mount Holyoke.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Topor Jr. of South Hadley.
Her father owns two automobile dealerships in Chicopee, Mass.


Many Protestant Faiths Face Financial Binds
For many of the nation's major Protestant denominations, the 1990's is shaping up as a troubling decade of financial stress.
Dollars that once flowed readily upward from the pews -- helping to build seminaries and start missionary corps -- are no longer reaching church headquarters the way they once did, as more money is held at the local level.
The result is that denominations that helped shape the American religious landscape, including the Presbyterians, the Lutherans and even the Southern Baptists, are often falling short of their budget goals.


GANG GIRL
I put off writing about Tamika, the young woman so thoughtfully portrayed in Adrian Nicole LeBlanc's article "While Manny's Locked Up" (Aug. 14), until I read a letter that appeared on Sept. 4, referring to her as "reprehensible." I would call her gutsy, stressed, intelligent, in search of a moral guide for her life, admirable, but hardly reprehensible.
I was also struck by the contrast between her life and the lives portrayed in Mary Tannen's Style feature "War Paint" (Aug. 14), a lighthearted romp among the privileged young.
RENE MCDONALD University Park, Md.


Susan I. Levy, Bart C. Shuldman
Susan Ilene Levy, an associate director of corporate bond trading at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York, is to be married today to Bart C. Shuldman, the president of the Magnetec Corporation, a printer manufacturer in Bloomfield, Conn.
Cantor Richard Silverman is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 31, graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
She is the daughter of Linda and Edward Levy of Monmouth Beach, N.J.


Insurance Official Disputes Article
To the Editor:
After noting my appointment as receiver of Monarch Life ("When to Drop a Troubled Insurer," Your Own Account, Sept. 11), Mary Rowland characterized my opinion to be that "Monarch policyholders should probably get other coverage." She then quoted me that "if you are still healthy, you ought to be looking at other companies." My remarks were taken out of context and should not have been presented in isolation.


Grandson Arrested In Woman's Killing
A 22-year-old man fatally stabbed his 70-year-old grandmother yesterday inside an apartment the two had shared in Long Island City, Queens, the police said.
The man, identified as George Galvez, was arrested after he surrendered to the building superintendent, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the Good Eating column on Sept. 11 misstated the rating of the restaurant Amarcord, at 7 East 59th Street.
It received two stars, not one, when it was reviewed on Feb. 25, 1994.


Anne M. Birle, George F. Veh
Anne Margaret Birle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Birle of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to George Frederick Veh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Veh of Gibsonburg, Ohio.
The Rev.
Janice Garrett performed the nondenominational ceremony at the home of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Rinehart, friends of the bride's parents, in Saratoga, Calif.
The bride, 31, is a partner at Birle Knowlton Wilcox Artsource, an art consultant in San Francisco.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a general partner in the Blackstone Group, an investment bank in New York.


Rebecca L. Hicks, Bruce P. Robinson
Rebecca Lynn Hicks, a pediatric nurse at New York Hospital, was married last evening to Dr.
Bruce Phillip Robinson, a dermatologist in New York.
Rabbi Jerome K. Davidson officiated at the Lake Success Golf Club in Lake Success, L.I.
Mrs.
Robinson, 30, and her husband, 32, graduated from the University of Texas, she from the Medical Branch at Galveston and he from the Austin campus.
Dr.
Robinson received his medical degree from the Galveston branch.


A Second Wind Is Blowing For Kevin Bacon
KEVIN BACON, A LONGTIME New Yorker who now lives in Connecticut, has been to Los Angeles many times, for visits long and short, but he never escapes a shadow of anxiety cast by the city.
"When I come out, I feel like I'm always in the hot seat, because I'm either doing a film, promoting a film or trying to get a film," he said.
"You're so defined when you're here by what's happening in terms of your career. It's constantly, constantly in your face."


Corrections
An article about orthopedic implant manufacturers based in Warsaw, Ind., misidentified the trade organization that represents the industry in Washington lobbying.
It is the Health Industry Manufacturers Association.


Why the East River Park Has Suffered Such Neglect
To the Editor:
The Sept. 11 article about the East River Park, "Park on Respirator Breathes New Life," tells of recent and planned improvements to the deteriorating park including a new comfort station, new emergency parking lot and new picnic tables.
As someone who has been jogging, walking and biking through the park for 20 years, I am pleased that some attention is being paid to the park; it's about time!


Haiti's Elite: Resentful but Resigned
The art gallery has been dark for more than a year.
Paintings of lush Haitian landscapes and dark voodoo ceremonies, priced as high as $20,000, are covered in dust.
Mahogany sculptures, priced at $10,000, are stacked like firewood in the middle of the floor.
The gallery's owner, Johnny Saba, is one of Haiti's wealthy elite, the collection of old families and rich newcomers who backed the coup that toppled the populist President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, on Sept. 30, 1991.


Smoking Aloft
To the Editor: As the East Coast news media representative for the pioneer of smoke-free aviation, Cathay Pacific Airways, I was surprised not to see it included in the chart "Flying Abroad Smoke-Free: A Sampling" (Aug. 7).


It's a Fix-Up, Dress-Up, Button-Down World
Many of the guests inspecting the mirrors on exhibit at the Parrish Art Museum's design biennial, benefit and auction on Sept. 17 couldn't help inspecting themselves as well.
But they did so clandestinely.
During the cocktail hour, in bouts with the vice of vanity and with the expediency of the guilty sucking on cigarettes in stairwells, they snuck glimpses to check lipstick, lapels and bald spots.
"It's very amusing," said Susan Soros, a co-chairwoman of the event and the director of the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts, where recently students have been studying Greek vases depicting women looking into mirrors.
"Women go up to look at the frames, and they start fixing their hair," she said.


Exotica From Reeves Is Trickery for Others
When Dan Reeves reaches into his bag of tricks . . . oh, that's right, he doesn't like the phrase "trick plays."
"I think 'exotic plays' is a better word for them," he says.
Trick plays.
Exotic plays.
Actually, they should be called killer plays, because that's what they have done to other teams.


T. L. Hanneman, Michael S. Rubin
Tamara Lynn Hanneman, the founding editor of Storyworks, a children's literature magazine in New York, is to be married today to Michael S. Rubin, a composer and producer in New York.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz is to officiate at Wheatleigh, an inn in Lenox, Mass.
The bride, 31, graduated from the University of Minnesota.
She is the daughter of Doris and Robert Hanneman of Franklin, Wis.
The bride's mother is the director of instruction for the public schools in Greenfield, Wis., where the bride's father, now retired, taught biology.


Back in Business: Once (and Future?) King of Times Sq. Porn
The King of Peeps, the man who popularized peep shows in the 1960's and then quit the business, has suddenly returned to Times Square.
Law enforcement officials say he is trying to regain supremacy in local sex entertainment even as the industry is under siege and the neighborhood is in the throes of change.
Martin J. Hodas, who transformed Times Square in the 60's with his simple innovation -- private viewing booths -- abandoned his multimillion-dollar empire in the mid-80's, after short prison terms for tax evasion and obscenity.
Richard Basciano took over some of his operations.
Now, they're competitors.


Streetscapes/The Swiss Home; With Not Enough Old Indigents to Fill It, It's for Sale
ANOTHER lump in the melting pot is about to dissolve.
The 1905 Swiss Home, at 35 West 67th Street, was built to house aged, indigent Swiss, but after 90 years of trying to fill it, the Swiss Benevolent Society is giving up and selling its building to concentrate on social services.
Although government now controls most charitable endeavors, mid-19th-century New York fairly bristled with improvement and self-help societies organized around religion or nationality.
In 1846, upper-class New Yorkers of Swiss extraction founded the Swiss Benevolent Society, which finally bought an old rowhouse at 108 Second Avenue in 1883.


Nancy J. Victory, Ray M. Senkowski
Nancy Jane Victory, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Victory of Quogue, L.I., was married there yesterday at her parents' home to Ray Michael Senkowski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond M. Senkowski of Fox Island, Wash.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles M. Cary, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.
The bride, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a senior associate at Wiley, Rein &amp; Fielding, a Washington law firm in which her husband is a partner.
She graduated from Princeton University and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of Victory Television, a New York distributor of syndicated programming.


Second Time Around
WE'VE ALL BEEN ASKED, "What do you want to be when you grow up?" But how many ever answered, "A doctor, a lawyer and an Indian chief"?
The assumption was that choosing one occupation was sufficient.
Some people are finding, however, that life's unexpected challenges create opportunities that keep them from lamenting roads not taken.
What's required is guts, resilience and a change of clothes.
GOLF CLOTHES USED TO LOOK pretty bad.
But they're getting better: colors are less vivid, patterns are more subtle, fabrics have more texture.
These clothes can give you freedom on the course.
I want the 1,500 people who work for me to convey that sense of ease as well -- relaxed yet smart.
Still, I'm a lot more dressed up than when all I dealt with all day were farmers and dirt.
People were surprised when I didn't sell the vineyards and just retire.
But retirement is the best prescription for an early death.
Human beings need to be active mentally and physically in order to thrive.
And I am.
I don't even have time for golf.
I have a business to run.
ELY CALLAWAY, THIS PAGE  Former vintner, now the chairman and C.E.O. of Callaway Golf, creator of Big Bertha Clubs, Carlsbad, Calif.
BOTH MY CAREERS HAVE BEEN people-oriented, but the former was about pleasing the audience on a short- term basis, whereas the present is about dealing with their long-term welfare.
In my heart, I'll always be casual, but obviously it's not only about me anymore.
Still, it's dressing for another stage, and it's fun picking out the right suits, shoes, the perfect tie that correspond to the development of your personality, just as a sheepskin vest was apt for another time.
Though I have to admit, when I compare myself then and now, I duck a little.
SONNY BONO, OPPOSITE PAGE Ex-pop idol, now a candidate for Congress from California's 44th District
CHANGE IS A TWO-PART PROCESS.
First there is the action.
That's immediate.
The acceptance takes much longer.
Still, it's funny how it's no longer as necessary for me to give off this impression of strength.
My ears are what count now, so I can give my body a rest.
I can wear things that cover myself more and look less intimidating.
It may not be as physically impressive, but I feel more grown-up.
I'd like to think that's why people now treat me differently.
But no matter what, my family will always treat me like I'm 12 years old.
DERRICK SMIT, THIS PAGE  Former security guard and gym manager, now independent record producer
I THOUGHT COMPUTERS WOULD BE the industry to be in.
I still admire the technology, but not corporate climates and ethics.
Running my own company made me realize big business's real problem is lack of communication.
My volunteer work led me to the idea of opening Earth General in Brooklyn,where we sell environmentally honest products -- cleaning solutions, health and beauty aids, apparel made from organic and recycled materials -- to help people take better care of themselves.
Part of that care is dressing in what is natural, easy to care for and soothing.
I'm sure it increases productivity, besides making people feel better about themselves.
And a healthier attitude makes a healthier planet.
STEFAN DOERING, OPPOSITE PAGE, TOP Former computer systems manager, now president of Earth General
ANYONE WHO HAS A TRAGIC accident has to go through denial and self-pity.
But then you have to leave the world of hurt and get on with the rest of your life.
I've always loved nature, but as a park ranger, I was content showing people where to buy rubber tomahawks and find the bathroom.
Now, thanks to modern technology, I can show other physically challenged people that rock climbing, skiing and kayaking are not beyond their reach.
Nor do they have to feel disabled.
I move gracefully in that chair, I love sports, I wear whatever I like.
When people spend time with me, they stop thinking about the wheelchair and start thinking about Mark Wellman.
MARK WELLMAN, RIGHT Former park ranger and professional rock climber, now a motivational speaker and film maker based in Truckee, Calif.
I WANTED SOME TIME OFF AFTER college.
Modeling, however, turned out to be a six-year sidetrack, and though I'm grateful for the traveling and the friends I've made, this is what I've always wanted to do.
Surgery is disciplined and, accordingly, requires certain restrictions in dress.
Patients have expectations.
They want to see me in a white coat, surgical greens or a suit.
But you can be comfortable while inspiring confidence.
I choose suits that are a little bigger, roomier, that let me reach.
My detour may be responsible for my being the oldest resident studying plastic surgery, but the way I figure it, by the time I get out, I can work on all my friends.
They're not getting any younger either.
MARK WARFEL, THIS PAGE Former model, now a second-year resident in surgery at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York City
MY WIFE SAYS THAT WHEN I FIRST moved in with her, all I brought with me were 15 uniforms.
I never gave a thought to what I wore, just how it looked.
So when I started banking, I really did think I was just going from one uniform to another.
Concerned only with conveying a level of trust, I dressed by the numbers: 90 percent of the clothes in my wardrobe looked identical; the other 10 percent were gifts.
But I'm discovering I've been limiting myself.
What looks like a uniform doesn't have to feel like a uniform.
It may require a little more effort, but there are a lot more choices as to how to convey authority.
And one way to do that is to feel good.
This suit feels real good.
JOHN BRATTEN, OPPOSITE PAGE Former Marine Corps lieutenant colonel, still in the Reserves, now a stockbroker


Sailor Apparently Drowned in Accident
Larry Klein, the world champion sailor and United States Olympic contender in the Soling Class, apparently drowned in a boating accident Sept. 17, said his widow, LESLIE KLEIN.
Initial reports indicated that Klein may have died from hypothermia.


New Species Revives Fears Of a Gypsy Moth Infestation
THE image of stark leafless trees in midsummer has Long Island park officials preparing for an aggressive battle against the dreaded gypsy moth to prevent a repeat of the major infestation of 1981, when 30 percent of the Suffolk County trees were defoliated.
"We hadn't received any phone calls about gypsy moths for several springs, not since 1989 when a fungus disease wiped them out," said Thomas Kowalsick, horticulture consultant at the Cornell Cooperative Extension in Suffolk County.
"But this past summer our lab received a good 100 calls on the gypsy moth caterpillar. That's a significant jump."


In Land of Topless Bars, a Ho-Hum
The men of the Knights of Columbus hall in Woodside, Queens, had to quit lending their floor polisher to Honey's, the bar next door, after it went topless about 10 years ago.
"I mean, how would that look, a K of C helping out a topless place?" said Joe Clancy, the manager of the hall at 50th Street and Queens Boulevard.
But Mr.
Clancy, talking with the other regulars in the dark bar area of the Knights hall, said the members of the Roman Catholic service organization had long ago made their peace with the presence of half-naked women on the other side of their common wall.


EUROPE: THE NEW SEASON -- Restored Treasures; France: After nearly 30 years, a Paris museum is back
The rush is on to complete the new National Library of France, the last of the ambitious series of public works designed to leave President Francois Mitterrand's imprint on Paris.
Already he will be remembered by the Bastille Opera, the expanded Louvre Museum with I. M. Pei's glass pyramid and the Grande Arche de la Defense.
Next March, just weeks before retiring from office, Mr.
Mitterrand will inaugurate the $1.5 billion ultramodern library on the Left Bank, with its four 200-foot, L-shaped towers.
But the French state has also been busy with less visible but, in a sense, no less daring renovations.
Damaged by Allied bombing in 1944 and closed to the public since 1965, the National Natural History Museum was reopened in June this year after a seven-year, $90 million transformation of the glass-and-iron interiors.
The late 19th-century building, which dominates the Left Bank's Jardin des Plantes (founded by Louis XIII in 1635), with its botanical garden and small zoo, is again able to live up to its nickname of the Louvre of Nature.


Disdaining a Sound Bite, Federal Judges Banish TV
WHILE no one expected the Federal judiciary to embrace the television age with open arms, it did appear for a while that the judges were at least learning to tolerate the cameras that have become a fact of life in most state courts.
So it was a surprise last week when the judges who make policy for the Federal system refused to extend a modest pilot project that had introduced cameras into a handful of Federal courthouses over the past three years.


Acceptable Dramatic License?
To the Editor:  As the writer of Robert Redford's new movie, "Quiz Show," I found Richard Bernstein's article something of a puzzle.
"Quiz Show" does not live up to the factual standards of a documentary, but neither does it purport to be one.
A historical drama, by its very nature, admits to certain liberties.
What is fiction, to borrow a phrase, is the idea that we have in any way dealt irresponsibly with the history that is the basis for this film.
The weightiest charge Mr.
Bernstein can make is that the film condenses a series of investigators into one figure -- in fact, the one prosecutor who was at all successful in his pursuit -- Richard Goodwin.
If this is not acceptable dramatic license, I don't know what is, but somehow in Mr.
Bernstein's mind this adds up to film makers abandoning the truth in the cause of entertainment.
His odious comparison is to the producers of the quiz shows themselves.


Revising the Script for a Starrett Plan in Brooklyn
ON the long road to developing housing on large tracts of land in New York City, a developer has to be ready to shift gears.
By the time the approval process is complete, the market may have changed.
City requirements or capital assistance capabilities may change too.
Even after public action has fixed the basic form, land-use plans need to give the development entity, whether public or private, some degree of flexibility.
Just east of Starrett City in Brooklyn, the Starrett Housing Corporation has for five years been the designated developer of 230 acres of vacant landfill property owned mainly by the city and state.
There have been several shifts in gear.


Long Live French Illusions
POLITICAL rivals and ideological foes though they were, Charles de Gaulle and Francois Mitterrand agreed on one thing -- that it served no purpose to look too closely at France's behavior during its occupation by Nazi Germany.
From the moment of the Liberation 50 years ago, De Gaulle set about restoring French honor by creating the myth that most French resisted the occupiers.
And decades later, President Mitterrand still felt that reopening old wounds would exacerbate "the eternal civil wars" among the French.
It is all the stranger, then, that at the age of 77, ailing with prostate cancer and barely seven months before leaving office, Mr.
Mitterrand should have placed himself at the center of an unparalleled debate about France's wartime past.
And he has done so by admitting his early rightist sympathies, his own role in the collaborationist Vichy regime and his friendship with a man later charged with crimes against humanity for deporting Jews to Nazi death camps.


Sept. 18-24: A Risk of Overuse; Connecting Fertility Drugs With Ovarian Cancer
Women treated repeatedly with fertility drugs have a greater risk of ovarian cancer than that for the general population, a new study showed.
Last week a report in the New England Journal of Medicine found ovarian cancer in 11 of 3,837 women who sought treatment in fertility clinics in Seattle from 1974 through 1986 -- a risk 2.5 times higher than the 4.4 cases expected from statistical calculations.


K.A. Farquharson, M.T. Crane
Kate Ann Farquharson, a daughter of Ann Farquharson of Cairo and the late John W. Farquharson, was married yesterday to Michael Turner Crane, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin F. Crane of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Francis Geer, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the bridegroom's parents' weekend home in Cold Spring, N.Y.
Mrs.
Crane, 33, was until recently a segment producer on "The Arsenio Hall Show" in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Essex University in England.
Her mother is an elementary education teacher at the Maadi British School in Cairo.
Her father was a vice president of private banking at Southeast Bank Florida in Miami.


Journal; Styne After Styne
Jule Styne composed the soundtrack to my stage-struck childhood, from the first musical I saw on Broadway ("Bells Are Ringing") to the most searing ("Gypsy").
So as an adult it was surreal to find him on the other end of the phone.
Even more surreal was the subject of our conversation last March.
A school in Southampton, L.I., had just banned a student production of "Peter Pan," the 1954 musical in which Mary Martin, singing the most poignant of Styne melodies, once unfurled Never Never Land in a generation of young American hearts.
Some adults of 1994 had now condemned another song in the show, "Ugg-a-Wugg," as insulting to Native Americans.


After Shaking Hands With the Devil in Haiti; The Go-Betweens
To the Editor:
"On the Brink of War, a Tense Battle of Wills" (front page, Sept. 20), which seeks to establish the chronology of Jimmy Carter's mission to Haiti, neglects to trace the mission's origin to the Caribbean-Latin American Foundation for Peace, a good-will group headed by the Rev.
Dr.
Robert Westcott and Theodore Eger, a former United States Navy lieutenant commander.


SUNDAY, September 25, 1994; Guarding the Summit
Josh Crabtree loves his commute to work.
He doesn't drive or take mass transit.
He hikes.
Crabtree is a High Peak Summit Steward in the Adirondack Park in upstate New York.
Every day between early June and mid-October he hoists 30 to 60 pounds of gear on his back and climbs 4 to 10 miles to the top of one of the park's peaks.
He spends the day there, explaining to hikers the fragility of the rare alpine vegetation found on the summits, and asking them to watch their steps.
Crabtree is one of four stewards in an effort in environmental education run by the state, the Adirondack Mountain Club and the Nature Conservancy.
He works on top of the two highest mountains in New York, Mt.
Marcy (5,344 feet) and Algonquin Peak (5,114 feet), shown above.
Their trails are among the most heavily traveled in the park; 40 to 200 hikers reach the summits each day.
That many people can cause a traffic jam.
So even Crabtree has to start his commute early -- near dawn -- when the trail is relatively free of other hikers.


Editors' Note
The Times Book Review on Aug. 7 carried a review of "Brecht and Company: Sex, Politics, and the Making of the Modern Drama," by John Fuegi, a Brecht scholar at the University of Maryland.
The reviewer was Ronald Speirs, a Brecht scholar at the University of Birmingham, England.


Holly Corroon, Marc Robinson
Helen Van Voorhis Corroon, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert F. Corroon of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Corroon, was married last evening to Marc Clapp Robinson, a son of Mrs.
Ernest Kip Robinson of Kansas City, Mo., and the late Dr.
Robinson.
The Rev.
Mark Connelly, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Robinson, who is known as Holly, graduated from Connecticut College and is a personal fitness trainer in New York.
Her father was the chairman of Corroon &amp; Black, the New York insurance brokerage that was founded by her grandfather, the late James Corroon.
Her maternal grandfather, the late James Maitland, was the president of the New York Bank for Savings.


Q. &amp; A.
Shedding Light on Electricity  Q I have owned a one-bedroom co-op apartment in Goldens Bridge, N.Y., since 1986.
This 43-unit garden apartment complex went co-op in 1983.
I have always sublet.


Profile; For 'Father of the Internet,' New Goals, Same Energy
CALL it luck or call it prescience.
But Vinton G. Cerf, a computer scientist as comfortable in an academic setting as he is in private industry, seems to make a success of nearly everything he touches.
And when he returned to MCI in January after an eight-year absence, he was, by his own account, eager to build something again.
More than a decade ago, when the commercial prospects for electronic mail were far from certain, Dr.
Cerf was the principal engineer of MCI Mail, now one of the nation's largest E-mail systems.
Now Dr.
Cerf, known throughout the industry as the primary force behind the development of the Internet, is helping the MCI Communications Corporation in an ambitious six-year, $20 billion project called networkMCI.


A Ballot Proposition Gives Voters the Opportunity to Influence National Immigration Policy
As Election Day 1994 approaches, Californians are poised to vote on a ballot proposition that would take the far-reaching step of denying illegal immigrants most major government services, including schooling and non-emergency health care.
Once again, the state's voters find themselves with the opportunity to influence the course the nation takes on a major issue.
Polls indicate that the rancorously debated measure, Proposition 187, put on the ballot by citizens groups, will win overwhelming approval from the nation's largest contingent of voters, sending to Washington a strong message of growing impatience with Federal immigration policy.


It All Started With Tunes From the Crypt
SIR NEVILLE MARRINER IS a firm believer in luck.
In 1959, when he was a violinist of the London Symphony Orchestra, he gathered some friends to play chamber music in the crypt of a London church.
On a whim, they adopted the church's name and became the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields.
They did not expect to play more than a handful of concerts.
Attaining sufficient international stature to be invited to open a season at Carnegie Hall -- as the academy will do on Thursday evening -- was surely not in the prospectus.
But an Australian heiress who owned a record company heard those first concerts and recorded the group in Baroque works.
With critics praising the clarity of the performances, and Baroque music poised to become a growth industry, the recordings instantly became popular and led to concert dates, which led to more recordings; the academy's 1984 soundtrack to "Amadeus" has sold more than two million copies.


NY '94
To the Editor: About "New York in a Package," by Susan Spano ( July 17): Domenico Tours, as the tour operator for NY '94, a tourism industry initiative offering attractively priced vacation packages, would like to point out what we feel is an unfair comparison in the article.
The writer compares one of our NY '94 vacations with a different package of her own creation.


Ford Recalls 2 New Models To Fix Defect
The Ford Motor Company is recalling its new Contour and Mystique compact sedans because of a design defect that, if uncorrected, could cause a fire during refueling.
Only 200 of the cars, which are about to be introduced in a $110 million advertising campaign, have been sold to retail customers.
Ford dealers have about 8,000 others.


Mexicans Sign New Accord On Economy
A group of Mexico's most powerful business and labor leaders today renewed a pact with the Government that will control prices and wages during the coming year.
But the accord does not offer the kind of economic jump-start many people expected from the winner of last month's presidential election.
The agreement also does not change the exchange-rate policy for the peso.
There was speculation the peso would be allowed to depreciate more quickly in order to make Mexican exports more competitive.


Where Buyers and a Hospital Benefit
AT the end of August, after the summer hiatus, when Peg Hart arrived to reopen the Twigs-Thriftree Shop here, she found a dozen shoppers milling outside.
"A few of them were dealers, but most were our regulars who come in several times a week to check out our stock and see what's new," said Mrs.
Hart, who has been a Twig volunteer for 25 years and is now responsible for the the shop's upkeep.
"We get new merchandise every day, so something is always new."


Stacy A. Powell, Christopher Wilde
Stacy Ann Powell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Powell of Orlando, Fla., and Jakarta, Indonesia, was married yesterday to Christopher Todd Wilde, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter V. Wilde of Flemington, N.J.
The Rev.
Wallace M. Pennepacker officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Memphis.
Mrs.
Wilde, 30, is a graphic designer at Siegel &amp; Gale, a corporate communications company in New York.
She graduated from Memphis State University.
Her father is an architect and senior project manager at the Bumimas Development Corporation in Jakarta.


Arts Excel Is Trying Again After a Shaky Start
THE premise is bold: improve learning in basic subjects like social studies, math and science by engaging students in activities like dancing, composing and mural making.
Awaken in children a respect for their own creativity, and they will grow intellectually by leaps and bounds.
Show the connection between what is art and what is not by bringing artists into the classroom, and turn schools -- especially urban schools -- into places of energy and excitement, where every child can thrive.


Stylish Standby
THE ODEON ** (212) 233-0507; 145 West Broadway, at Thomas Street; $$; all major cards


Reluctant Connoisseurs of Egyptian Wines Say, 'Add 7-Up'
Said Ibrahim never met a bottle of wine he didn't like.
"No matter what happens, we can always fix it," said Mr.
Ibrahim, an official at Egypt's only winery.
"We don't throw anything away."


U.S. Davis Cup Lead Cut By Sweden in Doubles
Stan Smith and Bob Lutz.
Peter Fleming and John McEnroe.
Ken Flach and Robert Seguso.
Rick Leach and Jim Pugh.
They came one after the other as if part of some grander design: American doubles teams with power, flair and tactical savvy, and they were dominant in Davis Cup play for nearly two decades.


Survey Shows C.D.W.'s Raise Rentals 46 Percent
Collision damage waivers for rental cars cost an average of $11 a day in a survey of 32 cities conducted recently by the United States Public Interest Research Group.
The waivers' cost increased the base price of an economy-car rental an average of 46 percent a day for a weekend rental.
Collision damage waivers are optional provisions in a car rental contract that relieve the customer from responsibility for damage or loss, if the terms of the contract are met.
Because such waivers are often not mentioned when customers make reservations for car rentals on the telephone, "consumers often first hear about C.D.W. at the rental counter, when they do not have the time to research their existing coverage or compare prices with other rental companies," the report noted.


Giuliani's Burden
Just three months ago, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone were drinking a champagne toast to an austere budget agreement that wrenched down the size of the municipal government and curtailed the growth of city spending for the first time in 16 years.
But now, all too soon, they have received a sobering reminder of how grim the city's fiscal problems are.
On Friday, mayoral aides told City Council leaders that the same budget now looks like it could be $1 billion out of balance.


A New Face at 'Law and Order.' Any Objections?
IT'S A HOT AUGUST MORNING INSIDE the cramped waterfront warehouse on West 23d Street in Manhattan that houses the sets for the NBC crime drama "Law and Order." They're shooting one of the first episodes of the show's fifth season.
And squeezed in among crew members and actors is Sam Waterston, who has just joined the cast in the central role of the Assistant District Attorney Jack McCoy.
The scene at hand takes place in McCoy's cluttered, book-lined office.
It is highlighted by Mr.
Waterston rejecting, with a gaze of steel, a defense lawyer's plea-bargain proposal.


Seeing Expressionism In the Post-Abstract
A preview of the Cy Twombly exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, Sept. 21.


Correction
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Charlotte Jane Triefus misspelled the family name of the bridegroom.
He is Lloyd Philip Zuckerberg.


Advancing the Poultry Debate
To the Editor:
Chickens are not electrically stunned during the slaughter process but are immobilized with a very mild yet very painful electric current.
Stunning is deemed by the poultry industry to be incompatible with commercial considerations, so countless millions of birds go through the slaughter process fully conscious.


One Scats, the Other Doesn't
WISHING ON THE MOON The Life and Times of Billie Holiday.
By Donald Clarke.
Illustrated. 468 pp.
New York: Viking. $24.95.
ELLA FITZGERALD A Biography of the First Lady of Jazz.
By Stuart Nicholson.
Illustrated. 334 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $23.


Diplomatic Subcontracting's Fine If You Get Good Help
THE Clinton Administration sent the Rev.
Jesse Jackson to Lagos in an unsuccessful effort to end a crippling, yearlong crisis in Nigeria.
A former senior diplomat, Michael H. Armacost, was asked to deliver a secret message about the Clinton Administration's willingness to extend trade benefits while he was on a private trip to Beijing.
And when the Administration needed Panama's help in setting up safe havens for Haitian refugees and had no ambassador in place there, it turned to Sol Linowitz, the lawyer who helped negotiate the Panama Canal Treaty.


Merger at Grand Central: 5 Forces, 1 Patrol
While Mayor Giuliani attempts to merge the city, transit and housing police, over at Grand Central Terminal, three police agencies and two private security forces have obliterated their crisscrossing boundaries.
From the new Grand Central Community Police and Security Alliance headquarters at Vanderbilt and 43d Street, they have begun a coordinated patrol.
Last week, monitoring of police radio systems enabled Metro-North to quickly solve a missing-person case and reunite a lost 7-year-old girl, found by transit police at Canal Street, with her frantic mother at Grand Central.


Not Just a Game, but the Ties That Bind
Long after their Valdosta High School team had preserved its unbeaten record in Lake City, Fla., Friday night, a number of fans milled around the stadium, soaking up the vibes of a satisfying victory.
The defense had recorded its second straight shutout and quarterback Kareem Wilson threw a touchdown as Valdosta defeated Columbia County High School, 14-0.
Now, as band members packed up their instruments and youngsters ran up and down the vacant field, a number of adults -- mostly parents of the players -- stood in groups reflecting on the game, some waiting for children, others coordinating plans for the next day.


Street Rebuilding Clears Another Hump
Along Main Street in downtown Flushing, shiny black traffic-light posts tower over old gray ones inches away.
Within weeks, the black posts will be equipped with traffic lights and the shorter ones will be felled, signaling the end of phase two in the reconstruction of the streets of downtown Flushing.
The City Economic Development Corporation, which is overseeing the repairs, expects to start repaving the street within days.


Sidney G. Beale, George Marshman
Sidney Gardner Beale, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Binney Beale of Chatham, Pa., was married yesterday to George McMurray Marshman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Marshman of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Sidney Lovett, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony near Holderness, N.H., at the chapel on Chocorua Island in Squam Lake.
Mrs.
Marshman, 27, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a certificate in landscape architecture from the New York Botanical Garden.
She is an associate of Bruce John Davies, a landscape architect in Morris Plains, N.J.
Her father is a vice president and the manager of private banking at PNC Bank in Wilmington, Del.


Selling High-End Homes
ASSUMING that F. Scott Fitzgerald was correct in his observation that the rich are different from you and me, it should follow that selling a property worth a million dollars or more would require a different approach from marketing, say, a three-bedroom colonial with a pink flamingo on the front lawn.
And indeed it does.
But it's also worth noting that although the sellers of high-end properties might view themselves as more financially sophisticated than the owner of a cookie-cutter colonial, brokers insist that they are as prone to serious misjudgments, although for different reasons.


Fall Exhibits Stay Put
OCTOBER and November promise to be rewarding months in Europe's fall art season, with major Poussin and Whistler exhibitions opening within days of each other, followed by a two-museum show of the French artist Yves Klein.
But who, given the choice, would not like to turn from one of Whistler's dreamy paintings of the Thames to a view of the river itself, as the Tate Gallery in London permits one to do?
In such cases, there is everything to be said for experiencing art in the ambiance that produced it.


KNOWLEDGE
YOU KNOW You need a new pin-striped suit if:  * Your tailor offers to float you a loan
* You spray water on it after ironing, to dull the shine obliterating the stripes
* Teen-agers can't get enough of those lapels
* The cabby says you look "snazzy"
*
A guest on "Montel Williams" is wearing the same one You're the oldest one in the room because  *
You said you went to the original Woodstock, and everyone believed you
* You raved about this great album by Ella, and someone asked, "You mean CD?"
*
You told them you grew up near the Polo Grounds, and they wanted to know if you ever learned how to play
* At this black-tie dinner no one is complimenting you on your new cummerbund
*
She called him "def," and you said you were sorry, you didn't know You're overdressed as soon as *
You realize you're the only one in a long-sleeved shirt
* Someone offers to hold your blazer during the sack races
* You enter the "pool party" with your own cue
* The job interviewer notes, "That's a nice suit"
*
You have chosen between costume and creative black tie, and other guests tell you how much they admire your courage You've been neglecting things when  *
The ring around the tub falls under its own weight
* The term "tank top" takes on a new meaning
* You say you'll catch up, and nobody saves you a seat
* Roaches are dying, and you haven't set off a bomb
* You have to separate the whites and the colors by guessing
* You beg to meet her there, and then ask what she'll be wearing
*
You think everyone else is dressing funny You're working too hard if  *
You've locked yourself out more than once a week
* You blanked on your best friend's phone number
* You think closing a deal is a Kodak moment
* You show up for an appointment on the right day, at the right time, on the wrong week
* You've eaten breakfast, lunch and dinner at your desk
* You couldn't think of anywhere else you'd rather be on your birthday
* You've spoken to your kids three nights in a row by phone without using an MCI number
* You don't want to do it
* You're not even thinking about it There's no such thing as  * One size fits all
* Dishwasher-safe
* Less fat, more flavor
* Never needs ironing
* A hip rep tie
* Striking that from the record
* Tastes just like chicken
* Making up for lost time
* An attractive pair of wing tips
* Being just like family if you're not
* Cheap seats with a full view
*
Classic fashion You're not a shopper since  *
The salesman stopped smiling when you asked to see something like what you have on, but in blue
*
You said you didn't have to try it on because "I'm always a 32," and the next day they said they only give credit on returns
* It took more than two minutes to choose a tie, and you didn't buy both
* You asked for the dressing room to put on a turtleneck
* You couldn't believe the sales tax You're right because  * You can afford to be quiet
* They start talking faster
* No one apologizes, but the next day, they all say good morning first
* At least three people ask if it's by Armani
*
You sleep peacefully, two days later Something's wrong when *
The salesman doesn't look at you but at the mirror, and goes, "Hmmm"
* Your partner gives you a self-help book for Christmas
* Your dinner guest arrives with mums
* You haven't missed a mirror
* Your date looks at the menu and says, "Oh, look. Shrimp!"
*
She says "Sure" more than once while looking straight ahead, and then adds a "Whatever"
*
You go to sleep like spoons, and one of you feels like a salad fork There's a bridge to Brooklyn with your name on it if you believe  *
"It's you!"
* No Appointment Necessary
* "They'll be ready in eight weeks"
* "Drop by any time"
* "We should do this again"
* "It's nothing personal"
*
"Next time, it's my treat" You can still have fun if *
You leave for vacation with a shoulder bag
* You stumble home after the sun comes up and don't brag about it
* You first start calling people at 6 P.M., and have it rolling by 8
* The kids don't believe you're their dad
*
You're awakened by a "good morning" that sings It's time to say so long when  *
You talk about finding a way onto the information superhighway and someone wants to know if it runs anywhere near Ronkonkoma
* The maitre d' offers you a tie
* The host starts referring to his wife as "the old ball and chain"
*
The salesman says you look great in that four-button double-breasted jacket, and you're 5 feet 8 inches
* She asks who your favorite character is on "Models Inc."
*
Anyone shushes everyone and says, "Oh, I've got one! There was this priest, this minister and this rabbi . . ." You've been in New York too long if you start *
Kissing your wife good night, on both cheeks
* Dressing the dog
* Thinking you've got to have more than two tuxedos and you're not in an orchestra
* Considering Friday as part of the weekend
* Finding it harder to make an appointment to cut your hair than to get an MRI
* Telling your shrink you're down on yourself for missing an art opening
* Wishing they'd open up Central Park to traffic on weekends
* Thinking the Angelika is the perfect movie theater
* Complaining there aren't more cabs
*
Worrying that your wardrobe has too much color You're in love when *
You wish the movie you waited two hours in line for was over now
* People you once stared at unrequitedly ask if you're free for lunch
* You sleep straight through the night
* You still think your job stinks, but hey, it's just a job
*
The two of you sit in the same room, quietly doing different things, and you don't think anything's wrong.
And you're right.


Welcome Back to Market
SHUNNED by American politicians and consumers for almost a decade, South African exporters are trying to re-enter the United States, a market that was off-limits to many of them until sanctions began evaporating in recent years.
Now the exporters are even hoping that the label that once repelled American shoppers, "Made in South Africa," will have cachet.
Last week more than 120 South African companies brought their products to New York in what the South African officials described as the biggest trade exhibition they had ever organized.


Sarah Chasson, Frank G. Zarb
Sarah Meneely Townsend Chasson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Monroe Chasson of New York, was married yesterday to Frank Gustave Zarb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Zarb, also of New York.
Judge Royce C. Lamberth, a Federal District judge for the District of Columbia, performed the ceremony at the Union Club in New York.
The Rev.
George A. Robinson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, also took part.
The bride, 26, and her husband, 32, are associates at New York law firms, she at Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher and he at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from New York University.
He graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received his law degree from the University of Michigan.


First Drive, Then Fly
From Budget Rent a Car comes a fly-drive package with a new twist.
Customers who rent a passenger vehicle in the United States for at least one day five times through Dec. 15 can earn a round-trip ticket on American Airlines.
Customers must use an American Express Card, and rentals in the same location or city within a 48-hour period are disqualified.
Tickets, good through Dec. 31, 1995, can be used on any round-trip flight within the continental United States. (800) 527-0700.


From Breezy Point, Following in the Stripers' Wake
At the tip of the Rockaway Peninsula, on the bay side of Breezy Point, there is a long, gently sloping beach where the daily cycle of the tides brings schools of stripers and blues that feed on the baitfish caught in the current.
You also see night herons, plovers, skimmers and killdeer, cruising and diving over the gentle waves.
If you are a surface fisherman, you can track the progress of your fly or plug in the carnival lights of Coney Island between the tall umbrella spire of the parachute jump and the huge circle of the ferris wheel.
The point is sheltered from the prevailing sea breezes so that casting conditions are almost ideal.
Dave Taft, a senior park ranger at the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, is a wildlife artist and lifelong angler who, like many of us, took up fly fishing in local waters as an alternative to the weekly pilgrimage to the Catskill trout streams.
He hails from Carnarsie, the traditional jumping-off spot for the Rockaways.


Vienna Opera Postpones Opening to December
The opening of the Vienna State Opera, traditionally held this month, is being postponed this year to Dec. 14 to allow the opera house to finish overhauling the hydraulic system for the main stage.
On that date the mezzo-soprano Christa Ludwig will give her farewell performance, as Klytemnestra in Richard Strauss' "Elektra." The next night the soprano Agnes Baltsa and the tenor Jose Carreras will appear in the first performance of a new production of Giordano's "Fedora," a co-production with the Bregenz Festival.


Political Memo; A Switch in Bastion of Liberalism: Not Many Protesting Sex Zoning
For better or worse, New York City has always had a reputation as one of America's most permissive cities when it came to matters of free speech -- even when the freest speakers wore no clothes.
Now, it seems, the city's tolerance, or at least its grudging acceptance, has reached a limit.
In a city where there are such things as an erotic bakery and cable channels with all manners of sexual explicitness, the proliferation of topless bars, X-rated video stores and other "adult" businesses has provoked an unusually concerted uproar, particularly in residential neighborhoods where they had rarely ventured before.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FREE SPEECH  STIFLED LAUGHTER  One Woman's Story  About Fighting Censorship.
By Claudia Johnson.
Fulcrum, $19.95.


Miss Feeley, Mr. Shelley
Anne-Marie Feeley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth J. Feeley of South Natick, Mass., was married there yesterday to Kevin Michael Shelley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald J. Shelley of North Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas Murray performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church.


Ms. Gross, Mr. Gastwirth
Laura-Leigh Lehrer Gross, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Gross of Rockville, Md., was married last evening to Andrew Evan Gastwirth, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart L. Gastwirth of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Bruce Lustig officiated at the Four Seasons in Washington.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Here's the scenario: It is the immediate future.
North Korea invades the South.
Russia and China are at war.
A right-wing general takes over Russia and uses nuclear weapons.
China retaliates with its nuclear missiles.
The general thinks they are American and launches 1,000 of his own against the United States.
America retaliates.
A weak President is impeached on the floor of the Senate, which is now located underground.
There is a surprise ending, sort of.
It's harrowing stuff in Eric L. Harry's first novel, ARC LIGHT (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23).
Learn all about how and why nuclear bombs work.
Shudder at the devastation they cause.
Follow a large cast through all kinds of adventures.
Trace the political maneuvering of American and Russian diplomats.
Wonder if the world will survive.


Building a Bulb Border, Layer by Layer
THERE are conventional ways to do things, but there is also your way.
Take bulb planting, for instance, a familiar routine for this time of year.
A rather maverick way once developed out of desperation.
It was one of those years when the planting kept getting put off by other priorities.
The daily list of chores grew longer and longer, bulbs kept arriving by mail and a pile of bulb-filled bags began accumulating.


IN SHORT: FICTION
RUSSIAN TALES  INCIDENCES  By Daniil Kharms. Serpent's Tail/High Risk, paper, $14.99.


WHERE HAVE YOU GONE, ROBERT FRANK?
What a pack of "filmflam" is social-message photography.
Roam the country, possess a fair measure of imagination, good perception, a tireless index finger and shoot 600 rolls of film!
Now you're about ready for a museum exhibit (or a cocktail table book).


Political Memo; Gradual Loss of Support Is Cuomo's Silent Burden
Mario M. Cuomo has always liked being the underdog, whether he lost (the Democratic primary for mayor to Edward I. Koch in 1977) or won (the primary for governor over Mr. Koch in 1982).
But there is a difference between being the underdog and being in the doghouse, which is where politicians agree Mr.
Cuomo finds himself after 12 years in office.
New Yorkers can pick almost any index they like about their Governor this year, and the numbers will show how much they don't like him.
Take his job-approval ratings (mid-30's), standing in the horse race (low 40's), even his modest majority against splintered opposition four years ago (54 percent).
All bespeak a level of vulnerability that incumbents do not often overcome.


The Restless One
Lately, on the bus on my way to work, I've been reading "Driven to Distraction: Recognizing and Coping With Attention Deficit Disorder From Childhood Through Adulthood," by Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey, both psychiatrists.
They define Attention Deficit Disorder as "an inherited neurological syndrome" that renders people unable to concentrate for very long on one thing, like a book.
The other day, this woman got on at 72d Street and struck up a conversation with the driver about her ex-husband, who had just married her sister.
It was a short step from the book's checklist of symptoms to self-diagnosis.
In fact, I realized, I'm not alone.
ADD is by my reckoning epidemic among those of us who work in the fashion business, and the traits that make it so hard for people with ADD to get on in the world are the very traits that make people get ahead in the world of fashion.


Tech Notes; Old Bottles for New Milk
BEFORE recycling became common, milk came in glass bottles that were washed and used over and over.
But today's plastic milk bottles generally cannot be reused for food packaging, because of Federal rules governing cleanliness.
Yet Waste Age magazine noted recently that pellets of recycled polyethylene terephthalate, or P.E.T., unlike most recycled substances, sell for less than virgin material.
So recyclers have an incentive to find a way to use P.E.T. for food.


Mary Pezzimenti, Nicholas Boulukos
Mary Gail Pezzimenti, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Pezzimenti of Redding, Conn., was married yesterday to Nicholas George Boulukos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Boulukos of Freeport, L.I.
The Rev.
Peter Karloutsos performed the ceremony at the Assumption Greek Orthodox Church in Danbury, Conn.
Ms.
Pezzimenti, who is keeping her name, is a manager in the human resources division at Conde Nast Publications in New York.
She graduated from Emory University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is the chief of hematology and oncology at Danbury Hospital.
Her mother is a substitute art teacher. .


Corrections
The continuation of an article about a new policy on AIDS for health workers was omitted last week, and a letter that had been printed on Sept. 11 was reprinted in its place.
Readers wishing complete copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Law Aims to Curb Telephone Swindles
President Clinton has signed a law aimed at curbing fraudulent telephone solicitations that have been particularly active in travel swindles.
"Most prevalent are the phone calls offering things like a seven-day cruise to the Bahamas for $199," said David Love, a spokesman for the American Society of Travel Agents, which endorsed the bill.
In a typical scenario, Mr.
Love said, the telephone solicitor takes the customer's credit card number for the $199 payment, "but there's no ship." The solicitor keeps putting off sending a ticket to the customer and, after 60 or 90 days, the credit card company stops seeking refunds on the customer's behalf, Mr.
Love said.
By that time, the soliciting operation has moved to another state.


Keenan Finds a Home, for Now
It did not seem odd to Mike Keenan to be at Kiel Center in downtown St.
Louis, rather than Madison Square Garden, to be talking about Brett Hull, rather than Mark Messier.
Keenan had 60 days to shake away those cobwebs, 60 days in hockey exile, most spent at his lakeside cottage in Ontario preparing for his new job.
He had time to rent a new apartment, get furniture delivered, change his driver's license, to reflect his new state.


Touch of Rashomon In a Cafe Battle
The owner says his sidewalk cafe at 81st Street and Second Avenue operated mainly on weekends.
Neighborhood critics say it was every day.
He says there were 16 chairs.
They say the number was double that.
He says he scrubbed the sidewalk with ammonia and bleach.
They say he poured grease in the gutter, drawing rats.
He says the cafe enhanced the corner.
They say it blocked pedestrians and doorways.
He says it was legal.
They say it violated the law.
Rashomon comes to Yorkville.


Marlene Kandall, James Glasheen
Marlene Heather Kandall, the daughter of Hazel Kleban of New York and Dr.
Stephen R. Kandall of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Walter Glasheen, the son of Anne and William Glasheen of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Judith Johnson performed the ecumenical ceremony at the White Hart Inn in Salisbury, Conn.
Mrs.
Glasheen, 26, graduated from Harvard University and is studying for a master's degree in history at Northeastern University.
Her father is the chief of neonatology at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York and a professor of pediatrics at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
Her mother is the president of the Marley Group, a legal search firm in New York.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Donald M. Kleban.


Trial in Woman's Blinding Offers Chilling Glimpse of Hoodoo
The trial of two sisters accused of blinding a third sister gave Dallas residents this week a glimpse of the shadowy world of hoodoo, a cross between Haitian voodoo and Catholicism in which spirits are real and demons take control of human bodies.
The victim was Myra Obasi, a Louisiana teacher who has fully supported the sisters accused of gouging out her eyes.
She had been possessed, she said, by a demon.


THIS BUD'S FOR YOU
Every spring my wife disappears for an afternoon to buy annuals.
I have never known where she went or why; it seemed to me a better investment of time and money to plant something that would grow back the following year.
Until reading Michael Pollan's "This Bud's for You" (Sept. 4), I never dreamed that my favorite gardener had been committing horticultural graffiti, thumbing her nose at "polite plant society" by planting "frivolous, low-rent flowers."


Jill M. Suppes, Philip Bowers 4th
Jill Marie Suppes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor A. Suppes of Saginaw, Mich., was married yesterday to Philip James Bowers 4th, the son of Ann L. Bowers of Far Hills, N.J., and Mr.
Bowers 3d of Bedminster, N.J.
The Rev.
Frederick Baldwin 2d performed the ceremony at St.
Bernard's Episcopal Church in Bernardsville, N.J.
Mrs.
Bowers, 27, graduated from Delta College.
She is an international flight attendant for American Airlines.


Death Row For 5th Youth In 2 Killings
Five Houston teen-agers have been sentenced to death for their roles in the gang rapes and murders of two teen-age girls who had innocently stumbled into a gang gathering in June 1993.
A jury took less than 15 minutes on Thursday to sentence Efrain Perez to death, the third such sentence handed down this week in the case.
The two other defendants were given death sentences in February and April.


Charleston Inn
To the Editor: This letter reflects an experience my husband and I had at the Battery Carriage House Inn -- an inn recommended April 17 in "What's Doing in Charleston."
We booked this room for our anniversary in May, and hoped for a wonderful experience.
I don't think that at $189 a night we were wrong to expect a little something special.
A view?
How about a window?
This was a windowless suite.
The bedroom had no windows and the window in the "sitting room" was the door, which was three steps down.
To hide how small and dark it was, one whole wall in the "bedroom" was mirrored.


Sports of The Times; Simms Joins Messier Off Stage
IN less than 24 hours last June, Mark Messier, holding aloft the Stanley Cup that the Rangers had finally won, was skating center stage at Madison Square Garden, and Phil Simms, "shocked and disappointed" at his release, was walking off the stage at Giants Stadium.
Now two of the biggest names in New York sports history are entwined again, as if they were sitting in the wings off stage together.


Ms. Hensel, Mr. Fouillade
Katherine Ruth Hensel, a financial executive in New York, was married yesterday to Jean-Paul Eric Fouillade, a New York-based steel executive.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Rush performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Christ Church in Summit, N.J.
The bride, 34, is a managing director and the chief investment strategist at Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
The bride graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Hensel of Summit.
Her father, who retired as an experimental physicist at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., is a distinguished professor of physics at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark.


BRONX UPDATE
FORDHAM In the latest chapter in the battle between Fordham University and the New York Botanical Garden over the university's proposed 480-foot radio tower, the Federal Communications Commission has said Fordham does not have to perform an environmental impact assessment for now.
Construction of the tower was halted early this summer after the garden complained, and the F.C.C. ordered the university to perform the study.
But the F.C.C. suspended the order as garden, and university officials meet to discuss alternative sites.
VAN CORTLANDT The Art Commission has given final approval for six tennis courts to be installed on the parade grounds 250 feet east of the Van Cortlandt Mansion, but local historians have hired a lawyer to find ways to block the construction.
The historians say the courts will destroy the historical integrity of the general area, which contains the remnants of the Albany Post Road and a slave burial ground.


Park Service Sees a Way To Keep More Money
THE perennially penniless National Park Service is drawing tantalizingly close to its budgetary Holy Grail: a legal mechanism to retain for use inside the parks more of the money that tourists spend there.
A new law may be enacted in the next few weeks that would greatly increase the Park Service's power over revenues generated by the parks through their concessionaires.


State Officials Strive to Bring the Health Care Debate Home
Frustrated by the failed Congressional effort to pass national health insurance legislation, a group of state officials convened this week at a mountain retreat here to continue their efforts to move the debate outside the Beltway.
The Reforming States Group, a bipartisan coalition of legislators and policy makers from 24 states, has been brainstorming for two years about overhauling the health care system.
But today, with national health care legislation nearly dead in the Senate, there is a heightened sense or urgency among the group's members.


Looking for Clones in All the Wrong Places
A HEADHUNTER CALLED SOME WEEKS ago, wondering whether I might recommend someone as the new director of the Tisch Center of the Arts at the 92d Street Y. The position had essentially been held for nearly two decades by Omus Hirshbein, who has since gone off to Washington to head the music program of the National Endowment for the Arts.
Under his care, the New York Chamber Symphony was born, and the 92d Street Y, a Jewish community institution with little intrinsic claim on the attention of the New York musical world, became one of its most important centers.
I explained that since I would probably be publicly commenting on the performance of whoever took the job, I didn't think it appropriate to make personnel suggestions.
But what sort of director was being sought?


Laura B. Heller and Gary M. Lauder
Laura Beth Heller, the daughter of Marlyn G. McClaskey of Greenbrae, Calif., and William A. Heller of Danville, Calif., was married in New York last evening to Gary Mark Lauder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard A. Lauder of New York.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein performed the ceremony at the Central Synagogue.
Mrs.
Lauder, 33, is the director of the education division at ICTV in Los Gatos, Calif., a manufacturer of interactive television systems for the cable and telephone industries.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a private investor.
Her mother is a financial planner in Greenbrae.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Susan Heller and of Larry McClaskey.


Welfare for Middle-Class Elderly?; In Final Years, Many Transfer Assets to Qualify for Medicaid
On a sunny floor in a New Jersey nursing home, two elderly women share a room, news about their grandchildren and a plight ever more common among their aging and ailing peers: both are poor, and their bills are paid by Medicaid.
But while one depleted her life savings in the first two months she spent at the nursing home, the other, a widowed homemaker debilitated by Parkinson's disease, intentionally reduced herself to poverty to qualify for Medicaid.
Several years ago, she paid a lawyer to transfer $50,000 worth of stocks, bonds and cash to her sons and grandchildren.


Vendors' Mall Draws Mixed Reviews
A vendors' mall, intended to ease the sidewalk gridlock in lower Manhattan by luring peddlers to Sara D. Roosevelt Park, is to open next month.
And despite the opposition of a major vendors' group, the project is already over-subscribed.
Michael Zisser, executive director of United Settlement, the nonprofit organization that will run the mall, Roosevelt Market, says he has 350 applications for about 100 stalls.
"We will have no trouble getting vendors," Mr.
Zisser said.
"Anyone who knows real estate rates in Chinatown knows this is a good deal, with no hidden costs."


2 Army Losses: Game and King
Army, which lost its two quarterbacks in its first two games, suffered a bigger loss today when its outstanding runner, Akili King, was hurt during the first possession.
Temple (2-1) won, 23-20, on a late 13-play, 83-yard scoring drive.
Temple's Henry Burris completed 21 of 39 passes for 218 yards.


Mrs. Simmons, Mr. Trachtenberg
Margaret Staats Simmons, the editor in chief of Travel Holiday magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Bruce Scott Trachtenberg, the director of communications for the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund and DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund in New York.
Judge Elliott Wilk of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated in the Conservatory Garden in Central Park.
Mrs.
Simmons graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in English literature from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Clarence S. Staats of Malvern, Pa., and the late Jane W. Staats.
Her father is a real estate developer and the founder of Staats Oil Corporation, both in Malvern.


F.Y.I.
The Island 'Lift' Q.  As a resident of Roosevelt Island, I am curious to know why the "lift" feature was required for the bridge across from Queens when the west channel is unencumbered and apparently deep enough for tankers.


Allison B. Weston, Andrew M. Meslow
Allison Brooke Weston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Weston of Ardsley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Martin Meslow, the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
George Meslow of Lincoln, Neb.
The bridegroom's father, a Lutheran minister, officiated at St.
Barnabas Church in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Sept. 18-24; 'Fourscore and 7 Innings Ago. . .'
WHAT if Ken Burns's "Baseball" series, which enters its second week tonight on PBS stations, were combined with his 1990 "Civil War" series into a single, very long work, perhaps by a videotape splicer who'd been beaned by a fastball?
After all, the tone and techniques of the two works are similar.
Maybe the result would sound something like this:
"In outer parts of Savannah, we have observed parties of soldiers playing a certain game of ball. Let us advance a while and inhale the gunpowder. Let us leave our encampments. Leave our tents. The game of war ball is glorious." -- William Tecumseh Sherman


'I Was Too Ugly to Go to School'
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FACE By Lucy Grealy. 223 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
IT'S tough being a living legend when those living around you aren't sure what you are famous for.
Morton Gould of Great Neck leads that kind of existence.
"I know I know that name," said a woman who lives down the street from him.
"Can you give me a hint why I know him?"


They Got a Blast From Architecture's Past
FOR THREE YEARS, I'VE BEEN taking periodic bites out of Christopher Curtis Mead's book on the Paris Opera, and I'm still nibbling away at it.
It's not that the book is hard to read, but it contains such a rich trove of inspiring ideas that I hope I never reach the end.
Dipping into it now and then gives me the kind of pleasure I imagine music lovers must obtain from frequent trips to the opera.
Unfortunately, the occasion for expressing my appreciation for this volume is not a happy one: the book's publisher has just closed its doors after 18 years of distinguished operation.
It was also a bit of a jumble.
There was a volume on bathing in ancient Rome and one on Soviet monuments of the Stalin era; a monograph on the hard-line modernism of Gordon Bunshaft and another on the pink stucco confections that Addison Mizner created for rich winter vacationers in Boca Raton.


Reich Urges Executives To Aid Labor
Elaborating on his theory that America's middle class is being rapidly transformed into an "anxious class" squeezed between the wealthy and chronically poor, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich will urge business leaders in Dallas on Tuesday to develop ways to help workers increase their skills and add to their sense of security.
He calls for a broad commitment by private business to help train and educate workers and even raises a veiled threat of Federal intervention in the form of required contributions to such training if they do not do so.


Messier Revisited
To the Sports Editor:
I marvel at the hypocrisy of New York hockey fans with the outrage expressed over the ouster of the Madison Square Garden president, Bob Gutkowski, and the subsequent statement by the new management team that negotiations with the Rangers' captain, Mark Messier, would start from scratch.


Antiques the Easy Way
Vacationers taken with the 19th-century quilts, 18th-century four-poster bed or other items in the Stowe Village House, a rental house in the Vermont town, can take them home, provided they pay for them.
The house, built in 1840, is one of 11 historic houses that rent by the day or week in Stowe.
All are furnished with antiques that are for sale.


Products of Cap
To the Sports Editor:
HERMAN KOLENDER
Brooklyn


Ways to Use the Season's Apple Crop in Cooked Desserts
LOCAL apples are in the markets, with some farms carrying dozens of varieties.
For cooking, choose apples that are not oversweet and that don't disintegrate, like McIntosh, russets, pippins or semisweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Northern Spy apples are especially good for pies.
Rome apples are large, dry and semisweet, excellent for baking whole.
Golden Delicious retain their shape when cooked, a quality that makes them useful for tarts, but they do not have much flavor.
Apple charlotte is especially good for a dinner party because it can be made a day or two ahead.
The apples are baked in a crust made from buttered bread, which turns crisp and golden, a lovely contrast with the soft sweetness of the cooked apples.


Corrections
A review of "The Modular Brain" in The Times Book Review on Sept. 11 misstated the occupation of the book's author, Dr.
Richard M. Restak.
He is a neurologist and neuro psychiatrist, not a neuropsychologist.


Yossarian Redux
CLOSING TIME By Joseph Heller. 464 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.


Harriman Suit: Misconduct, Or Just Bad Luck Investing?
It was when the trust fund checks stopped coming last fall to the elderly daughters of Gov.
W.
Averell Harriman, the railroad heir and financier, that the family began to sweat.
A son-in-law had already been dispatched to make discreet inquiries.
The family discovered that funds that had once held $25 million had dwindled to scarcely $3 million.
The fortune had been overseen by their patriarch's widow, Pamela Harriman, now the United States Ambassador to France, and his legal adviser, Clark M. Clifford, the Washington power broker.


Method and Madness; The Next Plague, and the Next
In the remotest tropics of Africa and South America lurk a coterie of viruses that infect animals or insects and seldom bother man.
But people occasionally stray into their path, with results usually horrifying enough to mark the annals of medicine.
Most of these viruses cause hemorrhagic fever.
They make the internal organs bleed and rot.
Many patients die, oozing virus-laden blood contagious to those who tend them.
Last month one of these exotic organisms, known as the Sabia virus, escaped from a high-security laboratory at Yale University.
For 12 days it roamed the streets of New Haven and even visited Boston.
As luck had it, the virus failed to spread beyond its newly acquired host, a researcher it infected when a centrifuge tube broke.
Neither did it manage to attack any of the 80 people in contact with him and involved in his care.


After Shaking Hands With the Devil in Haiti
To the Editor:
Pericles warned the Athenians in dealing with Sparta, "If you give in, you will be immediately confronted with some greater demand, since they will think you gave way on this point through fear." President Clinton faces the same prospect in Haiti.


Back Off
Chowing down alone in a neighborhood restaurant, I was relishing the opportunity not to be warm-hearted toward anyone except the waitperson.
Here in San Francisco in post-Aquarian times, it's now possible to be morose, even if only to oneself.
While sullenly munching my arugula salad -- light on the vinaigrette -- I could take a cold inventory of the difficulties of human nature in general and my own difficulties in particular, and nobody would charge me with insufficient cheer, felonious failure to grin.
A friend I've known for many years entered the restaurant with his entire dysfunctional family -- blissed-out wife, anorexic daughter and son temporarily home from drug rehab.
They insisted I join them.
They required a witness to the drama of family togetherness, and an evil short-circuiting of synapses deprived me of the usual excuses (papers to read, a bad cold, private wrestlings).
My friend called for another chilled glass so that I could sample the special brew pub beer he had ordered.
"Good, good," I said, "discreet yet pungent."


Sept. 18-24: Hope in Africa; Anti-Malarial Vaccine May Be Breakthrough
Manuel Patarroyo, a Colombian biochemist, first met disbelief and ridicule when he claimed progress in developing the first successful vaccine against malaria.
He seemed merely the latest scientist with good intentions.
Now, more than half way into tests being conducted in that West African nation and at two other tropical sites, in Tanzania and Thailand, the skepticism about Dr.
Patarroyo's chemically engineered vaccine is turning to widespread hope that one of the human race's oldest and deadliest enemies may be defeated.
More than 2 million die yearly, 90 percent of them in tropical Africa.


Marilyn Horne In Recital
IN recent ceremonies, when Marilyn Horne was given the key to the city by Stamford Mayor Stanley Esposito, the mezzo announced that the first recital grant awarded by her foundation would go to Connecticut Grand Opera and Orchestra.
As it turns out, the company's 8 P.M.
Saturday performance of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" will be offered at the same time as Ms.
Horne's recital in New London, where she will open the new season at the Garde Arts Center.
For reservations, call 444-7373.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  A FIREFIGHT IN HAITI  At least 10 Haitians were killed in two clashes involving civilians, Haitian police and American marines, U.S. officials said.
One American was reported wounded. 1  HAITI BEYOND ARISTIDE  Even if the exiled President of Haiti is restored to office, there will be major problems, with many institutions in ruins and the military still a potential trouble source.  16


In America; Wrong Answer on Human Rights
If the Public Broadcasting Service had the choice of televising a human rights series produced by a highly respected Emmy-award-winning team or a quiz show, which would it choose?
The events in Haiti give this question added significance.
PBS was created in 1969 to provide an alternative to commercial television's mind-numbing, politically timid fare.
In promotional material sent out this year as part of their 25th anniversary celebration, executives boasted that "PBS programs, created by public television stations, independent producers and foreign sources, set the standard for quality television; television that respects and nurtures the intelligence of the viewer."


Judgment Day for a Legal Powerhouse
"YOU read 2014 and tell me what it means, O.K.?"
It was nearing the end of a long conversation in the corner office of Harvey R. Miller, and the famously combative chief of the bankruptcy department at the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges was straining to maintain a practiced calm.


Camera Angles
To the Editor:  Anne Raver's article "Black-Eyed Susans in May? (Who Wrote This Script?)"  [ Sept. 4 ]  reminds me of other Hollywood gaffes.
Two of my favorites are in "Spellbound." When Ingrid Bergman and Gregory Peck take dinner in the diner as they depart from Grand Central Station for Rochester, what we see through the window beside them is clearly the sequence of Harlem cityscape that any passenger sees while aboard a train headed toward Grand Central.
And at the movie's climax, when Bergman and Peck are skiing side by side down the slope to unclog Peck's memory, they somehow manage to leave only one pair of tracks stretching up the hill behind them.
BERNARD RYAN JR.
Southbury, Conn.


Grim Shadow of Economic Reality
The Haiti that awaits the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide is a country whose political institutions and economy have been devastated in the three years since he was forced from power by a military coup.
If Father Aristide is restored to office under the protection of American troops, the initial wave of jubilation at his return is likely to dissipate once he and his supporters realize the extent of the problems they face.


Karen Eschmann And Clay Hunt
Karen Ann Eschmann, a vice president of the Dime Savings Bank in Uniondale, L.I., was married yesterday to Forrest Clayton Hunt Jr., an associate director in the commercial real estate department at the Standard &amp; Poor's Ratings Group in New York.
The Rev.
Robert J. Clerkin performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City, L.I.
Mrs.
Hunt graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Eschmann of Garden City.
Her father owns the real estate investment and consulting company that bears his name in New York.


This Collector Just Couldn't Stop Buying Americana
WIELDING A PADDLE OR standing with arms folded to bid at the auctions, Eddy G. Nicholson, a New Hampshire investor, rocked the market for Americana in the 1980's.
His contrarian behavior in publicly paying astronomical prices for scores of objects made the Texas-born ex-marine one of the more visible spenders at the New York sales.
Now, the bulk of the art and antiques bought for his 1845 Federal-style farmhouse in Hampton, N.H., has been shipped to Christie's in New York to be auctioned in January.
The two-day sale of 630 items is expected to bring up to $12 million, with as much as $9 million from the American decorative arts.


Performance Scale: What It Is And How It Was Done
THE performance scale uses citywide math and reading tests to measure public schools in New York City.
Educators have long known that scores on standardized tests can differ for many reasons.
Sometimes they differ because of what takes place within the school.
At other times, however, they differ because of the differences that students bring to school.
Studies have shown that children of stable, well-educated couples who are taught to read at home as well as in school typically do better on standardized reading tests than other students, regardless of the schools they attend.


Sally P. Rueger, Carl W. Barnes
Sally Patricia Rueger, a daughter of William and Anna Rueger of Old Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Carl William Barnes, a son of Edward and Barbara Barnes of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Francis S. Midura performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Hope Church in Carle Place, L.I.
Mrs.
Barnes, 34, is a regional sales manager for Wyndham Hotels and Resorts in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the village justice of Old Westbury.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/1995 Chevrolet Monte Carlo; A Disco Cruiser of the 70's Wears a New Leisure Suit
I DON'T want this to have more dramatis personae than an Agatha Christie novel.
But here goes:
When my wife's sister's mother-in-law bequeathed a castoff car to her son (my wife's sister's husband, who is named Frank), it was my first hands-on encounter with Chevrolet's "personal coupe," the Monte Carlo.


A Boy's Dream of Great Things Leads to a Publishing House
AS a boy growing up in the Eritrea region of Ethiopia, Kassahun Checole was always pouring his energy into creative endeavors.
In high school he organized a music group called the Harambe, a Swahili word meaning "pull together." The Harambe traveled the community, celebrating the harmony of life through song.
Mr.
Checole's other great love in those days was publishing the high school's first newspaper.
As he strained to recall its name in his Lawrenceville office recently, he smiled and he clasped his hands together.
Brightly colored books lined the shelf above his head.


Paula Escarameia and James Silver
Paula Ventura de Carvalho Escarameia, a daughter of Antonio Jose de Carvalho Escarameia and Maria Isaura da Cruz Ventura of Lisbon, was married there on Monday to James William Silver, the son of William Silver of New York and the late Linda Silver.
Dina Inacio, a civil registrar of Lisbon, officiated at the Hotel da Lapa.
Ms.
Escarameia, 34, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the Portuguese Catholic University and received a law degree and a Master of Laws from Harvard University.
She was recently appointed legal counsel to the Portuguese Mission to the United Nations in New York..


Zoe deRopp-Weinman, Todd Hart
Zoe deRopp-Weinman, the daughter of Zoe Van Wyck deRopp of New York and Irving L. Weinman of London, was married yesterday to Todd Christopher Hart, a son of Patty Sutherland and G. Lee Hart, both of Arlington, Tex.
The Rev.
George W. Busler performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
Mrs.
Hart, 29, is a senior consultant at Deloitte &amp; Touche, the New York accounting firm.
She graduated from Columbia University, and she and the bridegroom received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Her father is a novelist in London.
Her mother is an interior designer in New York.


Rambunctious With Tears
PROZAC NATION Young and Depressed in America.
By Elizabeth Wurtzel. 317 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Tabasco Cat Triumphs To Keep Title Bid Alive
Holy Bull was back in the barn in New Jersey resting on his laurels, but there was Tabasco Cat still chasing him in absentia yesterday in Florence, Ky., pounding along the road to the Breeders' Cup and keeping alive his chances for year-end honors by winning the $400,000 Kentucky Cup Classic by two lengths.
Tabasco Cat ran on a sloppy track in a race that formed the centerpiece of Turfway Park's inaugural preview of the Breeders' Cup, which will be run on Nov. 5 at Churchill Downs in Louisville.
He also ran on a good record: first in the Preakness, first in the Belmont, second in the Jim Dandy, third in the Travers.
And he added something to his record by holding off several late challenges and outrunning Mighty Avanti and the king of California's senior horses, Best Pal.


Code-Sharing
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's excellent article on airline code-sharing ("How Airlines Share Flights," July 17) contains at least one statement in need of amplification, namely "the airlines also create advantages for passengers in frequent flyer programs." In some cases this is so, but in other situations, code-sharing has exactly the opposite effect and can deprive unwary passengers of mileage.
For example, despite United's advertising its "seamless" integration of Lufthansa code-shared flights, these trips, which operate with Lufthansa equipment but United flight numbers, are treated by United as "partner carriers" rather than full United flights for the purpose of mileage awards.
This means that a passenger receives the basic mileage for the flight, but no bonus miles otherwise awarded to frequent travelers.


Designing Dinner in SoHo
Todd Oldham celebrates with friends and family, Sept. 18, the day after his first freestanding store opened.


Fannie Mae Holds a Fair To End Fear Of Owning
Carlene Hamilton has rented an apartment all her adult life, and while she has always dreamed of owning a home, she never thought it would be possible.
With a salary of $26,000 a year and a child to support, she was so certain that she could not qualify for a home loan that she never bothered to stop by a bank to see for sure.


'Unravish'd Bride Of Quietness'
To the Editor:
In Maureen Dowd's review of Linda Wolfe's "Double Life" (Aug. 28), which details the Madame Bovary-like decline of Judge Sol Wachtler, Mr.
Wachtler is said to have tried forestalling Joy Silverman's sexual advances -- a gesture as doomed as a single wave rolling in while the tide rolls out -- by discoursing on courtly love, even quoting from Keats's "Ode on a Grecian Urn." Maybe this is Ms.
Wolfe's error.
Or maybe it's Mr.
Wachtler's.
Perhaps he'd be among us today, free of his "narcissistic personality disorder marked by feelings of grandiosity" (a state of mind not unlike "lovesickness," we're told), if he'd quoted from the right century.


An African Savanna At the Honolulu Zoo
The Honolulu Zoo recently completed its African Savanna, which occupies almost one-third of the 43-acre zoological park.
The new section is designed as a natural-looking, cageless habitat, planted with grasslands, trees and marsh plants native to eastern Africa.
The savanna habitat is home to giraffes, cheetahs, crowned cranes, hyenas, lions, rhinoceroses, antelopes and baboons.
Nile crocodiles and hippos reside in a riverine area, near marsh birds and waterbuck.
The kopje (pronounced kah-PEE) is a rocky habitat created for small mammals like meerkats (an African mongoose) and caracals (a wild cat), and reptiles and lions.
There is also an aviary with starlings, finches, egrets and vultures native to Africa.


Data Bank/September 25, 1994
Data Bank/September 25, 1994
Housing Starts
Aug.
July
June
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,440
1,410
1,351
Merchandise Exports
July
June
May
In billions
$56.4
$58.3
$56.3
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$67.4
$67.4
$65.7
Weekly Jobless Claims
Sept. 16
Sept. 9
Sept. 2
In thousands
320
327
330
Coal Production
Sept. 9
Sept. 2
Aug. 26
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
19,162
21,028
21,096
3-Month Treasury Bills
Sept. 23
Sept. 16
Sept. 9
Rate in percent
4.77
4.58
4.93
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.19
5.01
5.35
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.79
7.77
7.70


Juliet Simon, Neil B. Cooper
Juliet Simon, a psychologist, and Neil Barnet Cooper, a senior vice president at Smith Barney, both in New York, are to be married today.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel is to officiate at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
The bride, 33, graduated from the State University College at Brockport.
She received a master's degree in psychology from the New School for Social Research and a doctorate in psychology from Yeshiva University.
She is a daughter of Sandra Simon of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Abe Simon.


Lisa K. Toth, A. G. Simpson
Lisa Kimberly Toth, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Toth of Morristown, N.J., was married there yesterday to Alexander Grant Simpson, the son of Julie H. Levy of New York and George R. Simpson of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas C. Sheffield performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Toth-Simpson, 25, graduated cum laude from Duke University, from which she and the bridegroom also received law degrees.
Next month, she is to become an associate at Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine, a New York law firm.
Her father is a marketing manager for AT&amp;T Network Systems in Morristown.
Her mother, Patricia Toth, is a manager of public affairs for Bell Atlantic-New Jersey in Newark.


A Tide of Pollution Threatens China's Prosperity
Ru Fuyang, who has been fishing carp out of the Huai River most of his 60 years, says he has not caught a fish since mid-July when the waters here turned black and putrid for nearly a week.
At the time, a deadly mix of ammonia and nitrogen compounds, potassium permanganate and highly toxic phenols swept down the river from scores of factories that had flushed their waste tanks and ponds.
When it was over in mid-August, more than 26 million pounds of fish had been killed and dozens of fish farms wiped out while some factories were forced to shut down for a week or more.
Economic losses were estimated at $75 million.


Lewis Halted In 2 Rounds By McCall
In the land where the stiff upper lip is an honored tradition, British boxers have more often received fat lips in their quest for the world heavyweight championship.
It happened again at about 1:30 this morning as Oliver McCall, an American underdog mostly known as Mike Tyson's sparring partner, stunned 7,500 spectators at Wembley Arena by knocking out their hero, the London-born Lennox Lewis, in 31 seconds of the second round of their fight for Lewis's World Boxing Council championship.
Lewis had been the only British boxer in this century to hold even a part of the heavyweight championship title.
He had hoped to turn a victory over McCall into a campaign to become the world's only heavyweight champion by going to the United States to win other parts of the title controlled by American organizations.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $330,000
60 East Eighth Street  (Georgetown Plaza)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining alcove, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,265, 49% tax deductible; listed at $369,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)


Commercial Property/Executive Suites; A Private-Office Illusion, With Shared Amenities
FROM all outward appearances, Zephyr Management, an investment advisory firm, is an old-line Wall Street outfit gone north.
It has an impressive address -- 630 Fifth Avenue, Rockefeller Center's International Building on 51st Street.
A soft-spoken woman answers its phones with the company name and a smiling receptionist greets its visitors.
No one would guess that the receptionist, the phone answerer, the couches in the lobby, even the steaming coffee in the kitchen, all are shared with others.
Or that the company leased the space for only nine months.
Or that Zephyr itself is only three months old.


Under Financial Pressures, Duck Farms Dwindle
IN the 1950's, 120 duck farms flourished on the Island, producing products that spread the name of Long Island far and wide.
Today five duck farmers remain, and two of their farms may close if the Brookhaven Town Board approves a zoning change on Bay Avenue in East Moriches.
A co-owner of one of the two farms on Bay Avenue that is up for sale, Bruce Vigliotta, said he was undecided whether he would stop raising ducks completely or move his business out of state.


Broncos Player Suffers Lacerated Kidney
MIKE PRITCHARD's lacerated kidney is not as serious as first believed, and the Broncos wide receiver could be back with the team later this season, Coach WADE PHILLIPS said yesterday.
Phillips said Pritchard, in serious condition in the intensive care unit at Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Hospital in Denver, would not require surgery and that physicians told him the kidney would heal itself.
Pritchard went to the hospital at 8:30 P.M.
Friday after he noticed blood in his urine, hospital authorities said.


The Parking Angel, Saint of Patrons
THE Angel peered down the street, a red forest of expired parking meters, and saw the Agent at the end of it.
It was his nemesis, a slight, smileless man who could ticket more illegally parked cars in one breathless trip than other traffic enforcement agents could all day.
"He goes back to his car after every trip," the Angel said.
"He doesn't have much stamina. But, boy, the damage he does in one round."


On U.S. Visit, Yeltsin Looks For Investors
When Boris N. Yeltsin arrives in the United States this weekend, America will witness the return of a salesman.
The Russian leader aims to do statesmanly things, of course.
He will address the United Nations General Assembly.
He will hold a summit meeting with President Clinton.
But mostly, in business meetings in New York, Washington and Seattle, Mr.
Yeltsin hopes to convince American executives that Russia is a blue-chip investment.
"His personal charm can do a lot," said Georgi A. Satarov, an aide to Mr.
Yeltsin.
"The American businessmen will tell him what are the necessary conditions for investment and our President will explain that such changes are already happening."


Ercil C. Casey, Chip Nottingham
Ercil Catherine Casey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Calvin L. Casey of Richmond, was married yesterday to Charles Denmead Nottingham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Kendall Nottingham of South Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert T. Casey, a United Methodist minister who is the bride's uncle, officiated at the Westover Parish Episcopal Church in Charles City, Va.
Mrs.
Nottingham graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College and in May received a law degree from Tulane University.
Her father retired as a vice president of Thalhimer's Inc., the Richmond department store.


ROBERT REDFORD'S 50'S, THEN AND NOW
In "Robert Redford's 50's, Then and Now" (Aug. 21), Dan Wakefield notes that a photographer, Ron Greene, saw "something special" in the actor when he attended the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, in 1959.


Working as a Team On Children's Books
BRIAN PINKNEY and his wife, Andrea Davis Pinkney, share a similar background: both grew up black in nearly all-white suburbs, he in Croton-on-Hudson, she in Wilton, Conn.
Both were inspired in their careers by their families.
Mr.
Pinkney is an illustrator whose father, Jerry Pinkney, has won many awards for his book illustrations and whose mother, Gloria Pinkney, is a popular children's author.
Andrea Pinkney learned to love writing in a home where her imagination was encouraged.
"There was a rule in our house," she said.
"You had to tell stories at the dinner table."


Prints and Photographs From 8 Award Winners
THE "Artists' Encore, 1994" invitational at the Perkins Center for the Arts here was masterminded by two curators at the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
The curators, John Ittman (prints) and Martha Chahroudi (photography), have chosen eight New Jersey and Pennsylvania artists, most of whom have shown in Philadelphia or Manhattan and all of whom have received awards in previous Perkins groups.
In the experimental photography division, David Stroud leads the way with a black and white video of open heart surgery, taken from various sources.
Visitors who have the stomach for such things can observe this primitive production by looking through a peephole in a closet door.


Not In Your Underwear
How many times have you read that it's O.K. to wear a suit with a standard white, combed-cotton, walk-the-dog-hose-down-the-car-watch-Monday-night-football-in T-shirt?
And how many times have you put the two together and thought the look needed the pooch, the Porsche or the TV?
A change in color, a different fabric, a little texture, however, can get you out the door still feeling as though you have your feet up.


Sept. 18-24; Mother Russia, Your Bill Is Overdue
It seemed like an outtake from "Dr. Strangelove": Suddenly last week all power was cut to the Russian Strategic Nuclear Missile Command Center near Moscow, which controls enough nuclear firepower to wipe out most life on earth.
A decade ago the Central Intelligence Agency might have been the obvious culprit.
Fighter planes would have scrambled into the sky.
The world could have edged to the brink.


Sarajevo's Unending Travail
Sarajevo was sealed tight today.
Threats to aircraft from the Bosnian Serbs closed the airport.
All roads out were barred.
Deprived of water, as well as electricity and gas, for 10 days, people holding plastic containers formed long lines at the Miljacka River.
It was the 904th day of the siege of Sarajevo.
The sun shone, gunfire was intermittent, people pushed wheelbarrows full of water containers slowly up the hills.
Another day in a long war.
And yet, for the 300,000 people of this city, it is becoming clear that something has changed and another phase has opened in the Bosnian conflict.


Corrections
The International Datebook listing on Aug. 28 misstated the dates for the St.
Croix Jazz and Caribbean Music and Arts Festival.
The dates are Oct. 14 to 23, not Sept. 13 to 23.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
P.S.A.L.
COLASANTO REACHES CENTURY MARK: Head Coach Carmine Colasanto won his 100th career high school football game when LEHMAN (2-0) defeated SOUTH SHORE (1-1), 28-22.
The Lions' victory was secured when defensive back Adam Ramos batted down a South Shore touchdown attempt with just 10 seconds remaining.
Ramos, also a running back, ran for touchdowns of 58, 19 and 2 yards.
TRIFECTA: Three different running backs eclipsed the 100-yard mark as KENNEDY (3-0) roughed up NEW DORP (0-3), 42-0.
Gary Miller ran for 119 yards and a 41-yard score.
Andre Wyatt added 108 yards, including scores of 57 and 29 yards.
Peter Clark, who rushed for 100 yards, chipped in a 60-yard scoring sprint.


Ways to Use the Season's Apple Crop in Cooked Desserts
LOCAL apples are in the markets, with some farms carrying dozens of varieties.
For cooking, choose apples that are not oversweet and that don't disintegrate, like McIntosh, russets, pippins or semisweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Northern Spy apples are especially good for pies.
Rome apples are large, dry and semisweet, excellent for baking whole.
Golden Delicious retain their shape when cooked, a quality that makes them useful for tarts, but they do not have muchflavor.
Apple charlotte is especially good for a dinner party because it can be made a day or two ahead.
The apples are baked in a crust made from buttered bread, which turns crisp and golden, a lovely contrast with the soft sweetness of the cooked apples.


Listening Hard for Voices on the Cheever Channel
IN ONE OF JOHN CHEEVER'S MOST famous stories, a young wife discovers that her new radio is broadcasting the intimate dramas that unfold in her neighbors' apartments.
Over the airwaves, out of the ether, secret lives unfold in disembodied voices that speak of the passion and the pain behind conventional facades.
A.
R.
Gurney's new play, "A Cheever Evening," is a little like Cheever's enormous radio.
Tuned to the Cheever channel, it pulls in the myriad, impassioned voices of Cheever's short stories, fading in and out at times, but at others hovering for several minutes while a full-length scene plays out.
Sometimes it picks up several stories simultaneously, using the theatrical equivalent of cross-cutting.
Throughout, the Cheever language pours forth, in the rich, evocative, melancholy voices that belie the gray flannel suits and the plain-Jane dresses.


EUROPE: THE NEW SEASON -- Restored Treasures; Russia: A top Moscow museum more or less reopens
In the annals of Soviet remont, or renovation, nine years is hardly a record.
Remont, as the old joke goes, is not an act, but a condition; it can be stopped, but never completed.
Still, an entire generation of Russians -- and tourists -- has never had the pleasure of visiting the best museum in Moscow, the State Tretyakov Gallery, shut since November 1985, only seven months after Mikhail S. Gorbachev came to power.
Considered the world's finest collection of Russian painting and sculpture, it is particularly noted for its medieval icons and modern Russian art.
On Sept. 4, a city holiday, the on-again, off-again Tretyakov renovation was finally declared finished -- even as some of the early work is due for just a little touch-up.
But this "grand opening" was really for the Mayor, Yuri Luzhkov, who has pushed the project along with President Boris N. Yeltsin, and the construction company.


A Queen Anne's Arsonist Is Sought
An arsonist who restricts his crimes to Queen Anne-style houses has set at least 15 fires over the last year in Sheepshead Bay, fire officials say.
Sixteen firefighters and one neighborhood resident have been injured in the blazes, and two of the homes have been seriously damaged.
The fires have caused about $1 million in property damage, said Thomas Clarke, a deputy chief fire marshal for the Bureau of Fire Investigation.


U.S. to Monitor Airports to Find Any Plague Carriers
As part of an effort to prevent the spread of plague, Federal health officials said yesterday that they plan to increase surveillance at airports in the United States to identify any cases among passengers coming from infected areas of India.
Travelers will not be prevented from entering the United States, even if they are ill, but officials are working out plans on where to hospitalize such people if the need arises.


Immigrant's Trip From Martial Arts to Movies
It occurred one day to Val Lik, a Sheepshead Bay high school senior, that maybe he ought to be an actor.
"It was just put into my head," said Mr.
Lik, 16, who immigrated to Brooklyn from Russia with his family in 1979.
"I would be good for acting, I thought," he said.
"I've got the looks and everything."


Marcia A. Ben-Eli, James J. Ammeen
Marcia Ann Ben-Eli, a vice president at Lipman, Richmond, Greene Advertising in New York, was married yesterday to James J. Ammeen, the president of Neema Clothing, a men's-wear manufacturer in New York.
Judge George Rawding of the Municipal Court in Verona, N.J., officiated at the couple's home in Verona.
Mrs.
Ammeen graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
She is the daughter of the late Pearl Soifer and the late Joseph Gloster and is the stepdaughter of Herman Soifer of Rancho Mirage, Calif.


Cash and Plastic: A Few Wrinkles
THERE was a time not long ago when the American traveler abroad had to bring along wads of paper in the form of cash, both dollars and foreign funds, and traveler's checks.
Now, increasingly, credit cards and automated teller machines are complementing -- and, more often than not, taking the place of -- paper.
Because of fluctuating exchange rates, as well as service fees and interest charges, there are advantages and risks to both paper and plastic.
But this much is clear: Plastic is gaining.


A City of Many Stages
FOR the American visitor, theatergoing in London normally means trawling the commercial West End for treasure, with side trips to see the great state-subsidized troupes -- the Royal Shakespeare Company and the National Theater itself.
That's fine, but it is sometimes worth extending the search by the odd mile or so.
What about a visit to Islington or Notting Hill or Shepherd's Bush or Swiss Cottage or Hammersmith or Greenwich or some other place that may well sound like a subway stop in nowhere-in-particular, but actually allows you a serendipitous ramble before you see a play that may well end up on Shaftesbury Avenue or even Broadway?
More details in a moment.
First, let me do the conventional thing and pick some obvious plums from the metropolitan pie.
The tabloids will probably make a particular fuss over Cameron Mackintosh's big Dickensian revival of Lionel Bart's infinitely hummable "Oliver!," in which Jonathan Pryce, late of "Miss Saigon," plays the satanic Fagin; it is expected to open at the Palladium on Dec. 8.
The snobbier critics, however, will be awaiting an event a month earlier, on Nov. 4: Peter Hall's first production of "Hamlet" since he directed Albert Finney in the play 20 years ago and, with it, the rechristening of one of the West End's most famous theaters.


Escaping Justice
Welcome as it is that the military junta has again promised to step down, Haiti's future depends far more on the terms of its departure.
For the fourth time in nine years, brutal rulers have been offered retirement and possible exile instead of trial and punishment.
Once more, the rationale is that justice for their crimes must be sacrificed to make way for reform.
Jimmy Carter, who seems to have dropped human rights in favor of reconciliation at all costs, forcefully advocates this view, and the Clinton Administration seems increasingly drawn to it.


Beyond Bohemian on Avenue A


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Existing-home sales, Aug., mils., ann. rate
3.95
3.85
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index, Sept.
89
90
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, Aug., pct. chg.
-4.3
3.4
Thursday
GDP, 4th qtr., final, pct. chg.
3.8
3.8
New-home sales, Aug., thous., ann. rate
664
650
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
320
325
Friday
Personal income, Aug., pct. change
0.5
0.4
Purchasing managers' index, Sept.
61.6
61.0
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meeting
Friday
Deadline for U.S.-Japan trade negotiations


Repairing a Co-op's Floor or Replacing It
To the Editor:
In the Sept. 11 Letters column, Paul R. Shaw indicated that a co-op corporation would be responsible for replacing or repairing the floor of an apartment after doing repairs to the building's pipes under that floor.
That may be the case in a rental building, but most proprietary leases provide otherwise.


The Electric-Car Trade-Off
To the Editor:
Consumers in the Northeast may soon be forced to pay dearly for limited air quality improvements.


Report on C.I.A. Spy Is Said To Show Agency's Blunders
An internal Central Intelligence Agency report on the case of the confessed spy Aldrich H. Ames paints a picture of incompetence and indifference at the agency and confronts its Director, R. James Woolsey, with a decision on disciplining some of the agency's most senior officers, according to Government officials familiar with the report.
For years, top officials at the agency paid little attention to the fact that there was, in essence, a serial killer in their midst, the report says.
It depicts a careless attitude toward the search for the worst turncoat in the agency's 47-year history.


The Imaginary Railroad
PICTURE YOURSELF ON A TRAIN IN A station, with grain elevators and coal-embossed skies, and you'll begin to get an idea of what Michael Flanagan is up to.
A New York artist, Flanagan has compiled an album of photographs documenting the stations along the aging Buffalo &amp; Shenandoah and Powhatan Railroads, in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia.
Except they aren't photographs at all but paintings, executed in a weathered trompe l'oeil style and inscribed with dictionary excerpts, news clippings and eyewitness details.
The rail lines and stations don't exist either: they are entirely fictional, drawn from random snapshots, Flanagan's imagination and memories of the railroad town that his father grew up in.
The hand-written marginalia (presented here in captions), the woman named Anna who wrote them and her love affair with the photographer, a brakeman named Russell McKay -- they are all fiction, too.


SUNDAY, September 25, 1994; More Manhole Covers
Manhole aficionados don't only photograph them (Sunday, July 31, featured six photos from the book "Manhole Covers"); they make prints of them.
Two Manhattan artists -- Steven Lowy, a photographer, and Pascal Giraudon, a master printer -- have done many such prints.
They start with extra heavy paper -- a pound per square yard.
Giraudon inks up the manhole cover and runs a steamroller or other heavy vehicle over it.
Lowy documents the process with maps and photographs, which become part of the finished work, as in the print and collage at left of a manhole cover located at Wooster and Grand Streets in SoHo.


Local Governments Lose Millions In Complex and Risky Securities
In 1990, Virgil Swartzlander, the treasurer of Sandusky County, Ohio, for more than 30 years, began investing in a new type of highly speculative security cooked up by Wall Street.
So did his friend, Maurice Kline, treasurer of nearby Portage County.
Now, after $10 million in losses of taxpayer money, they say they did not fully understand what they were buying.
These men, along with dozens of other officials of towns, colleges and at least one Indian tribe across the country, thought they could get higher returns from new and risky investments called mortgage derivatives.
But as interest rates have risen, these investments have dropped sharply in value, and taxpayers now face multimillion-dollar losses.


Bookshelf
ALPHABET OF GIRLS.
By Leland B. Jacobs.
Illustrated by Ib Ohlsson.
Bill Martin/Holt. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Actually there are lots and lots more than 26 girls' names threaded through the verses in this abecedarium.
Even if your little girl can't spot her name or someone who looks like her in the illustrations, it's fun.
GRACE.
Written and illustrated by Tanya Weinberger.
Longstreet. $15.95. (Ages 3 and up) The popular animated television story about the woeful girl named Grace, whose nose is too long and whose ears stick out but who triumphs anyway, appears in a successful book adaptation.


The Decline and Fall of the Russian Empire
IMPERIUM By Ryszard Kapuscinski.
Translated by Klara Glowczewska. 331 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Word for Word / Soap Opera Criticism; As the Dissertations Churn: Academe Has the Hots for TV Soaps
AND you thought the only thing you could learn from soap operas was who was doing it to whom.
Silly you.
The wide and enduring appeal of broadcast serial drama -- beginning with radio in the 1920's and then television from 1956 onward -- has for a long time set smart people to thinking, and writing quite a lot.
James Thurber was among the first to take soaps seriously as a cultural phenomenon, writing in The New Yorker in 1948 -- in a four-part series on radio dramas titled "Soapland" -- that "if soap opera did disappear from the air (and I see no signs of it), the wailing of the housewives would be heard in the land. I doubt that it could be drowned out even by the cheers and laughter of the househusbands dancing in the streets."


Advancing the Poultry Debate
To the Editor:
In her letter, Ali Webb, communications director for the Agriculture Department, contends that Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy was mistreated in your report on Tyson Foods ("Agriculture Secretary's Position Was Misrepresented," Letters, Sept. 4; "How Tyson Became the Chicken King," Aug. 28).
But new poultry regulations were withdrawn earlier this year at the behest of Mr.
Espy's chief of staff and have never seen the light of day.
Other regulations have been proposed, but they would prohibit Federal inspectors from condemning poultry contaminated with fecal matter.


Glamour Guys for the Ball
THE phone rang in Oscar de la Renta's showroom at 550 Seventh Avenue.
Pat Buckley, charity chairwoman, was on the line.
"Oscar, how do you feel about pagodas on the tables?" she said in her husky voice.
"Pagodas," Mr. de la Renta mused, brightening. "I love the idea."


Despite No. 1 Pick, Bengals Register a Big Fat Zero in Sacks
The Bengals took Dan (Big Daddy) Wilkinson as the No. 1 player in this year's National Football League college draft, signed him to a six-year, $15 million deal, stuck him in the middle of their defensive line and waited for the fireworks.
So far, there haven't been any.
After three games, Cincinnati is still sackless.
The Bengals now have two first-round selections on their defensive line -- defensive end John Copeland was a No. 1 pick and fifth over all in 1993 -- and are the only team in the N.F.L. that hasn't registered a sack this season.
Actually, the Bengals have gone without a sack in six of their last seven games.


Hooked on Philosophy
SOPHIE'S WORLD A Novel About the History of Philosophy.
By Jostein Gaarder.
Translated by Paulette Moller. 403 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.


Jamie Lustberg, Mark Benjamin
Jamie Margaret Lustberg, an owner of the Bridgewater/Lustberg Art Gallery in New York, is to be married today to Mark Benjamin, a documentary film maker based in New York.
Rabbi Lori Forman is to officiate at the Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bride, 34, graduated from Cornell University.
She is the daughter of Rena and Richard Lustberg of New York.
Her father owns a representative concern in New York for men's wear manufacturers.
Her mother is the fashion director of the McCall Pattern Company in New York.


When the Phone Rings, It May Be for Pancakes
To the Editor:
In his Sept. 18 Coping column "Can't Anyone Say 'I'm Sorry,' With Feeling?" Robert Lipsyte tells of occasionally, and for no apparent reason, receiving phone calls from people trying to reach a McDonald's.
In my case, the reason is apparent: The first six digits of my number and that of the local International House of Pancakes are identical.
And the seventh digits are almost as bad.
From the sixth digit, it is one digit to the left to reach me and one digit to the left and one up to reach pancakes.


Justice Shines on the Baseball Players
To the Editor:
When baseball's acting commissioner, Bud Selig, announced the end of the 1994 season, I was surprised at how many fans and even sportswriters blamed the players.


Internationally Celebrating the Season
FOREST HILLS  Festival Offers Glimpse At Sephardic Culture  One of the great things about New York is that a subway ride can take a person halfway around the world, culturally speaking.


BENEFITS
A Brazilian Ball  TONIGHT -- Roots of Brazil, a New York-based dance company, will benefit from a dance beginning at 6 P.M. at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street.
A musical program will be followed by a buffet and a performance by the Roots of Brazil troupe.
Tickets, $50, at the door.
Uptown Jazz Evening  MONDAY -- The Abingdon Theater Company will benefit from an evening of jazz that will feature the Howard Alden Quintet with Warren Vache.
The event begins with a dinner buffet at 8 P.M. at La Cave, a club at 1125 First Avenue (62d Street).
Tickets, $100, from (212) 724-4520.


Wounded Officer Is Released From the Hospital


Smelling Nic
A Middle Eastern woman is encased in robes, her hair hidden, a baby tucked under her vestments, as she stands in front of a Macy's men's fragrance counter, rubbing a scent strip containing Boss's new fragrance, Elements.
"This is what you like?" she whispers to her husband.
"I think so, yes. I like it," he replies, almost confidently.
She keeps rubbing the strip as if waiting for a genie to appear and grant her three wishes, the first of which would be to make him change his mind.
"I don't know," she says flatly.
"There are many others." He then gently takes the strip from her hands, and for the next five minutes engages her in an aromatic summit, which ends in a stalemate.
"We will be back," she says noncommittally, and walks away.
"I will, for sure," he says, lingering.
Less than a decade ago, this discussion might not have occurred.
Back then, had she not fancied the scent, he probably would have walked on.
In fact, it's unlikely he would have been anywhere within spritzing distance of a fragrance counter.


Q and A
Tours of Japan  Q.  Do you know of any firms that offer small group tours to Japan to historic, artistic and cultural sites? -- Jack Economou, Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


Jane E. Ascheim, Eric G. Winston
Jane Elizabeth Ascheim, the daughter of Mary and Dr.
Robert S. Ascheim of New York, was married last evening to Eric Gordon Winston, a son of Drs.
Beverly and Arnold Winston of Brooklyn.
Rabbi William Kloner performed the ceremony at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Winston, 28, is the merchandising supervisor at People magazine in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Vassar College.
Her father, an internist and cardiologist, is an associate professor at Cornell University Medical College in New York.
Her mother is the special events coordinator for the New York office of the Enterprise Foundation, a nonprofit developer of low-income housing.


Loving Garbo
To the Editor:
In his review of Hugo Vickers's "Loving Garbo: The Story of Greta Garbo, Cecil Beaton, and Mercedes de Acosta" (Aug. 21), Stephen Holden seems to believe that Garbo was in reality "a rather dull, self-centered eccentric." It is clear to me as a longtime close friend and neighbor of Miss G. that she was careful not to open up to many people.
She would laugh with me at the continuing "take" on her persona by so-called close friends.


If Flames Singe, Who Is to Blame?
ONE of the trickiest questions about the strange, new medium called cyberspace is how much responsibility a computer network should take for the words posted on its virtual bulletin boards.
The problem arose in a particularly complicated context recently when two women at a California college were insulted on a computer conference for which only men were given passwords.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 25, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
1
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
3
13
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
4
10
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
5
15
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
6
6
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
7
5
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
8
6
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
9*
4
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
10
1
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
11
24
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
12
1
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious disappearance.
13*
1
BORN IN FIRE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a glassmaker and a gallery owner in western Ireland.
14
14
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
15
32
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
1
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3*
37
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
4
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
5
568
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
4
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime cases reported by a veteran policewoman.
7
37
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
8*
84
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
9
21
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
10
20
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of mental illness.
11
19
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
12
18
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13*
47
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
14
10
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past and present.
15
68
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
16*
154
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
5
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
2
184
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
46
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel.
4
2
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


A Decade That Remade the World in Paint
"No Explosion; No Unknown genius," lamented Baudelaire about the nearly 4,000 works in the 1859 Salon in Paris.
Where were the great new talents?
On their way.
The 1860's turned out to be an explosive decade, as a constellation of prodigies emerged to paint modern France.
They included some of the best-loved and most revered figures today: Manet, Monet, Renoir, Degas and Cezanne.


Compromise Is American, Not Haitian
THE thousands of American troops who landed in Haiti without resistance last week stepped straight from their airplanes, ships and helicopters into a conflict that bears no resemblance to the one for which they had trained.
They have been inserted into a society that has been at war with itself from the moment it became an independent state, and this makes them combatants in a struggle more complicated and perilous than an invasion.


Two Airlines Expand Services in West
United and Southwest Airlines are expanding in the West, resulting in new flights and other changes for travelers.
On Oct. 1, United will begin a new shuttle service, with low fares and fewer amenities, between many West Coast cities.
The move is intended to help the airline compete against Southwest Airlines, whose combination of low fares and limited service has made it a popular and rapidly expanding carrier.


Wagner, Wagner Everywhere
PERHAPS Wagner really dominates the fall European music season, or perhaps it's just that people who like his operas choose to highlight them in advance.
In either case, as one looks around Europe it is Wagner's works that stand out.
How could it be otherwise, when both Paris and London have new productions of the "Ring des Nibelungen" tetralogy?
To be accurate, it is Paris -- at the municipally sponsored Theatre du Chatelet, not the troubled state-run Opera National de Paris -- that is offering the complete new "Ring," the first home-grown French production in 36 years.
It began last June and July with stagings of the first two "Ring" operas, "Das Rheingold" and "Die Walkure."


After a Slaying, a Question Is Asked: Who Was She?
She was a jogger who was in great physical shape and she maintained a healthy diet.
Her fingernails were neatly manicured and her teeth were in good condition.
She wore expensive running shoes and a modestly priced jogging outfit.
In the police world these mere facts point toward someone who lived a leisurely life style and someone who would be missed if she had not shown up for days.
So why hasn't anyone reported her missing?


Late Already, Denver Airport Faces More Delays
The star-crossed Denver International Airport, its opening already delayed by more than a year, risks missing yet another deadline, according to a preliminary report by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress.
The report expressed pessimism that the baggage system would be ready for the airport to open on its latest scheduled date, Feb. 28.


Christopher, Carter In 'Friendly' Talks
After a week of news stories suggesting that the two men were at odds over foreign policy, Secretary of State Warren Christopher had a "friendly and completely constructive" meeting today with former President Jimmy Carter today in Plains, Ga., the State Department said.
A State Deptartment official said Mr.
Christopher had praised Mr.
Carter "for his efforts to help negotiate the arrangements that allowed the U.S.-led force to land in Haiti without opposition."


Bonds Has Bone Chip Removed
San Francisco Giants outfielder BARRY BONDS underwent surgery Friday to remove a bone chip from his right elbow and should be able to resume baseball workouts within three weeks, team officials said yesterday.
The operation and was performed by the team physician, WARREN KING. (AP)


They Said It Couldn't Be Done: Conan Lives!
IN NBC'S STUDIO 6A, THE FORMER Mayor of New York City is crouching down between several tall stalks of plastic corn, awaiting his cue.
Wearing denim overalls, a blue flannel shirt and a broad grin dominated by a blackened front tooth, Edward I. Koch suddenly pops up and begins to tell an intentionally bad joke as the cameras roll.
"What do you give a pig with a rash?" he asks, reading his lines in a faux Southern accent that barely masks his familiar nasal twang.
"Oink-ment!" he answers, before dropping down out of view again.


Wine and Chefs
Wine Celebrations
The Maidstone Arms in East Hampton (324-5006) is holding its first Wine Country Weekend starting on Friday.
The three-day event includes two nights at the Maidstone Inn, all meals, including a five-course tasting dinner, wines and vineyard tours.


In the Region/Connecticut; Yale Works to Break Down the Town-Gown Barrier
FOR 293 years Yale has been a pre-eminent institution of higher learning, in its lighter moments giving birth to the Whiffenpoofs and helping to popularize the button-down shirt.
It has also been a leading example of the condition known as "town and gown," a term that originated in England in the 17th century to describe the isolation of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge from their host cities and the frictions that flowed from the isolation.


In Honor of Burlesque Tradition
JOHN HODGE doesn't mean to be morbid, but no one gets bumped off in "Sugar Babies" and he's worried.
You see Mr.
Hodge has been tallying up Gateway's Candlewood Playhouse's greatest hits since he took over as associate producer last year.
"The King and I" and "West Side Story" as well as "Phantom" (including two return engagements of the Maury Yeston-Arthur Kopit version), head the list.
And what do these musicals have in common?
A grand, climactic on-stage death scene, that's what.
Note that "West Side Story" has two, one to end each act.
In "Phantom" a diva suffers a real life immolation scene, and in the Rodgers and Hammerstein classic, a couple of off stage deaths raise the musical's mortality rate.
A concubine is burned at the stake after her lover is killed.


Sept. 18-24; Found in Ethiopia: The Missing Link?
Darwin predicted that the deepest roots of human evolution would be found in Africa.
And something about the way people are, their consciousness of having a past and their curiosity about it, has driven them to dig for those roots.
Last week they drew tantalizingly close to the time when the first human ancestors presumably split off from apes.
Scientists announced that from genetic studies, molecular biologists have determined that the common ancestor of humans and their closest living relatives, the chimpanzees, would have lived sometime between 4 and 6 million years ago, not 25 million years as previously thought.


A New Season of Music
The Philharmonic-Symphony Society celebrates the opening concert of the New York Philharmonic, in Damrosch Park, Sept. 21.


Andrew T. Hahn and Rosa S. J. Park
Rosa Soon Jae Park, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Byung Chan S. Park of Seoul, South Korea, was married on Friday to Andrew Thomas Hahn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis P. Hahn of Warren, N.J., and Hong Kong.
The Rev.
Owen B. Moran performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Patrick in Chatham, N.J.
The bride, a concert pianist, is studying for a doctorate in music at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She graduated from the Juilliard School, from which she also received a master's degree in music.
Her father is the chairman of the Sam Chang Corporation, an international trading company in Seoul.


A SENSE OF PLACE
THE TIME: Sunday morning in the State of New Jersey.
THE PLACE: A television screen in your living room.


Walking Vienna's Other Ring
THE old city of Vienna is laid out like a spider web, encircled by a series of such streets as Opern ring, Parkring and Schottenring that trace the boundaries of the medieval city walls.
Two trolleys, the No. 1, running counterclockwise, and the No. 2, going clockwise, travel this route constantly, making it a popular tourist circuit.
One thread farther out on the web, traversing what was once open fields beyond the city walls, lies a second ring.
Less well known to visitors, this outer ring affords one of the best walking tours of Vienna, providing a cross-section of Vienna's architecture, culture and history, not to mention its cuisine.


Fresh Visions for Urban Oases
TO the extent that they both deal with public spaces within the limits of New York City, "Urban Paradise: Gardens in the City" at the Lehman College Art Gallery seems to follow the trail blazed by Wave Hill's current exhibition, "Transitory Gardens." But in reality, the two come from opposite directions.
The Wave Hill display consists of photographs taken by Margaret Morton of dwellings, with or without gardens, improvised by the dispossessed in Manhattan.
That at Lehman casts its net as far as the outer boroughs, featuring grand, often grandiose, proposals for public parks submitted by artists to the Public Art Fund.


On Sunday; Peace Prevails In an Offering Of Simple Cloth
THE Federal Government's annual peace offering of scores of thousands of yards of muslin cloth for the Indians of the Iroquois Confederacy arrived at the upstate tribal grounds 12 days ago, on time and true to an exceptional 200-year-old treaty, just the way George Washington intended.
The cloth used to be calico, as the treaty stipulates.
But Indian families still appreciate the modern muslin, which, most important, is fully accepted by the six tribes' leaders as the autumnal proof that the Pickering Treaty of 1794 remains working after all these years.


As a Hockey Coach, Rye Mom Is a Winner
LYNNE MORELL'S son Jay and his teammates still call her Coach Mo, and surprised her with a silver photo album with their names engraved on the cover and individual notes tucked inside.
The third-place plaque they won at the second annual Triple Crown Street Hockey Festival in Steamboat Springs, Colo., rests on the windowsill of the High Gear sporting goods store in Rye.
To the boys, it was just another tournament.
To Mrs.
Morell, it was more.
"They really worked hard toward a goal," she said proudly.
"It was just incredible that it all fell together for us." Mrs.
Morell did have her doubts this summer.
She had worked for Paul (Bear) Bryant, the renowned University of Alabama football coach, playing hostess to his recruits.


ROBERT REDFORD'S 50'S, THEN AND NOW
I shuddered when I read in Wakefield's article that "editorials suggested that the young Van Doren . . .  was making education popular." Shows in which contestants regurgitate facts to win big bucks reinforce the popular belief that education is supposed to turn people into well-behaved but well-paid nerds.
It's a shame that "The Quiz Kids" seems to have been legit; the cause of education would have benefited if that show had perished in a scandal the way that "Twenty-One" did.
JAMES D. MCCAWLEY Chicago


Star U.S. and Brazilian Bridge Teams Fall
When the Rosenblum Open Teams continued here today at the NEC World Bridge Championships, there was a surprising absentee.
One team that failed to survive qualifying play on Friday was that led by Richard Freeman of Atlanta and including Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C.; Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman of Dallas; Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla.
The Wolff-Hamman and Rodwell-Meckstroth partnerships have long been considered among the world's best.
They finished fifth in an eight-team group with four due to qualify.
The star Brazilian team headed by Gabriel Chagas was also eliminated, as were two top-ranked American teams led by Bill Pollack of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and Rita Shugart of Pebble Beach, Calif.
Among the 32 teams continuing in knockout play today are 11 from the United States and 2 each from Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Poland.
In the World Women's Team Championship for the McConnell Cup, 16 teams qualified for knockout play beginning today.
Among these are six from the United States, two each from France and the Netherlands, and one each from Britain, Canada, China, Germany, Israel and Italy.
American teams led by Gail Greenberg of Manhattan, Jan Martel of Davis, Calif., and Kathie Wei-Sender of Nashville were eliminated.


World Markets; Eyes Are Smiling on Irish Economy
FOR most people, Ireland holds many pleasures, from the lush green landscape to the head on a fresh pint of Guinness.
But for investors, Ireland has always been a bit of a wasteland.
Now that may be changing.
Ireland, once viewed as an economic disaster area, has remade itself in recent years into one of Europe's most vibrant economies.
While most of the rest of Europe languished deep in recession last year and struggled to recover this year, Ireland's gross domestic product grew 4 percent last year and is expected to grow nearly 6 percent this year.
Next year's growth could exceed even that torrid pace.


British Commander in Bosnia: In a Quagmire and Sniped at From All Sides
Eight months ago, an unusually charismatic British general arrived in this city vowing to open the roads, restore basic utilities and bring at least a semblance of normal life back to Sarajevo.
Today, shelling of Sarajevo has virtually stopped and, even two days after a NATO air strike, gunfire is rare.
But the roads out of Sarajevo are sealed, electricity, water and gas have been cut for 10 days, the streetcars are no longer running and weary people are again lining up at the river to fill containers of water.
Meanwhile, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, is in London.


Consequences Could Be Great for Players Who Might Break Union Ranks
The spring training sabers are rattling already.
The union says spring training is in jeopardy.
Clubs say they will open camps next February even if they do not have a strike-ending agreement with the players.
Whichever side turns out to be right, the ramifications pose even greater problems for major league baseball than the 45-day-old strike has already inflicted.
Talk of spring training, or the fate of it, or what will happen during it, is premature.
A significant amount of time remains before teams even have to plan for it.
But the talk has begun because neither side feels optimistic about the ability to reach an agreement before spring training.
Furthermore, Fehr was in Florida last week for a players meeting and was asked about spring training because people in Florida have a vested interest in it.


Leslie Michelson And Steven Cohen
Leslie Ilene Michelson, a daughter of Maurice and Phyllis Michelson of East Brunswick, N.J., is to be married today to Steven Earl Cohen, a son of Linda and Dr.
Willard Cohen of Dewitt, N.Y.
Rabbi Bennett F. Miller is to perform the ceremony at Anshe Emeth Memorial Temple in New Brunswick, N.J.
The bride, 26, is a benefits consultant at Ernst &amp; Young in New York.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is the chief financial officer at Burkhardt &amp; Christy Advertising in New York.
Her mother is a technical writer at Schering-Plough, the pharmaceutical company in Kenilworth, N.J.


Geoffrey Trussell and Ramsay Gifford
Ramsay Dewing Gifford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles K. Gifford of Manchester, Mass., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Clayton Trussell, the son of Heather M. Trussell of Bel Air, Md.
The Rev.
Edward B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Universalist Church on Nantucket Island, Mass.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 26, graduated from Bowdoin College.
She is a producer of public affairs programs on children's issues, the homeless and discrimination, at WCVB-TV in Boston.
Her father is the president of the Bank of Boston.


Symra A. Cohn, Irwin L. Fisch
Dr.
Symra Ann Cohn, an internist in New York, was married last evening to Irwin Leland Fisch, a composer for film and television productions.
Rabbi Burt Siegel performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Dr.
Cohn, 33, is also a clinical instructor of medicine at Cornell University Medical College in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Purchase, N.Y., and received her medical degree from the New York Medical College.
She is the daughter of Gena Raps of New York, a pianist who is an instructor at the Mannes College of Music.


On the Wing of a Prayer, Colorado Shocks Michigan
Kordell Stewart dropped back, threw a football as far as he could and watched it sail into a dream.
The play is known, now and forever, as Rocket Left.
Stewart's desperation, final-tick heave carried more than 70 yards toward a group of Colorado receivers and Michigan defenders near the home team's goal line in Michigan Stadium, where the celebration of a Wolverine victory had already begun.
Blake Anderson, a reserve receiver positioned at the 2-yard line, batted the ball upward and backward toward the end zone, where it settled gently into the upraised hands of Michael Westbrook, whose determined lunge instantly became part of football history.


Susan P. York, Thomas Losee 3d
Susan Paige York, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bennett Van York of Hattiesburg, Miss., was married there yesterday to Thomas Penny Losee 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Losee Jr. of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Andrew Silman performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 26, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Mississippi and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
She and the bridegroom, 28, are managers at York Developments, a real estate development company in Hattiesburg.
The bride's father, who owns the company, is an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in Hattiesburg.


When Congress Is the Workplace
The National Labor Relations Act covers millions of American workers in the public and private sectors -- but not the 40,000 who work for Congress.
The same is true for nine other Federal laws that define and protect employee rights.
Legislation to correct this injustice awaits final action by the Senate, which seems in no hurry.
If members want to demonstrate that they do not hold themselves above the laws they write for everyone else, they should pass this bill before they adjourn.


Henrietta Jones, Richard Vorisek Jr.
Sarah Henrietta Hoblyn Jones, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Jones of Syracuse, was married yesterday to Richard Dennis Vorisek Jr., a son of Judith D. Wheatley of San Francisco and Mr.
Vorisek of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Vorisek, who is known as Henrietta, is a district manager in New York for the Gap, the retail clothing chain.
She graduated from Syracuse University, where her father is a professor of advertising.
He is also an author.
Her mother, Wendy H. Jones, is the coordinator of the English-as-a-Second-Language program at the Literacy Volunteers of Greater Syracuse.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CANINE COMPETITION
Nearly 1,900 upwardly mobile dogs vied for prizes in last year's Northwestern Connecticut Dog Club show, and the word along the canine grapevine is that the number will be exceeded today, when the 49th edition takes place.


From Beat Poet to Pop Chic
NINE YEARS AGO, Allen Ginsberg wrote in the introduction to his "Collected Poems 1947-1980" that he was now creating work for "electronic laser TV generations that don't read Dostoyevsky." Certainly this description is even more true of the newly released "Holy Soul Jelly Roll: Songs and Poems (1948-1993)," an enthralling four-CD set.
The material here ranges from the first reading Mr.
Ginsberg ever gave of his career-establishing poem, "Howl" (to a giggling, genially shocked Berkeley, Calif., audience in 1956), to the poet's catchy but dead-serious punk-rock ditty, "Birdbrain." In between, Mr.
Ginsberg collaborates with Bob Dylan and yowls along with the English band the Clash.


Timing Is Off
To the Sports Editor:
Re George Vecsey's column, "Graf's Back Aches" (The Times, Sept. 11): The crowd properly booed Tony Trabert's question about her ailing back.
In the context of the awards ceremony, when the champion had not yet been presented to the crowd, it was rude and disrespectful to ask Graf to offer excuses or explanations.
Her demure response was appropriate, sporting and classy.
The awards ceremony should not be turned into a press conference.
If CBS doesn't care or know better, Trabert should.
PAULA A. GRANT  Patchogue, L.I.


A Longtime Favorite on the North Fork
AMERICA'S celebrity chefs recommend free-range chickens, freshly caught fish and produce from the farm down the road.
Showcasing the local bounty is nothing new.
John Ross has been doing it for more than 20 years at Ross's North Fork restaurant.
The dishes that sparkle at Ross's, a favorite in Southold, are the simple ones, pristine Robins Island oysters on the half shell, a platter of just-picked baby corn mated with golden corn cakes and a late summer salad spotlighting slices of deep red tomatoes, crisp onions, cucumbers and fresh basil.


POSTINGS: A Book and an Exhibit; Updated Guide To Preserving Landmarks
Ever wonder what an oriel is?
The answer is in a new preservation manual for New York City landmarks that has been published by the Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts.
The 26-page second edition of "A Guide to Working on New York City Landmarks" contains chapters on the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, how to perform work on individual buildings or buildings in historic districts, the standards for performing work, technical information on building materials and government agencies that preservationists may need to contact.
There is also a directory of useful resources, as well as a glossary of building preservation terms. (An oriel is a bay window projecting from a wall and supported by brackets or bricks.) The manual, written by Ken Lustbader, costs $5 (plus $1 for postage and handling) and can be obtained by calling the Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts at (212) 535-2526.


Habitats/Chatham Towers; Heir to 60's Apartment Reworks It
TUCKED behind the enormous municipal and judicial buildings of Lower Manhattan are two impressive monuments to 1960's architecture: the undulating Italian-influenced and innovative Chatham Green apartments, at 185 Park Row, and, opposite it, the even more innovative Chatham Towers, at 170 and 180 Park Row.
Today, Chatham Green's innovations have become, if not commonplace, then visually comfortable: rows of metal grid balconies set in front of the sweep of red brick, and orange and yellow doors for a punch of color.
It is Chatham Towers -- two twin 25-story towers of raw concrete -- that remains sharply distinctive.


Guzman Was Hard to Find
IN THE FORESTS OF THE NIGHT Encounters in Peru With Terrorism, Drug-Running and Military Oppression.
By John Simpson.
Illustrated. 307 pp.
New York:  Random House. $25.


Ways to Use the Season's Apple Crop in Cooked Desserts
LOCAL apples are in the markets, with some farms carrying dozens of varieties.
For cooking, choose apples that are not oversweet and that don't disintegrate, like McIntosh, russets, pippins or semisweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Northern Spy apples are especially good for pies.
Rome apples are large, dry and semisweet, excellent for baking whole.
Golden Delicious retain their shape when cooked, a quality that makes them useful for tarts, but they do not have much flavor.
Apple charlotte is especially good for a dinner party because it can be made a day or two ahead.
The apples are baked in a crust made from buttered bread, which turns crisp and golden, a lovely contrast with the soft sweetness of the cooked apples.


Okefenokee Tales
GOING THROUGH THE CHANGE Stories.
By Janice Daugharty. 200 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Ontario Review Press. $19.95.
DARK OF THE MOON  By Janice Daugharty. 275 pp.
Dallas: Baskerville Publishers. $19.


Amber A. Guth, Thomas Diflo
Dr.
Amber Azniv Guth and Dr.
Thomas Diflo, surgeons in New York, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys performed the ceremony, with the Rev.
Carnig Hallajian, a priest of the Armenian Apostolic Church, taking part.
Dr.
Guth, 37, and Dr.
Diflo, 36, are assistant professors of surgery at New York University.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from Queens College and received her medical degree from N.Y.U.
She is a daughter of Sima and Arthur Guth of Forest Hills, Queens.
Mr.
Guth is a broadcast engineer at Princzko Productions in New York.


Advancing the Poultry Debate
To the Editor:
You report that 70 birds a minute move down the chicken-processing line and that Government inspectors work beside Tyson employees, suggesting that inspectors have several seconds at most to detect salmonella bacteria and other infestations.
In fact, Jim Mason and Peter Singer in their book "Animal Factories" write: "An inspector in a typical broiler-processing plant has about one second to inspect each carcass for 20-odd diseases transmissible to humans."


There's More to the Soaps Than You Thought


BEST SELLERS: September 25, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
7
2
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
3
2
30
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
4
3
9
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
5
1
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
6
4
14
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
7
8
4
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Returning to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters a murderer he once knew.
8
6
111
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
5
16
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
10
10
8
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
11
9
6
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) An American woman's role as a chaperone in Georgian England brings her a surprising romance.
12
11
3
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
13
14
24
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
14*
16
2
HALF ASLEEP IN FROG PAJAMAS, by Tom Robbins. (Bantam, $23.95.) Three perilous days in the life of an inexperienced, not entirely ethical stockbroker.
15*
1
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) The loyalties of a black woman are tested by colleagues' behavior in a Los Angeles bank.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
3
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
2
1
72
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
12
2
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
4
4
40
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
6
29
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
5
9
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
7
3
6
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of an American family.
8
1
BRANDO: Songs My Mother Taught Me, by Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the actor.
9
7
6
OCTOBER 1964, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $24.) The season in which the Cardinals beat the Yankees, reflecting great changes in baseball and society.
10
8
7
THE TRIBE OF TIGER, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) The nature and culture of cats.
11
9
14
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
12*
11
2
TRUE NORTH, by Jill Ker Conway. (Knopf, $23.) The memoir of an Australian woman: from graduate student at Harvard to president of Smith College.
13
1
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the national game.
14
10
7
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Pantheon, $24.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent, lady's man and freeloader.
15
1
BETTER THAN SEX, by Hunter S. Thompson. (Random House, $23.) The 1992 Presidential campaign as seen by the gonzo journalist.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
70
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
22
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
22
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
34
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ALL'S FAIR: Love, War, and Running for President, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) They were in love.
She was political director of the Bush campaign in 1992.
He was manager of Bill Clinton's.
This is their story.
Hepburn and Tracy were never such fun.
THE ANTI-EGOTIST: Kingsley Amis, Man of Letters, by Paul Fussell. (Oxford University, $23.) The old devil analyzed and explicated not only as the author of "Lucky Jim" but also as poet, literary critic, anthologist and moral satirist on the order of Pope and Swift.
BALZAC: A Life, by Graham Robb. (Norton, $35.) A thoughtful, abundant biography of the great, voracious novelist and man-about-everywhere, excessive in everything, who could write books about as fast as ordinary people can read them.
A BUNDLE FROM BRITAIN, by Alistair Horne. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $23.95.) A generous chronicle of loyalty and gratitude to the Americans who sheltered a British boy during World War II, sparing him both the blitz and the agonies normally inflicted in upper-class schools.
CHINA WAKES: The Struggle for the Soul of a Rising Power, by Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) Two correspondents for The Times report from a nation whose ruling classes, having chucked Communism, seem to run on sheer meanness.
THE GRANDMOTHER'S TALE: And Selected Stories, by R.K.
Narayan. (Viking, $24.95.) The title story (1992) and a selection of old favorites show the humanism that makes Mr.
Narayan's most poignant stories comedies of suffering.
IN THE TENNESSEE COUNTRY, by Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $21.) In mellow, elegant prose, this fine novel follows the quest of an academic hustler and failed artist to pin down a cousin who escaped from history a generation after the Civil War.
NO ORDINARY TIME.
Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Prodigious research lies behind this engrossing, colorful view of a changing nation as experienced by White House dwellers and habitues.
ONE TRUE THING, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) This second novel by a Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The New York Times concerns a talented journalist, the lingering death of her mother and the emotional changes and reflections forced upon her.
OPEN SECRETS: Stories, by Alice Munro. (Knopf, $23.) Bold, ambitious, risky short stories that never stop where stopping would be easy but go on to reach for the most expensive and difficult truths; Ms.
Munro's eighth book of fiction.
SHELTER, by Jayne Anne Phillips. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Ms.
Phillips's second novel blends regionalism and symbolism in a spiritually charged parable of innocence too young betrayed in a backwoods summer camp for girls in 1963.


Flying Away From Football
One sure-fire way to avoid football on Monday night is to hop on a plane.
Through Dec. 16, Southwest Airlines is offering a budget escape -- fares on all Monday night nonstop flights that take off at 7 or later are $25 one way.
Though many of the flights are short, a few cover a lot of ground for $25, like Phoenix to Houston.
Curiously, the bargain fares are billed as a salute to the 25th anniversary of ABC's "Monday Night Football." (800) 435-9792.


Sports of The Times; Getting Away, a Few Quick Strokes Off Shore
THE kayak floats at the edge of the bay.
My bare feet connect with the pebbles and shells of the salt water at high tide.
My first time out, I tried to step into the kayak, but my clumsy weight tipped the tiny craft, and I capsized in literally a foot of water, splashing around like some idiot creature deservedly doomed to extinction.
There were a few people watching from the beach, and I wouldn't have blamed them for laughing out loud at a grown man floundering in shallow water.
But I learned.
It isn't hard, in a kayak.
You stick one leg into the craft and scroonch your butt down low and pull in the other leg.
Then you push away from the shore, and then you paddle, and the world goes away.
There is no telephone, no fax, no Fed Ex messenger at the door, just the shoreline receding with a few simple strokes.


REMEMBER THE MANE
When I started working at MTV six years ago, I was 29," recalls John Shea, now a senior vice president in marketing for the music channel. "And I thought it would be a lark to dance on Club MTV.
So I told the producer.
He seemed hesitant -- I couldn't guess why -- but he agreed to let me on.
He did suggest, however, that I wear a hat.
In my ignorance I thought, 'Well, isn't that cool?
He wants to style me, too.' Later, someone gently told me that the hat was because he thought I looked bald and too old for the show.
I didn't go on."
Is there a greater right-between-the-eyes reminder that your youth is checking out -- leaving no forwarding address -- than the first time you see a drain clogged with your own hair?
"I didn't realize it," says The New Yorker's cultural editor, Brendan Lemon, who is 37.
"My sister pointed it out to me. I immediately thought I'd never get another date on Saturday night." The interior designer Austin Chinn, 47, recalls, "I actually sat down and tried to talk it out with God, as if He might be willing to make a trade."


In Museum Show, Quality With Quantity
NEARLY all the well-known craft artists of the state plus a number of new names are featured in a top-notch exhibition, "The Art of New Jersey Designer Craftsmen," at the Zimmerli Museum here.
The handsome installation provides a showcase for 134 pieces, far more than the Designer Craftsmen organization's intimate space can hope to display.
The museum ambiance is also a reminder that decorative arts of distant cultures and historical periods have a strong influence on the design of contemporary crafts.


Ease of Reading
To the Editor:
As I sit here with an unfilled prescription for reading glasses to assist my fortysomething-year-old-eyes, your Sept. 18 note that font size and spacing will increase my ease of reading brought the thought that I may be able to hold The Times a few inches closer for a few more months.
But then I wondered: Will column inches of advertising be reduced?
Will I have more newsprint to trundle off to the recycling bin?
Or will I find instead there's 11 percent less news?
DAVID N. HINGSTON  Plainsboro, N.J., Sept. 18, 1994


Pears, an Apologia
The fact that I first came to know them in a can probably limited my appreciation, turning me against pears early in life.
Nevertheless, when I now attempt to enjoy them, it is inevitably in a cooked and, yes, tin-reminiscent form.
Intellectually, I grant the green, round Comice its charms.
It is sweet and juicy and, when ripe, almost buttery, and I remember eating one with Brie ever so languidly on a terrace overlooking a vineyard in Bordeaux.
Later, I came to understand the sweet wine flavor of the Anjou and the tart taste of the long-necked Bosc.
The bell-shaped Bartlett, which can be red or gold, always tastes sweet and mildly musky, whatever its hue.


Checking It Out: A Walk on the Mild Side
I WAIT until after dark, until I can imagine most decent people tucked into the comforting corners of Ken Burns's "Baseball," too numbed to go out into the gritty night and spot me scurrying under the floppy hat I never wear in the nabe, the one I picked up eight years ago on assignment in Nicaragua.
It celebrates the revolution and helps me imagine myself invisible, dangerous, not nearly as foolish as I feel.
I am not, after all, trekking to the guerrilla hideout.
I am merely walking the two blocks to the porn shop on the corner.
Until this newspaper ran a big map two weeks ago showing the locations of sex shops around the city, I was not aware that I lived so close to an X-rated cluster.
There were three dots on 14th Street and Third Avenue.
I dimly recalled passing storefronts with XXX outside, but almost always I was still entranced by what I had just seen in the pet shop nearby; snakes, heartbreakingly adorable puppies, kittens that fairly whispered, "Take me home, big boy."


WHERE HAVE YOU GONE, ROBERT FRANK?
In the article on Robert Frank, your reporter quotes Frank's churlish put-down of his colleague Richard Avedon: "He is pretentious and pushy. He has some of the worst American qualities."


R.E.M. Gets Rowdy, Again
MY FAVORITE NOTE ON R.E.M.'S NEW ALbum, "Monster," is the one that opens "Circus Envy." Peter Buck plays a fat, fuzz-toned, low guitar D that buzzes out of silence and sustains while Billy Berry's drums and Mike Mills's bass kick in.
The note begins to break up but hangs around in its own staticky penumbra, crackling and frazzling through the first verse as Michael Stipe sings, "Here comes that awful feeling again." And it reappears throughout the song, holding on after the band is done.
Its sculptured cantankerousness might as well continue through the whole album; R.E.M. has started to blare again, brilliantly.
The sound of "Monster" (Warner Brothers 45740; LP, cassette and CD) won't surprise longtime fans.
Since 1981, R.E.M. has cut a path for what came to be called alternative rock.
The band came out of a small college town (Athens, Ga.) with the do-it-yourself mentality of punk rock and a revived folk-rock lexicon; its songs were urgent, mysterious and memorable.
R.E.M. worked its way up to arenas by the late 1980's but stopped touring in 1989.


Alien Corn
To the Editor:  Ms.
Raver had her corn straight the first time.
The Van Dorens would not have been eating butter and sugar corn in 1958.


Helen R. Pantuso, Steven J. Barlotta
Helen R. Pantuso, a vice president and management supervisor at Grey Advertising in New York, is to be married today to Steven J. Barlotta, a saxophonist and the musical director for the singer Gary U.S.
Bonds.
The Rev.
Herbert Stab is to perform the ceremony at Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church in Piscataway, N.J.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from the University of New Haven and received a master's degree in sociology from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Betty Pantuso of Newtown, Conn., and the late Anthony J. Pantuso Jr.


A Chattering Engine May Tell a Dirty Secret
AN engine noise that has long troubled drivers of older cars is now annoying owners of relatively new vehicles, and that is causing some friction between auto makers and oil companies.
The engine clatter -- often called "knock" -- is usually heard in the first few minutes after the cars are started.
The problem is occurring on vehicles with as few as 5,000 miles on the odometer.


Amy C. Barkin, Claude K. Jackson
Amy Claire Barkin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Solomon Barkin of Leverett, Mass., was married last evening to Claude King Jackson, a son of Ruth Bitzer of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Wilburn Jackson.
Michael Prival, a leader of the Society for Humanistic Judaism, officiated at the ANA Hotel in Washington.
Ms.
Barkin, 47, is keeping her name.
She is a captain in the United States Public Health Service in Washington.
She graduated from New York University and received master's degrees in social work from Smith College and in public health from Harvard University.
Her father is a professor emeritus of economics with the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her mother, Elaine Barkin, is a retired psychotherapist.


Bronx Community Boards
DISTRICT 1 Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven.
Last Thursday of month; next meeting Sept. 29, 6:30 P.M., Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
Chairman: George Rodriguez; District Manager: Oberto Crespo DISTRICT 2 Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of month; next meeting Sept. 28, 6 P.M., 1029 East 163d Street, between Southern Boulevard and Simpson Street, third floor; (718) 328-9125.
Chairman: Roland Lopez; District Manager: John Robert


Penn Holds Its Ground To Edge Dartmouth
The game came down to one play with one minute left in the game today.
It was Pete Oberle, Dartmouth's resolute running back, against Pat Goodwillie, Penn's all-Ivy linebacker.
On fourth down, a yard short of the Quaker goal, Oberle ran off right tackle and Goodwillie was there to meet him.


EUROPE: THE NEW SEASON -- Restored Treasures; England: A modernist pavilion re-emerges on the coast
Since it was finished in 1935, providing Britain one of its first if uncertain encounters with German modernist architecture, the De La Warr Pavilion has stood out sharply against the often gloomy Victorian clutter of England's southern coast.
With its wide terraces and bold, three-story glass bay fronted by curved balconies and enfolding spiral stairs, it stands like a sleek white ocean liner along the seafront of Bexhill-on-Sea, an aging resort about 65 miles southeast of London.
Now, after nearly six decades as a community center -- theater, music hall, reading room and public cafeteria -- for Bexhill's large population of retirees, the pavilion is being carefully restored to the original vision of Erich Mendelsohn, the German modernist who, along with Walter Gropius and other principals of the Bauhaus movement, fled to Britain from Hitler's Germany in the 1930's.


At the Newsstand: 'Hello, My Brother'
There was a time in the late 1970's, Ramon Alvarez remembers, when he ran the only all-night newspaper shop on Avenue A, and a rusty crowbar was his best friend.
"From 14th to Houston, three o'clock in the morning, sometimes my light was the only light you see on this street," said Mr.
Alvarez as he took in the bustling evening scene in front of his cluttered store, between Seventh Street and St.
Marks Place.


SUNDAY, September 25, 1994; New Computer Icons
For conservatives, 1996 beckons like the sunrise after a long winter night.
But no need to wait till then.
On the computer screen it can be morning in America now.


8 HAITIANS KILLED BY MARINE PATROL
At least 10 Haitians were killed here Saturday night in two clashes involving American marines, the Haitian police and civilians, marine officials said.
Details were sketchy, but shooting reportedly started when Haitian police officers fired on a crowd of several hundred supporters of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, when the crowd advanced on a police station in this northern port city.


Beyond Bohemian: Superdeluxe on Avenue A
They come from all over.
Some drive Saabs in from Westchester.
Others are reformed punks who have called the avenue home for years.
What they have in common is money.
And the desire to plow it into Avenue A, which has in the last two years -- since the gates swung open on a quieter, cleaner Tompkins Square Park -- taken on a decidedly new look.
Walk down the east side of the avenue near 11th Street and find Orologio, a sleek Italian restaurant that is just one of the newest of a welter of new eating establishments.
Then there is Cafe Limbo, which opened in the summer of 1992, where aspiring writers sip cappuccino milkshakes while, say, Harold Brodkey reads from his work.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
97.85
99.95
105.95
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5483
1.5790
1.6380
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3435
1.3503
1.3198
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5772
1.5790
1.5085
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$395.70
$389.60
$357.40
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Wall Street; Trouble for Soros-Reichmann Team
WHEN George Soros and Paul Reichmann teamed up last year to run a real-estate fund, they raised some eyebrows -- and a lot of hopes.
Mr.
Soros, after all, was the man with the golden touch, the trader who in 1992 made more than $1 billion by betting against Europe's central banks.
Mr.
Reichmann, on the other hand, was the visionary who led Olympia &amp; York into bankruptcy, the real-estate mogul whose empire collapsed under the weight of its grandiose Canary Wharf development in London.
Wits joked that next Mr.
Soros would hire Michael Milken to run a bond fund.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about investments by towns and colleges in highly speculative Wall Street offerings referred incorrectly in some copies to the amount of public money that the treasurer of Sandusky County, Ohio, placed in an interest-rate investment known as an inverse floater.
It was $6.5 million, not $6.5 billion.


After the Beats: A New Generation Raises Its Voice in Poetry
Naomi Shihab Nye stood under the bright lights at Waterloo Village on Thursday night, a television camera hovering around her like a mobile X-ray, to read her work into a microphone.
The poet could not hear herself; the wind whipping the tent's plastic walls, the rain's ping-ping drumbeat on the roof and the expanse of empty seats seemed to swallow the sound of her.
I want to be famous in the way a pulley is famous,


Crafty Plays Give a Lift To Bears
Offense can win football games.
Defense can, too.
But good special teams can win games, inspire the other units to play better and demoralize the opposition.
The Chicago Bears' special teams did that tonight in a 19-7 victory over the Jets.
Consider this sampler of special-teams heroics:


Hills Stores, in Comeback, Seeks Life After Wal-Mart
The original aim of the showdown over the Hills Stores Company, which ended in a truce on Friday, was to shine a spotlight on a once-bankrupt discount retailer making a comeback that Wall Street had all but ignored.
The fight, between some of the financial world's shrewdest and most ruthless investors, increased Hills's stock price to a new high last week, but it -- not the company -- grabbed all the attention.


New Round in Messier Talks
With less than a week to go before the scheduled start of the season, the Rangers president, Neil Smith, and Doug Messier, Mark Messier's father and agent, will sit down face to face today and try to work out a contract agreement for the team's holdout captain.
The feeling in the Messier camp is one of cautious optimism because serious negotiations will resume for the first time since Bob Gutkowski was forced out of his position as president of Madison Square Garden last Tuesday.
Gutkowski had been handling the negotiations with the Messier camp.


Ringling Brothers Seeking an Agency
The Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus is seeking an agency to handle advertising for its 125th anniversary show.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $12 million.


Leftist Candidate in Brazil Promises to Force a Runoff
Fighting to rescue a sinking campaign, Brazil's socialist Presidential candidate vowed tonight that he would prove all opinion polls wrong, winning enough votes on Oct. 3 to force a second round in the presidential election.
"There will be a runoff," Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, the barrel-chested leftist, roared to a delirious, flag-waving crowd of 50,000 -- the largest rally of his yearlong campaign.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the opening of the United Nations General Assembly referred incorrectly to its new President, Amara Essy.
He is the current Foreign Minister of Ivory Coast, not a former one.


Rabin to Hold Talks on Vote With Arafat
Edging toward the next phase of Palestinian self-rule, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., agreed today to start talks next week on elections in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
After meeting with Mr.
Arafat for nearly two hours at an Israeli base on the northern border of the Gaza Strip, Mr.
Rabin announced at a joint news conference that the talks would start Oct. 3 in Cairo and that the two leaders would meet again within a month to gauge progress.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  American Express BellSouth Corp Disney Walt Co Harsco Corp Hartfd Steam Boiler Unocal Corp TUESDAY  Centerior Energy Nipsco Inds Inc United Dom Rlty Tr WEDNESDAY  Aquarion Co Belo A H Corp Pilgrims Pride Corp Vulcan Matls Co Washington Gas Lt Co THURSDAY  Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt Co KCS Energy Inc La Quinta Inns Inc Vigoro Corp FRIDAY  Southwestern Bell


Margeotes Fertitta Appoints Executive
Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York has named Graham Turner as creative director, succeeding Jeff Weiss, who left to head Amster Yard, a new unit of McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York.
Mr.
Turner, 39, joins Margeotes Fertitta next Monday from Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, where he was a senior vice president and creative director.
He also worked at TBWA Advertising, Chiat/Day and McCaffrey &amp; McCall.


Biodiversity Pact on the Ropes
Chances that the Senate will ratify an international agreement aimed at preserving the world's biological diversity are diminishing as fast as the organisms the pact is designed to protect.
Republican opposition and Democratic lethargy are combining to frustrate approval of the biodiversity convention, thus keeping the U.S. out of step with most of the rest of the world in the fight to save a wide range of biological species and habitats.
The convention was one of the major treaties approved at the 1992 world environmental summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro.
It sets no firm requirements to save species or habitats but commits the signatories to develop national plans aimed at doing so.
The treaty also seeks to promote an equitable sharing of benefits between the developing nations that possess biological resources and the industrialized nations that seek to use them for medical or agricultural purposes.


Singing for Your Sentence: How Will It Pay Off?; Ex-Crime Underboss May Find Out Today What He Gets for Turning U.S. Witness
One side of the scale is weighted with Salvatore Gravano's violent Mafia record: participating in 19 murders, masterminding million-dollar extortions, running brutal loan-sharking rings and trying to fix juries in mob trials.
But law-enforcement officials say he is the most devastating witness ever used against the mob, and compare his testimony and revelations to a missile strike against New York's Mafia families.


Patents; An Electronic Monitor for Leftovers Could Help Make a Refrigerator a Mold-Free Zone
AT one time or another, everyone has reached into a deep corner of the refrigerator, pulled out a long-forgotten plastic container and opened it to find a fuzzy, gray-green blanket of mold.
In fact, said Dianna Namisniak, Americans throw away 15 percent of their fresh food and leftovers because they forget what is in the refrigerator until it is too late.
She and her husband, Lee, used to do that -- until they invented the Leftover Lifeguard.


Study Urges Less Heart Surgery for Elderly
A study of more than 200,000 elderly heart attack patients indicates that invasive treatments like heart bypass operations and catheterizations may not increase long-term survival in many cases, Harvard University researchers said.
Using a new approach to analyze health data from Medicare beneficiaries, the researchers said last week that their study indicated that invasive cardiovascular procedures after heart attacks could be reduced by more than 25 percent without increasing mortality.


Results Plus
HOCKEY Palffy Scores Again for Isles in Preseason Pierre Turgeon and Steve Thomas both had goals, and Zigmund Palffy continued his hot scoring last night in the Islanders' 4-2 exhibition victory over Florida in Cincinnati.
The Islanders (4-4) led, 2-1, when Turgeon scored at 11 minutes 33 seconds of the second period.
Palffy, the Islanders' second-round draft choice in 1991, opened the scoring with the only goal of the second period at 3:42.
The goal was his sixth of the preseason.
Jamie McLennan, who appears to have the inside track on the Islanders' starting goaltender position with the recent trade of Ron Hextall, stopped all 11 shots he faced.
Tommy Soderstrom, who New York acquired for Hextall, allowed both goals on 13 shots. (AP)


TOBACCO INDUSTRY FIGHTS NEW YORK OVER SMOKING BILL
The tobacco industry is mounting an all-out campaign to derail or modify legislation imposing new restrictions on smoking in public in New York City.
As part of that campaign, Philip Morris has warned that it will consider moving its headquarters out of New York if the bill passes.
Today the City Council's Health Committee is to hold a hearing and possibly a vote on the bill, which would outlaw smoking in nearly all restaurants and public places.
While the bill will not be voted on by the full Council for weeks, lobbying is under way with a zeal that is rare in New York's municipal affairs.


Bosnian Serbs Restore Gas To Sarajevo
The Bosnian Serbs reopened the gas supply to Sarajevo today after an 11-day cutoff, but they insured that the airport remained closed by threatening to shoot at incoming United Nations flights.
The airport, which runs between Bosnian Serb and Bosnian Government positions, is essential to the arrival of food aid to the city and to the United Nations peacekeeping operation.
A spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said current food supplies were sufficient for another two weeks.


CHRONICLE
Holy comeback, Batman!
ADAM WEST has left the cave -- without his cape and tights -- as a cold-hearted playboy in the film "The New Age."
"If you hang around long enough, they think you're good," Mr.
West said in a recent interview, The Associated Press reported.
"It's either my tenacity or my stupidity, I'm not sure which."


Capital Cities Buys Stake in Mail-Order Flower Company
Calyx &amp; Corolla, the upstart mail-order company that began challenging traditional ways of selling flowers six years ago, has sold a minority interest to Capital Cities Capital, the venture capital subsidiary of the media giant Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
Ruth M. Owades, founder and president of Calyx &amp; Corolla, said her company planned to use the money to expand.
"This partnership will really catapult us into the big leagues," she said.


The Public Needs TV To Oversee the Courts
To the Editor:
The inexplicable decision of the Judicial Conference of the United States once again to ban television coverage of Federal trials and appeals (news article, Sept. 21) is both disappointing and unjustified.
The Association of the Bar of the City of New York, for which I am chairman of the committee on communications and media law, has long supported cameras in the courtroom.
We are convinced that justice is best served when the public is well informed about judicial processes, and that exposure through television is a powerful and effective way for the public to keep informed.


Barbara D. Hoffstot, Preservationist, 75
Barbara Drew Hoffstot, an architectural and community preservationist, died on Sept. 18 at her Pittsburgh home.
She was 75 and also had homes in Palm Beach, Fla.; New Waterford, Ohio, and County Galway, Ireland.
She died after a long illness, The Palm Beach, Fla., Post reported.


Market Place; Some stocks below Wall St.'s radar may be good values.
STOCKS that are not followed by Wall Street analysts are usually assumed to be unattractive investments, but a number of professional investors say that some of the better buying opportunities could be among the companies lacking research coverage.
Though few on Wall Street like to admit it, the size of the research analysts' universe has not kept pace with the growth of the new-issues market.
As a result, there are more public companies trading without the scrutiny of analysts who can provide regular reports on a company's latest financial and operating performance.


How Two Men Saved Thousands of Jews
To the Editor:
I believe your readers will be interested to learn about the consequences of Chiune Sugihara's compassionate act of saving Jewish lives during World War II by issuing thousands of transit visas from Lithuania to Japan ("Sugihara's List," Op-Ed, Sept. 20).


Let Us Count Spoons
To the Editor:
William Kristol, head of the Project for the Republican Future and a supporter of Oliver L. North, a candidate for senator in Virginia, misquotes Samuel Johnson as having said, "When people start speaking of honor, I count my spoons" (front page, Sept. 16).


U.S. to Press Cedras to Speed Up Disarming of Allies, General Says
Gen.
John M. D. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today that the American military would seek to speed up its efforts to disarm Haitians in response to the firefight Saturday night in Cap-Haitien that left 10 Haitians dead and an American sailor wounded.
General Shalikashvili said on the CBS News program "Face the Nation" that the United States would press Haiti's military leader, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, to move faster to disarm the shadowy paramilitary groups that have long been closely allied with Haiti's military.


Calm Returns to Indian City Hit by Plague
With bonfires of rotting garbage and putrefying animal carcasses casting pillars of smoke into sky, the city of Surat began what officials there described today as "a return to normalcy" after days of panic brought about by an outbreak of pneumonic plague.
Reports from Surat, 160 miles north of Bombay, said squads of workers were beginning to clear mountains of uncleared refuse that medical experts have identified as one of the likely causes of the outbreak.
In addition, work crews were tackling the mammoth task of fumigating dwellings in the muddy shantytowns where many of the city's 1.6 million people lived until the first plague deaths sent hundreds of thousands of them fleeing from the city last week.


The Ghost of Comeback Pact Can't Scare Moon
For a moment during the Vikings-Dolphins game this afternoon, Minnesota quarterback Warren Moon thought he was standing in the middle of some nightmarish flashback.
The Vikings had taken a 28-0 lead late in the second quarter and were sitting on what appeared to be a safe 28-6 halftime lead.
But before you could say "Dan Marino drops back," the Dolphins had scored 22 unanswered points -- two Marino touchdown passes and a 2-point conversion in the third quarter and another touchdown early in the fourth quarter -- to tie the score.
And the shootout was on.


Snags Reported in Talks On a Disney-NBC Deal
The talks between the General Electric Company and the Walt Disney Company about Disney's possible purchase of NBC have cooled, several people with knowledge of the discussions said yesterday.
The stumbling block seems to be Disney's desire to buy all of NBC -- the network, the seven local television stations and its interests in cable television, including CNBC.
General Electric has apparently decided that it would prefer to continue owning a majority of NBC, making only 49 percent available to suitors.


Pennsylvania Abortion Foes Say Law Is Being Undermined
Abortion opponents in Pennsylvania are complaining that abortion clinics are undermining the state's regulation of abortion by allowing prospective patients to listen by telephone to taped information about the procedure instead of requiring face-to-face counseling with a doctor.
Although the taped information upholds the letter of the law, which says that at least 24 hours before an abortion, a patient must be "orally informed" by a doctor about the procedure, abortion opponents say the tapes do not comply with the spirit of the law.


A Sense Of Weimar In Sound
The word provincial, normally bad news for the nouns to which it is attached, ought sometimes to be rethought.
It can, for example, describe the Weimar Staatskapelle in the happiest of terms.
"Provincial" is a limiting adjective, and this German orchestra, which played three times in the Kaye Playhouse last week, lives comfortably within its limits.
The Weimar Staatskapelle has, first of all, a sense of place.
It is not particularly imposing in modern political or economic terms but one that is deeply settled in history.
The orchestra traces its origins to a time before Columbus.
Goethe watched over the theater to which it is attached.
Liszt used it to promote controversial music, both Wagner's and his own.


Making Awkwardness an Advantage
Not every musician is a natural-born performer.
Even after years of steady touring, some bands are still awkward on stage.
That vulnerability and lack of pretension is part of the appeal of alternative rock, and on Friday night at the Manhattan Center, shyness was the operative word as Grant Lee Buffalo, American Music Club and St.
Etienne performed a CMJ Music Marathon as part of a Warner Brothers Records showcase.
It would be nice to see Grant Lee Buffalo, a trio from Los Angeles, sell as many records as other popular new bands like Collective Soul and Candlebox.
Grant Lee Buffalo not only writes catchy alternative-rock songs with classic-rock melodies, butalso plays smart, original music with genuine emotion and no compromises.


A Pass of Pure Fantasy, And Yet Perfectly True
The moment that will always link Kordell Stewart, Blake Anderson and Michael Westbrook today headed back where it came from.
Their tipped, 64-yard game-winning pass, the one that gave Colorado its 27-26 victory over Michigan and lifted the Buffaloes into the fifth spot in the national polls, returned to the places where such unthinkable successes are first conceived.
Back to the grass of backyards or the asphalt of neighborhood streets just as the autumn sky is darkening, as it was over Michigan Stadium early Saturday evening, and meals are being placed on the table.
"Dinner's ready."


Simms's Moment of Decision Inches One Step Closer
As the Arizona Cardinals were deciding last night whether to make Phil Simms their latest experiment on offense, the agent for the former Giant quarterback intimated his client may not be through shopping even if the Cardinal deal falls through.
Simms has been seeking a guaranteed, two-year deal that his agent, David Fishof, now says will be worth more than $4 million from the Cardinals.
It is a deal requiring a fair amount of salary-cap maneuvering by Arizona.


Parish Hopes Pope Is Merely Delayed
Expressing both sadness and optimism, parishioners at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church celebrated Mass together today for the first time since learning that Pope John Paul II had canceled an October trip to the United States, and with it his first visit to New Jersey.
They consoled themselves with the thought that their waylaid preparations would simply be a dress rehearsal for the real thing next year.


Chinatown Holds Its First Parade To Mark Mainland Anniversary
In an event that reflected a shift in the political views in Chinatown, the area yesterday held its first official parade celebrating the founding of the People's Republic of China.
Waving American and Chinese flags, 5,000 Chinese representing 73 Chinese organizations took part in the celebration of the 45th anniversary of China's founding.


Extend Airport Link Plan to Columbus Circle
To the Editor:
Critics of a proposed light rail system to La Guardia and Kennedy airports say terminating it near the Queensboro Bridge would create a congestion nightmare and force travelers to face either a long walk, a ride on two or more subway lines or an excruciatingly slow taxi ride to their most likely destinations.


Lessons From Health of Hospitals' Unions
After back-to-back announcements last week that the city's private hospitals had guaranteed their workers' jobs for four years and that the public hospitals would be laying off 3,000 workers, the relative strength of the unions involved became the butt of bitter jokes.
"1199 is about three times the union that 420 is," said Willie King, a 20-year veteran of the housekeeping staff at Bellevue Hospital Center, whose own local was on the short end.


O'Connor to Rome for a Monthlong Synod
John Cardinal O'Connor plans to leave for Rome on Wednesday to attend a monthlong meeting there on improving conditions for priests, nuns and others in the Roman Catholic religious professions.
Joseph G. Zwilling, a spokesman for the Archdiocese of New York, said the trip to the Synod of Consecrated Life would be the Cardinal's longest absence from New York since he became head of the archdiocese in March 1984.
On other trips, even to Rome or the Middle East, Mr.
Zwilling said, the Cardinal had tried to return to New York on Friday so he would be in St.
Patrick's Cathedral for Sunday Mass.


A Carnival to Help Children With AIDS


Corrections
An article on Friday about traffic officers in Greenwich, Conn., misstated the title of a town official, Tom R. Ragland.
He is a selectman, not the town's first selectman.


Corrections
A subheading on Wednesday with an article about a report on taxes in New York State described the burden imprecisely.
As the article stated, total taxes paid by businesses and individuals to the state and local governments in 1992 averaged out to $3,531.85 per state resident; that is not the average amount paid by individual New Yorkers.


Not for the Ophidiophobic


Results Plus
HOCKEY Palffy Scores Again for Isles in Preseason Pierre Turgeon and Steve Thomas both had goals, and Zigmund Palffy continued his hot scoring last night in the Islanders' 4-2 exhibition victory over Florida in Cincinnati.
The Islanders (4-4) led, 2-1, when Turgeon scored at 11 minutes 33 seconds of the second period.
Palffy, the Islanders' second-round draft choice in 1991, opened the scoring with the only goal of the second period at 3:42.
The goal was his sixth of the preseason.
Jamie McLennan, who appears to have the inside track on the Islanders' starting goaltender position with the recent trade of Ron Hextall, stopped all 11 shots he faced.
Tommy Soderstrom, who New York acquired for Hextall, allowed both goals on 13 shots. (AP)


Editor Is Retiring At Advertising Age
Fred Danzig, editor of Advertising Age, is retiring, Crain Communications, parent of the trade publication, announced Friday.
Mr.
Danzig, 69, who joined Advertising Age in the New York bureau in 1962, has been editor since 1984.
Steve Yahn, 47, executive editor for the last year in Chicago, where Advertising Age is based, has been named editor, effective immediately.


METRO DIGEST
LOBBIES BATTLE COUNCIL ON SMOKING
The City Council's Health Committee is to hold a hearing and possibly a vote on a bill which would outlaw smoking in nearly all restaurants and public places in New York.
While the bill will not be voted on by the full Council for weeks, lobbying by the tobacco industry is under way with a zeal that is rare in New York's municipal affairs.
Philip Morris has even warned that it will consider moving its headquarters out of New York if the bill passes.
A1.


Boats Done the Old Way, in Wood


McCall Does the Knocking, but King Does the Talking
Within minutes of the stunning knockout victory by his underdog fighter, Oliver McCall, Don King was performing, flamboyant in the way that makes him professional boxing's ineffable presence.
He attacked HBO, which had televised the fight in the United States; he paraphrased Winston S. Churchill and Rudyard Kipling and he dashed off a version of George M. Cohan's "Yankee Doodle Dandy."
For King, the new Yankee Doodle Dandy is McCall, whose quick right-handed counterpunch knocked out Lennox Lewis, the World Boxing Council champion, 31 seconds into the second round at Wembley Arena.


Here's a Controversy Just Waiting to Start
FOR once, the Jets wish they had a quarterback controversy.
Moments after Boomer Esiason departed on a flatbed cart with a sprained left ankle late in the third quarter last night, Jack Trudeau moved the Jets into field-goal range but Nick Lowery missed from 41 yards.
Trudeau later fumbled when sacked by Chris Zorich, positioning the Chicago Bears for their clinching touchdown in a 19-7 victory.


A Consolidation For Best Foods
The Best Foods division of CPC International in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., has consolidated its North American grocery account at BBDO New York, which already handles brands like Skippy peanut butter and Hellmann's and Best Foods mayonnaises.
The agency's Best Foods billings, now estimated at $30 million to $40 million, are expected to grow initially by $7 million and then further as Best Foods increases spending.


One Worldview, Many Lively Vantage Points
There are social critics as lively and opinionated as Nanni Moretti on many a park bench, but they don't share Mr.
Moretti's rare gift for captivating an audience.
This funny, contentious Italian film maker, who was voted best director at this year's Cannes International Film Festival, wanders through "Caro Diario" ("Dear Diary") airing his thoughts in delightfully offbeat ways.
As both a skillful director and a lovable oddball, he commands interest.
It's easy to follow him anywhere.
He has many different destinations in "Caro Diario," one of the high points of this year's New York Film Festival.
Divided into three sections, this film starts out with a portrait of Mr.
Moretti's Rome.
Cruising serenely in "On My Vespa," he visits a nice selection of settings that bear out his worldview.
Cinemas are especially important, like the one playing a film in which dour yuppies bemoan their disillusionment.


Spring '95: Popcorn, Peanuts and Pickets
It is said that the real business of Congress is conducted in the hallways and back rooms on Capitol Hill.
So it was not surprising that while members of a Congressional committee were being exceedingly polite last Thursday to those who conduct the business of baseball, more chilling words were uttered once the official proceedings ended.
"If the owners think they can delay over the winter, break the union, hire scabs and minor league players to fill the void, I think they ought to think about it very carefully," Jack Brooks, a Democrat from Texas and chairman of the powerful House Judiciary Committee, told reporters after Brooks had adjourned a hearing into baseball's antitrust exemption.


Expressing Dark Emotions In Dark, Melodramatic Ways
There was a curious sense of a living past when three graduates of Arizona State University performed on Friday night at the Workhouse Theater in SoHo in the inaugural program of their Dek-ad-ens company (which actually includes some phonetic characters in the title).
The evening was hobbled by the sameness of the seven dances, almost all of which expressed dark emotions in a darkly theatrical way.
It has been a long though not unprofitable time since dance was seen as a vehicle for the expression of anything other than itself.
Though short on discernible meaning, these dances were full of tangy atmosphere.
Cliff Keuter, who teaches at the university and was once active in the New York dance scene, contributed three works.
"Studio," performed by Gregory Nuber to a Bach score, was a dreaming classroom exercise for a solitary, tight-muscled dancer.
"Starting Over," danced by Mr.
Nuber and Elizabeth Knock to a taped collage by Mr.
Keuter and Brent Davids, was a familiar look at a man and a woman locked in a relationship.
"Ivy" was a dark blur of a trio, performed by Mr.
Nuber, Ms.
Knock and Erinn Sullivan to music by Ravel.


Four Academics Doing What They Do Best
Equivocation is the first language of the characters in David Gilman's "Ghost in the Machine," at the Perry Street Theater.
A profoundly talky crew of academics, they can turn even the simplest exchange into a debate on the relativity of knowledge.
The play often feels like a Kantian variation on the old "Who's on first?" routine, with Ping-Pong volleys of lines like, "If I were to say the proof is known, who knows?"
This annoying tendency is partly a matter of professionally conditioned reflex for Mr.
Gilman's characters.
But it's also a convenient smoke screen for deceptions ranging from adultery to computer sabotage.
Or maybe not.
Someone, perhaps everyone, in the play is lying.
And since knowledge is inevitably limited by perspective, who's to know?


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Sept.
Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
Aug.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  G.D.P. . . . 2d Qtr.
Revised  New-Home Sales . . .
Aug.
Friday  Personal Income . . .
Aug.


It's Contagious: Clock Ticks on New Labor Crisis
As the National Hockey League and its Players Association resume bargaining in this Canadian metropolis on Monday, their confrontation, at least on the surface, bears an eerie and dreary similarity to that which canceled the conclusion of the 1994 baseball season.
As is the case with baseball, the hockey owners are seeking to control the increase in wages.
The players are resisting what they say is a salary cap.
The owners say they are concerned about the survival of the teams in smaller cities and those that take in less revenue.
The players say the business is healthy over all and that the owners can keep it that way by redistributing some of their revenues among themselves.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Tom McHale, offensive lineman, to a one-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League  LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Agreed to terms with Rich Tocchet, right wing, on a four-year contract.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Assigned Dave Roberts, center; Terry Hollinger, defenseman; and Geoff Sargeant, goaltender, to Peoria of the International Hockey League.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Adflex Solutions Inc., Chandler, Ariz., an initial public offering of 2.1 million shares.
Robertson, Stephens.


To Raise I.Q.'s: Hard, but Possible
To the Editor:
The writer of an obituary of a famous person need not compose a eulogy; just as certainly, he ought to avoid writing a demeaning caricature or uttering misstatements of fact.
Your obituary of the psychologist Richard J. Herrnstein (Sept. 16) states that Dr.
Herrnstein wrote in a 1982 Atlantic Monthly column that because I.Q. was inherited, compensatory education was futile.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  CHAOS GROWS IN HAITIAN CITY
Hundreds of Haitians, emboldened by the deaths of 10 members of the security forces in a firefight Saturday with U.S. marines, ransacked police stations in Cap-Haitien, Haiti's second-largest city.
A1


Man Acquitted of Waldbaum's Arson Is Arrested Again
Leaving the courthouse in Brooklyn a free man, Eric Jackson-Knight had clutched a red Bible.
In a retrial, he had been acquitted of helping to set a supermarket fire that killed six firefighters and for which he had already served 10 years in prison.
And now, he said, he felt as if he were "being born again." It was time to get out of New York City, he said, and away from the troubles that had dogged him here over the years.
That was Aug. 17.
Early yesterday, on a desolate street in Brooklyn, trouble found him once again.


In Mexico, Storm Quietly Gathers
To the Editor:
After having served as a foreign visitor to the Mexican elections in August, I decided to return to Mexico for another month of study and travel.
It was an educational experience to note the calm immediately after the elections and, subsequent to that, a growing restlessness among the people in a number of states who don't want to face six more years of repression and starvation.


Treasury Plans to Auction Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes the regular weekly sale of three- and six-month bills today and the monthly auctions of two- and five-year notes that will take place tomorrow and Wednesday.
Analysts expect the $51.45 billion of Treasury debt this week to weigh on bond prices.
Depending on the outcome of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting, which begins on Tuesday, sales at auction could be well received or dealers could end up holding more in inventory than they care to.


Cuomo Plan Would Cut Medicaid to Aid the Uninsured
Facing criticism from his Republican challenger for rising welfare spending, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo plans to unveil this week a proposal to reduce some Medicaid services for the poor and use the savings to expand health care coverage to uninsured groups like low-income families.
Cuomo administration officials said today that the plan has three major benefits.
It could, they said, help brake the spiraling cost of Medicaid, the government health care program for the poor that, at $5.9 billion, is among the largest expenses in the state's $34.2 billion budget this year.
It could also improve care for uninsured people whose health services are currently provided primarily by emergency rooms.


Don't Confuse CUNY With City College
To the Editor:
Having taught history at Brooklyn College for 40 years and at the Graduate Center of the City University for more than 30 years, I would like to point out omissions and misconceptions about the institution owing to recent discussions (Op-Ed, Sept. 8, and letters, Sept. 15 and 20).


A Rejuvenated Life Magazine Bounces Back
After so many years of near-death experiences that its name began to sound like a joke, Life magazine is having its most profitable year since its rebirth as a monthly in 1978.
The number of advertising pages has risen each month this year, except July, from the corresponding months in 1993, with the increases ranging from 20 percent to 78 percent.
The November issue, with a total of 160 pages, will be the biggest in six years.


Should Children Be Told If Genes Predict Illness?
In their fevered race to isolate the breast cancer gene, researchers often discovered, through indirect tests, which relatives of affected women also had the gene -- and an 85 percent chance of developing the disease.
Many of those relatives were children.
The researchers faced a troubling question: should they tell the parents and children what they knew?
To the families' shock and dismay, some decided not to.


New Role Disorients Haiti Army
Like a neighborhood bully, the Haitian Army has intimidated, beaten and killed Haitians in the last three years.
But, nearly a week after American soldiers and marines landed here, the pecking order has been reversed: thousands of Haitians now defy their army with demonstrations to support the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, under the watchful eyes of the Americans.


Gold's Perch, Close to $400, Is Precarious
The spot price of gold traded Friday at its highest level since Jan. 4, rising to more than $400 an ounce before falling back to $396.10.
And futures contracts are feeling a similar push.
Investors buying gold on Friday for December delivery paid $399.60 an ounce.
Yet whether gold continues its ascent or retreats as it has in three other climbs earlier this year is uncertain.


'Gridlock Alert' Set for the City
The city has issued a "gridlock alert" for midtown Manhattan because of President Clinton's visit to the city, as well as planned motorcades of other heads of state attending the opening of the United Nations General Assembly.
A Transportation Department spokesman, Dwight L. Langham, said motorists were "strongly advised" to use public transportation today.
He also provided broad outlines of the President's itinerary, saying security precautions obviated more specific detail on routes and timing.


Love Songs Reflecting Maturity
"I'm not afraid to love you," Jeff Buckley whispered from the stage of the Supper Club on Saturday night, and he meant it.
At a time when many rock songwriters (and fans) are gingerly about love, Mr.
Buckley's songs plunge into it like a kayak heading for the rapids, riding every surge and whirlpool.
Folky guitar licks drift toward hard-rock stomps, which melt away; the words find more longing than bliss.
Mr.
Buckley's riveting voice reveals every shade of pain and euphoria, of yearning and shame.
He started his set with a display of bravado, volatility and tenderness, singing without words against a hovering guitar chord.
A sustained "oh" glided into earshot, held steady, quavered with the microtonal turns of Indian raga, moved into a blues curlicue and then changed to a liquid, feminine croon.


San Diego Edges the Raiders in a Carney Atmosphere
The knees buckled on both starting quarterbacks today.
But the one with the worse limp won.
Stan Humphries, against doctor's orders, led the San Diego Chargers on a maniacal scoring drive that began on his 20-yard line with 6 minutes 52 seconds left and culminated with him in kicker John Carney's arms.


The Loss When the Cream Can't Rise to the Top
In Defense of Elitism  By William A. Henry 3d  212 Pages. Doubleday. $20.


No Headline
"This is what I call the ragged edge of the genetics and moral community. There are no clear guidelines." -- DR.
CHARLES R. SCRIVER, discussing whether there should be restrictions on the genetic testing of children.  [ A14:1. ]


Mocking MTV Style And Paying Homage to It
Lurching, vertiginous camera work is one hallmark of Wong Kar-wai's "Chungking Express," a film from Hong Kong with a tirelessly capricious sense of style.
While its slender, two-tiered plot links love affairs that happen largely by accident, the film's real interest seems to lie in raffish affectation.
Mr.
Wong has legitimate visual flair, but his characters spend an awful lot of time playing impish tricks.
A film in which a man talks to his dishtowel has an overdeveloped sense of fun.
Mr.
Wong, whose "Days of Being Wild" was shown at the New Directors/New Films series in 1991, displays aggressive energy, but his material is slight.
In the first vignette, a mysterious blond-wigged moll oversees a comically intense drug-smuggling operation while a policeman mopes about the loss of his longtime girlfriend.
These two strangers will eventually fall in love, we are told.


Clinton Seeks to Delay Bosnian Arms Pledge
As he prepared to address the United Nations and got ready for a two-day meeting with President Boris N. Yeltsin, President Clinton began to search yesterday for a way out of a promise that threatens to divide the United States from Russia and other allies over efforts toward Bosnia.
In an afternoon meeting with President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia, Mr.
Clinton began to explore whether the Bosnian Government might be satisfied with a plan that would delay his pledge to seek United Nations approval for a lifting of the arms embargo against his Muslim-dominated forces if the Serbs did not agree to an American-backed peace agreement by Oct. 15.


6-Time Champion Tries A 3-Event Competition
Three years ago, the doctors told Camille Duvall, a six-time professional water skiing champion, that she had better retire.
Whipping around on the waves with a crushed artery in her neck -- suffered in a practice session -- was just too much of a risk.
So Duvall, now 34, competed in tennis tournaments and softball games, went horseback riding and in-line skating.
And this weekend she competed in her first-ever triathlon.


Disorders Follow Clash in Haitian City
Hundreds of Haitian civilians ransacked the four police stations and the central military headquarters here today and marched through the streets with captured rifles, plunging Haiti's second-largest city into chaos for several hours.
The rampage followed Saturday night's shooting of 10 Haitian security personnel by a 10-man United States Marine patrol in a 15-second gunfight outside the main police station.
Marine commanders said today that the shootings were in self-defense after the Haitian security forces brandished their weapons at the patrol.


Aristide Plans To Call Session Of Parliament
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, announced today that he would convene his country's Parliament on Wednesday so it can consider amnesty legislation -- something Haiti's military eagerly desires and a move that is called for under the agreement for the military rulers to yield power.
The session would take place in Haiti, and a spokeswoman for Father Aristide said he hoped that members of Parliament who are Aristide supporters and currently in exile in the United States would be able to return.
Father Aristide is not expected to attend.


Pushing Cigarettes
To the Editor:
Re "Absent Cigarette Sparks Debate Over Stamp" (news article, Sept. 18): In discussing opposition to a new stamp depicting the blues singer Robert Johnson without a cigarette, you cite the position of Thomas Humber, identified only as "president of the National Smokers Alliance," a part-time job he has held since last year.


CHRONICLE
MERYL STREEP says she has finally accepted a role that impresses her children: the voice of Bart's new girlfriend in "The Simpsons."
"It's given me more credibility in my home than anything I've ever done," Ms.
Streep said of the cartoon project, The Associated Press reported.
"Now, as far as they're concerned, I can do no wrong."


A Town Loses Its Hospital, In the Name of Cost Control
This resort town on a barrier island off the Florida Panhandle enjoys silken beaches, good fishing and a boom in real estate.
What Destin does not have these days, to the outrage and despair of many residents, is its own hospital.
Last May the country's largest hospital chain, which had recently acquired the eight-year-old Destin Hospital, closed most of it in the name of efficiency.
The only part left open was the emergency room, which, lacking the support of an intensive-care unit and ready surgeons, could not treat many life-threatening conditions.
As of now, the hospital is completely closed.


Giuliani Wants to Cut Back Consumer-Protection Licenses to Ease Business Burdens
Deciding that New York City no longer needs to exercise its regulatory authority over such things as masquerade balls and drive-in theaters, the Giuliani administration plans to stop requiring consumer-protection licenses for a variety of business activities, officials said yesterday.
As part of its efforts to reduce burdens on businesses, the city would no longer regulate 21 of the 72 categories of businesses now licensed by the city's Department of Consumer Affairs -- from auctioneers to used-car wholesalers, laundries, children's rides, sightseeing guides and movie theaters.


Coca-Cola to Put Another $100 Million Into Russia
The Coca-Cola Company and two bottling partners plan to invest $100 million during the next three years in Russia, where the foreign soft-drink market has long been dominated by a competitor, Pepsico.
Coca-Cola is scheduled to announce its plans today as President Boris N. Yeltsin begins a visit to the United States, largely to woo American executives with a picture of Russia that includes less inflation and lowered barriers to investment and trade.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; With Garth Brooks's help, McDonald's succeeds at its first attempt to sell music with food.
McDONALD'S first-ever music promotion ends this week, having already sold more than seven million compact disks and cassettes at discount prices to customers who buy certain items from the menu.
The promotion, co-sponsored by EMI Records Group North America, and backed by a $20 million national advertising campaign from McDonald's, has sold more than three million copies of a collection of songs by Garth Brooks, the country star, and more than a million copies of collections from both Tina Turner and Elton John.
A collection from the rock group Roxette has sold more than 500,000 copies.


What Happened in the last Seconds of Flight 1016
Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board heard from 25 witnesses last week on what might have caused USAir Flight 1016 to crash into the woods near Charlotte, N.C., on the evening of July 2.
The inquiry into the crash, which killed 37 of the 57 people on board the McDonnell Douglas DC-9, focused on three principal areas: whether air traffic controllers relayed pertinent information to the pilots as quickly and fully as they could have whether the Charlotte airport's severe weather warning system was adequate and whether the pilots took appropriate evasive action quickly enough.


Tough-Decision Time for the Federal Reserve; Meeting Tomorrow Could Raise Rates
Federal Reserve officials appear likely to respond to signs of strong economic growth by raising short-term interest rates again this year, but economists are deeply divided over whether the increase will come when the central bank's committee on interest rates meets on Tuesday.
Producer prices rose at a brisk pace in August, and American factories are operating closer to full capacity than they have in five years.
This has convinced some that the Federal Reserve will nudge interest rates higher in an attempt to prevent the economy from overheating, which would add to inflation.


Essay; The New Disloyalty
Years ago, I brushed my teeth with Kolynos toothpaste.
Then Harry Von Zell or somebody got me to switch brands to Ipana, for the "smile of beauty." I felt vaguely guilty about deserting Kolynos, especially after Ipana squeezed its last.
More recently, I was swept up in the wave of private brands.
No more Bayer, the aspirin that cooled my childhood fevers; I was persuaded by consumerists that the same product sold for less under the name of my drug store, People's; that outfit has since been sold to some chain with forgettable initials and now my medicine chest is filled with strangers to which I feel no attachment and from which I get no sense of familiarity or security.


For 58 Years, a Window on Life's Journey
In 1936, Henry Luce assembled a team in great secrecy for the start-up of what was known only as Project X. The team included a young German photographer named Alfred Eisenstaedt, already known for his portraits of statesmen and his photographs of big news events.
Project X became Life magazine, introduced on Nov. 23, 1936.
And Mr.
Eisenstaedt became one of the great photographers of the century.
The two names became inextricably linked.


Corrections
The chart of major financial indicators atop the Business Digest on Saturday misstated the closing level of the Dow Jones industrial average.
The Dow closed on Friday at 3,831.75, not 3,381.75.


Prisoners Are Piling Up As the Guards Dwindle
NEW YORK CITY'S arrest statistics would be the stuff of a Giuliani television commercial if this were a mayoral election year: misdemeanor arrests by the Police Department are up 8.1 percent over last year; arrests for violations (like wielding a squeegy) are up 36.8 percent; misdemeanor drug arrests have increased 23.5 percent.
Arrests for drug violations (like marijuana possession) are up 31.3 percent.
And that is just for the first five months of the year because it takes the statisticians a while to catch up.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said they would increase low-level drug and quality-of-life arrests, and they have.
By all indications, the public is delighted.


Celebrating an Anniversary in Chinatown


Listen to All Iranian Voices
In dealing with a dictatorship, it is simple prudence to listen to its critics.
This has not been U.S. policy in dealing with Iran's clerical tyranny.
The State Department has shunned all contact with a key opposition group, the People's Mujahedeen, which also happens to be the group most loudly denounced by Iran.
Bothered by this boycott, Congress last year instructed the Administration to prepare an objective written report on all the Iranian opposition groups.
But the State Department still refuses any contact with the People's Mujahedeen, a stance protested the other day by a flock of U.S. senators and nearly a hundred representatives.
Indeed, it is hard to see how any study can be complete as long as the State Department studiously ignores one important component of the Iranian opposition.


The Phone-Law Static; Senate Refusal to Act Imperils Price Cuts, Competition and Funds for New Technology
The abrupt collapse on Friday of efforts in the Senate to overhaul the nation's communications law is likely to give most telephone and cable television companies at least a temporary reprieve from the prospect of increased competition.
Consumers may not notice the difference, but they will be affected.


World Economies


Houston Effler Gets Top Hatch Award
Houston Effler &amp; Partners of Boston took top honors, winning the Best of Show award, at the 34th annual Hatch Awards ceremony, New England's creative awards show sponsored by the Advertising Club of Greater Boston.
At the competition last week in Boston, Houston Effler won the top award for a television campaign for Hannaford Brothers, which operates Stop 'n Shop supermarkets in Maine.
The agency also won 19 other awards.


Michael Kermoyan; Actor, 73
Michael Kermoyan, an actor who starred in revivals of "The King and I," died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 73 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his nephew, Loren Toolajian.


Out of Fashion With, Clinton Campaigns in a Fashion for the Faithful
Politics is just an art.
Campaigning for Democrats when you are a less-than-popular Democratic President, on the other hand, is nuclear physics.
It is the science of embracing a candidate while remaining at arm's length, and giving a Presidential blessing to a man or woman who may not wish to look like your ally.
It is being radioactive without giving everyone else on the dais a lethal dose of political roentgens.
This weekend, President Clinton went to four cities in three days and gave eight speeches on behalf of Democratic candidates, as well as making an appearance with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
If he did not win the Nobel, at least give him a Ph.D.


A Punchless Team Flickers in Spotlight's Glare
The Bears and the Jets.
Trading places.
One team trying to get to .500, the other trying to avoid it.
The Bears succeeded and the Jets failed last night, with the Bears toppling the Jets, 19-7, at Giants Stadium.
Both own 2-2 records now.
And, except for a flashy play here or there, both looked very average.


Jets Lose Their Quarterback, the Game and That Upbeat New Image
The Jets aren't ready for prime time yet.
In fact, they may not even be ready to write a new chapter in their history.
For they evoked tonight all the memories they had tried to put behind them in this season of renewed hope under their rookie head coach, Pete Carroll.


Months of Sparing, Now Simpson's Trial
Ever since the bizarre televised car chase three months ago, the country has been deluged with what seems like every possible detail of the murder case against O. J. Simpson, and now, on Monday morning, the trial will finally begin.
It is almost certain to be one of the most bitter, expensive and widely followed trials in years.
Prosecutors have declined to discuss the particulars of their evidence and strategy publicly, and have tried to minimize the case by saying it is just another of a long series of high-profile trials in recent years.


Tough-Decision Time for the Federal Reserve; New Vice Chairman Stirs the Board's Pot
When Alan S. Blinder worked at the White House, his usefulness to President Clinton went far beyond his job as economic adviser.
Mr.
Clinton, stumped by the math homework of his 14-year-old daughter, Chelsea, sometimes pulled Mr.
Blinder aside at economic policy meetings for advice.
Usually they were "mind-twisting problems" that involved turning words into complicated equations, one Administration official recalled.
"Alan would almost always have the answer," the official said.


What Happened in the last Seconds of Flight 1016
Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board heard from 25 witnesses last week on what might have caused USAir Flight 1016 to crash into the woods near Charlotte, N.C., on the evening of July 2.
The inquiry into the crash, which killed 37 of the 57 people on board the McDonnell Douglas DC-9, focused on three principal areas: whether air traffic controllers relayed pertinent information to the pilots as quickly and fully as they could have whether the Charlotte airport's severe weather warning system was adequate and whether the pilots took appropriate evasive action quickly enough.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; In a Darwinian struggle for viewers, smaller cable channels clamor to get their schedules listed.
NEVER mind, for a moment, that tree falling in that forest.
If a show appears on television, without turning up on any easily accessible schedule, can it be said -- by its producers, its advertisers and its potential audience members -- to exist?
These days, the question is more than just philosophical.
True channel surfers are rare; most viewers depend on daily newspaper listings, Sunday television supplements or TV Guide magazine to make sense of the television universe.


CHRONICLE
In 1972, SHELDON H. SOLOW , the real-estate developer, commissioned the graphics designer Ivan Chermayeff to create the red sculpture of the No. 9 that sits on the sidewalk in front of his building at 9 West 57th Street.
Ever since, Mr.
Solow has been searching for just the right piece of sculpture to put on the West 58th Street side of the building.
At one point he installed a 12-foot Alexander Calder mobile in the space.
"But the wind took it in a way I thought might be dangerous to pedestrians," Mr.
Solow said the other day.
"So I kept looking for something else."


INSIDE
Fear of Plague Ebbs in India
The city of Surat began what officials described as "a return to normalcy" after the panic brought by an outbreak of plague.
Page A6.
Simpson Trial Ready to Begin
After nearly two months of preliminary legal skirmishes and a deluge of publicity, O. J. Simpson will finally go on trial this week.
Page A12.
Relief From Competiition
The demise of a bill to overhaul communications law gives phone and cable companies a reprieve from rivals.
News Analysis, page D1.
Sweden Defeats U.S.
With Pete Sampras unable to continue because of an injury, the United States lost to Sweden in the Davis Cup semifinals.
SportsMonday, C2.


Kohl, Fearing Voters' Apathy, Cites Threat by Ex-Communists
Midway through the campaign for the Oct. 16 national elections, Chancellor Helmut Kohl is so far ahead in the polls that to make sure people turn out to vote he is now running against a threat most Germans thought disappeared five years ago: the former Communists in eastern Germany.
"Freedom or socialism" was Mr.
Kohl's slogan in his first campaign for the Chancellor's office in 1976, at the height of the cold war.
He lost that one to the Social Democrats, but this year he is accusing them of plotting to collaborate with the environmentalist Greens and the marginal former Communists to unseat him after nearly 12 years as Chancellor.


Image Makers Hard at Work In the Selling of a Candidate
Nearly 200 miles from the campaign's headquarters in Harrisburg, Pa., but just next door to the recording studio of the pop singer Cyndi Lauper in midtown Manhattan, media consultants gathered to shape the image of Tom Ridge, the Republican candidate for governor of Pennsylvania.
Like Mr.
Ridge, Ms.
Lauper was using the most sophisticated editing equipment to freshen up her persona -- she with a new music video, he with a new television commercial.


More Violence in Port-au-Prince


Drinking and Driving
Although about one in every three traffic fatalities in the region is alcohol-related, statistics show the fight against drunken driving is making steady progress.
The number of alcohol-related fatalities each year in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut has been cut in half since 1982.
The percentage of drivers involved in fatal crashes found to be legally drunk is also down significantly in all three states.
Law-enforcement and highway safety officials credit tougher laws, the use of designated drivers and the perception of drinking and driving as socially unacceptable as reasons for the drop.
While unable to cite statistics, some officials believe the concept of a designated driver has been most widely accepted by teenagers and young adults.


Clinton's Sermon in Harlem: Don't Desert Cuomo
Rocking to resounding gospel strains, President Clinton went to a black church in the heart of Harlem yesterday to rouse a vital constituency to turn out its vote for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the onetime rival whom he now praised as "the heart that you must not lose."
Mr.
Clinton, in town for political fund-raising and meetings with international leaders before a speech at the United Nations today, took his sermon from an epigraph by the prophet Isaiah printed on the cover of the program at the Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church on West 132d Street: "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles."


Karen Akers's Classically Controlled Pop
In her meticulous presentation of songs and cool, statuesque demeanor, Karen Akers comes closer than any American cabaret performer to treating pop as a close relative of European art song.
Ms.
Akers, who opened a four-week engagement at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) on Tuesday evening, exudes the emotional control of someone who measures by the teaspoon how much to let go and how much to hold back in performances that have the atmosphere of recitals.
More than once in Tuesday's opening-night performance, Ms.
Akers described what she does as "showing songs." And the accompaniments by a drumless trio that featured reed instruments contributed to the evening's semi-classical aura.


Sampras Winces, Larsson Booms and the U.S. Loses
Magnus Larsson leaped over the net with his long arm extended, eager to shake Todd Martin's hand as quickly as possible and get started with the celebration.
It was a celebration few of Larsson's fellow Swedes could have hoped for on Friday, when this Davis Cup semifinal got off to a decidedly pro-American start.
But that was before Jan Apell and Jonas Bjorkman dominated Saturday's doubles; before the ever-fragile Pete Sampras was forced to retire after only one set against Stefan Edberg because of a strained hamstring, and before Larsson imperiously shrugged off Martin's higher ranking and served Sweden straight into its ninth Davis Cup final with a 5-7, 6-2, 6-2, 6-4 victory.


Cubans Get A Taste of Capitalism
This might have been called a market town when there was still anything much to buy.
But as farmers rumbled into it this weekend on loaded-down tractors and their customers came however they could, San Nicolas seemed almost in the midst of a new discovery.
A marketplace of sorts was set up on the long concrete platform that had housed the local "free farmers' market" until 1986, when the ruling Communist Party abolished it and others as a dangerous deviation from the revolutionary course.


A 20-Year Collaboration Finds New Places to Go
Among the sopranos who graced the Broadway musical stage in the 1950's, none has transcended the role of the eternal ingenue more magnificently than Barbara Cook.
Through an inspired 20-year collaboration with the pianist and arranger Wally Harper, she has evolved into a cabaret singer of increasing range and depth who spices up a traditional sweetness with her own version of a mature red-hot mama.
Although the collaboration has had its stagnant moments, it has just now reached a new peak of creativity and intelligence.
Ms.
Cook's new show, which opened a four-week engagement at the Cafe Carlyle on Tuesday evening, finds her exploring her playfully bluesy side with renewed enthusiasm.
Without giving up the wistful ballads that remain the cornerstone of her act, the singer has developed a middle and lower vocal range that brings out her sense of humor and shows off her growing rhythmic adventurousness.


A Comic Takes a Turn In Highbrow Territory
Dudley Moore is riotously funny.
If further proof were needed, he supplied it late on Saturday night at Carnegie Hall, at the end of a long concert and after the official encores.
He is obviously kind and generous as well, or he would not have been there in the first place.
Along with the other soloists of the evening, he was donating his services to benefit Music for All Seasons, a three-year-old organization that presents performances by professional musicians in hospitals, nursing homes, prisons and other residential institutions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Alan S. Blinder has stirred things up at the Fed by suggesting that creating jobs should sometimes take precedence over cutting inflation by a few points.
The new Fed vice chairman has irritated some colleagues with tutorials on the economy.  [ Page D1. ]  At the Fed, officials are likely to respond to signs of strong growth by again raising interest rates this year, but economists are divided whether the bank's rate-setting panel will act tomorrow.  [ D1. ]


Tharp Goes Patriotic At the Kennedy Center
Twyla Tharp combined clever choreography with patriotism of the most benign and idealistic sort in her program of commentary and scenes from works in progress in the Terrace Theater of the Kennedy Center.
Ms.
Tharp has been an artist in residence creating new dances at the Kennedy Center for two months.
Sequences from them were performed to taped accompaniment in the presentation on Thursday night, which she called "Twyla Tharp in Washington: New Works." It will continue through Sunday.


Roosevelt Island As a Stage
The geographical setting for Meredith Monk's impressive new multimedia production was Roosevelt Island, a strip of land in the East River.
But spiritually, this two-part work took place at the intersection of past and present.
"American Archeology No. 1: Roosevelt Island" was offered on Saturday at two sites as the last attraction of the Dancing in the Streets Festival NYC.
It featured a cast of 60 in choreography and music by Ms.
Monk.


Panel Weighs Indian Point 3 And Its Future
Safety concerns have shut the Indian Point 3 nuclear reactor for 19 months.
Now the changing economics of electric power may shut it for good.
Four reactors around the country have already been prematurely retired in the last few years because the electricity they generated cost more than electricity from other sources.
And at a legislative hearing beginning today, several witnesses are expected to testify that Indian Point 3 should also be closed.


A Big Zero for Montana and Chiefs, And the Rams Take Advantage of It
Rams 16, Chiefs 0
Joe Montana, fighting what Chiefs officials called a viral infection, played his worst game of the season and saw his team shut out for the first time in a 15-year career as the Los Angeles Rams shocked the previously unbeaten Chiefs, 16-0, yesterday in rainy Arrowhead Stadium.


Accounts
*
Dahlberg Inc., Golden Valley, Minn., a unit of Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., to Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising, Chicago, to handle the creative and media portions of its Miracle Ear hearing-aids account, with billings estimated at $12 million.
The creative portion was previously handled on a project basis by Campbell Mithun Esty, Minneapolis.
Cash Plus Inc., a Campbell Mithun subsidiary, handled the media portion. *
Coors Brewing Co., Golden, Colo., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, to introduce Keystone Ice, an ice-brewed variety of Coors's Keystone beer, which Foote, Cone already handles.
Billings were not disclosed.
Foote, Cone will also handle the future introductions of amber light and no-alcohol varieties of Keystone.


The Second Time Around For Jennifer Capriati
The desert sun is on the rise and already packing a punch only a lizard could love, and it would be 99 degrees in the shade if there were any, so it's small wonder that the hot acres of outdoor hard courts at the Mission Hills tennis complex are deserted, all except for one.
On its simmering surface, a teen-ager with a rakish purple glaze in her ponytail and a hard-working wad of green gum in her mouth is whacking tennis balls across the net as fast as her male sparring partner can deliver them.
The tear in her graffiti-print shorts is self-inflicted -- tennis shorts as fashion victim -- but the tears under her eyes are not tears of unhappiness from feeling victimized by everyone within staring distance.
This is just plain sweat after a rigorous practice session.


Varying Views on Role Of Haiti General's Wife
The wife of Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras was given much credit by Jimmy Carter in the accord he reached here last week, but people who know her and the Cedras family have expressed doubts about the former President's portrayal of her as willing to die in the face of an invasion and of her crucial role in the negotiations.
In interviews with more than half a dozen women of all classes in the last week, all spoke about General Cedras's wife, Yannick, on the condition that their names not be used, fearing retribution in a country where the Haitian military is still in power.
Attempts to make contact with Mrs.
Cedras for an interview were unsuccessful.


Bridge
Upsets abounded in the Rosenblum Open Teams at the NEC World Championships here on Saturday.
In two cases top-ranked American teams were eliminated by lesser-known compatriots.
The team headed by Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., which represented the United States a year ago in Chile, lost by 29 imps to John Roberts and George Tornay, both of Manhattan, Walt Walvick of McLean, Va., and Steve Lapides of Towson, Md.
And Andy Goodman of San Francisco, with a strong group, lost by 19 to Dan Rotman of Aventura, Fla., and his team.


People
*
Alan Cohen, senior vice president of marketing at NBC, New York, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president.


Koriyama Journal; American Colleges Are Flunking Badly in Japan
Texas A &amp; M University is one of the largest institutions of higher education in the United States and prides itself on the academic programs there.
But that did not impress people four years ago when the college opened a campus in this city north of Tokyo and tried to attract Japanese students.
People "think this is an English-language school," Takeshi Watanabe, a student, said as he stood in the asphalt yard of the nearly deserted campus shortly before it was shut down in August.
"They don't look at it as a university."


For Safety's Sake, Reduce Arms
President Clinton and President Boris Yeltsin of Russia can spur efforts to curb the spread of nuclear arms when they speak at the United Nations today and then meet in Washington.
They can do so only if they recognize that the fewer warheads they have, the better the chances of keeping them out of the hands of other countries.
But a just-completed Pentagon review of America's nuclear posture could get in the way of deeper cuts.
The two leaders need to arrange for closer monitoring of Russia's vast stocks of nuclear material -- to keep any of it from slipping onto the black market.
In view of alarming reports of attempted smuggling, the material needs to be collected at a few well-guarded storage sites while the Russians determine how best to dispose of it.
Unfortunately, Russia's nuclear custodians are resisting any sharing of custody or help from the outside.
Mr.
Clinton needs to persuade Mr.
Yeltsin to break down their resistance.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Thursday about changes in the law regulating radio advertisements that promote leasing misidentified the bill embodying the provisions.
It is the Community Development Banking bill, signed by President Clinton on Friday, not the interstate banking bill, signed earlier in the month.


Lord Shackleton Is Dead at 83; An Ex-Labor M.P. and Minister
Lord Shackleton, a British Cabinet minister who played a key role in Britain's decision to give up its colonial toehold in southwest Arabia, died on Thursday in Lymington in southern England.
He was 83 and lived in London.
Edward Arthur Alexander Shackleton was Minister Without Portfolio in 1967 when the Labor Government of Harold Wilson sent him as a troubleshooter to Aden, a strategically important British colony on the Arabian peninsula's southern coast.


CBS Gives Romance A Chance
Having been dumped from a relationship with the National Football League that lasted 38 years, CBS is doing what many jilted lovers have been known to do: It is escaping into romance novels.
Abandoned by its longtime Sunday-afternoon companion, CBS has decided to walk away from the largely male audience of football and instead court women with a package of new made-for-television movies.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City tomorrow because of the Jewish holiday of Shemini Atzereth.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Abroad at Home; What Weakness Costs
On March 20 of this year the U.N.  commander in Bosnia, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, organized a soccer match in Sarajevo to show how effectively an ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs had stopped their shelling and sniping.
A crowd watched safely in a shell-pocked stadium.
"This is an irreversible process," General Rose said.
"The people of Bosnia have had enough of this senseless killing and destruction of their beautiful country."


MISSION TO HAITI: POLITICS
In an action intended to make it easier for Haiti's exiled President to control legislation that would grant amnesty to military leaders, the United States Embassy announced today that American troops had been ordered to prevent a group of pro-military legislators from taking part in the deliberations.
The National Assembly is to begin a special session on Wednesday to consider amnesty for the military leaders, a step required under the accord that former President Jimmy Carter negotiated with Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras on Sept. 18.


Raveling Is 'Stable'
GEORGE RAVELING, the Southern California basketball coach, who sustained multiple fractures and a collapsed lung in a car accident Sunday, probably won't need surgery but is expected to be hospitalized for up to two weeks.
Raveling, 57, fractured nine ribs, his collarbone and pelvis when his Jeep Cherokee collided with another car near the U.S.C. campus in Los Angeles Sunday morning.


CHRONICLE
As the chairwoman of the Women Writers' Committee of International PEN, MEREDITH TAX has been occupied lately with the plight of Taslima Nasrin, the feminist writer from Bangladesh who has been threatened with death by Muslim fundamentalists who charged that she had defamed Islam.
Ms.
Tax, a writer herself, is also concerned about censorship closer to home.
So on Thursday evening she is to join a group that includes writers, editors, librarians and a kindergarten teacher in reading from children's books that have either been censored or threatened with removal from schools and libraries.
The benefit, at the CBGB Gallery, 313 Bowery, will aid the National Coalition Against Censorship.


Opening-Night Rituals, but With Passion
There is often a kind of rote ritual to opera performance.
Love, jealousy and death are enacted again and again, night after night, to stormy musical accompaniments in the hope that once in a while something real will break through the art and artifice, and that the passion enacted will become passion felt.
Even such hopes, though, are usually put aside for opening night at the Metropolitan Opera, another sort of ritual in which the company honors its wealthiest and most loyal patrons and they return the favor.
Usually no one expects too much from these often fractured evenings, although occasionally, as in Placido Domingo's performance last season in the first act of Wagner's "Walkure," real opera breaks through the ritual.


Anger and Obsession: The Life of Robert Crumb
When the cartoonist Robert Crumb was a little boy, he reveals in Terry Zwigoff's riveting documentary portrait, he was sexually attracted to Bugs Bunny, even carrying around a picture of this buck-toothed rabbit.
Eventually it became crumpled and was all but destroyed after he had his mother iron it for him.
At 12, he developed a new fixation.
He became erotically obsessed with the television character Sheena, Queen of the Jungle.
Although Mr.
Crumb went on to create such famous modern cartoon characters as Fritz the Cat and Mr.
Natural, and helped to found the underground-comic movement, Bugs Bunny and Sheena continued to reverberate through his art.
Bugs Bunny's cheery irreverence was sharpened into a satirical sensibility that has been compared to Daumier and George Grosz.
Sheena's descendants are the devouring Amazonian women portrayed in work that is often savagely misogynistic and pornographically explicit.


H.M.O. Drug Plans Are No Consumer Bargain; An Expensive Swallow
To the Editor:
In view of the debate regarding what sacrifices should be made to achieve universal health care, I note Merck &amp; Company's contribution:


Mexican Election Loses Some Luster as Fraud Is Uncovered
The record Mexico compiled in conducting what many observers said were the first free and clean elections in decades is being tarnished by irregularities in several areas and accusations that political parties are bargaining over election results.
An election tribunal in the northern state of Nuevo Leon last Tuesday annulled the results in 42 precincts in the important industrial city of Monterrey because of irregularities.
As a result, the narrow mayoral victory of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI, was overturned.


Why Health Care Fizzled: Too Little Time and Too Much Politics
Everyone in the White House, in Congress and in the lobbyists' offices in Washington now agrees that major health care restructuring is dead for 1994.
But people disagree on precisely what killed what might have been the boldest legislative initiative in decades.
Talking to those involved in the debate that consumed the first 18 months of the Clinton Administration is like taking depositions from witnesses in a complicated legal case: everything depends on where they stand.


A Scramble for Free Food in Haiti


DePaul on Probation
DePaul University's basketball program and its coach, JOEY MEYER, have been placed on probation for a year, the first time the school has been penalized by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Meyer's salary also has been frozen after the N.C.A.A. determined that the coaching staff was lax in monitoring the activities of a freewheeling booster who provided free meals, lodging and other illicit benefits to players and their families from 1985 to 1989.


Spanish Economy Picking Up, but Many People Still Suffer
After suffering the ravages of the deep European recession, the Spanish economy is perking up and should grow at a reasonable rate over the next several years.
Exports are surging.
Corporate profits are improving.
Inflation is under control.
But none of that means much to Soledad Arevalo Sastre.
She recently lost her job as a history and geography teacher, has little hope of finding a new one and is living on unemployment insurance.
She does not expect the economic recovery to change the outlook for her or for most of the 3.7 million other Spaniards who are out of work, a staggering 24.3 percent of the work force, nearly four times the current rate of 6.1 percent in the United States.


New Woe for Channel Tunnel Stock
The Channel Tunnel is leaking, and as usual it is the investors in the project who are getting soaked.
Shares in Eurotunnel, the company that operates the 31-mile undersea link between Britain and France, plunged today after news reports over the weekend that water was seeping into the tunnel and not draining properly.


Corrections
A picture caption in Weekend on Friday with a film review of ". . . and God Spoke" reversed the names of the actors shown.
Stephen Rappaport was on the left, with Michael Riley.


Accounts
*
Dow Plastics, Midland, Mich., to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Toronto, to handle the consolidated North American communications activities for its fabricated products group's construction materials business.
D.M.B.&amp; B. previously handled the Canadian portion while the Jayme Organization, Cleveland, handled the United States portion. *
Outfooters L.L.C., Ramsey, N.J., to CCM Inc., New York, to introduce its Jan Sport footwear line.
Billings were not disclosed.


Theater Club Offers Several Premieres
New works by Terrence McNally and Christopher Durang are to open, respectively, the Stage 1 and Stage 2 fall season of Manhattan Theater Club at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
Nathan Lane stars in Mr.
McNally's "Love! Valour! Compassion!," the story of eight men who gather over the course of three holiday weekends, beginning on Oct. 11.
"Durang Durang," a collection of past and new pieces by Mr.
Durang, begins on Oct. 25.
The season will include "After-Play," Anne Meara's first theater work (Jan. 10, Stage 2); "Holiday Heart" by Cheryl L. West (Jan. 17, Stage 1); "Night and Her Stars" by Richard Greenberg (March 28, American Place Theater); Arthur Laurents's "Radical Chic" (May 16, Stage 2), and "Sylvia," by A. R. Gurney (May 2, Stage 1).
Sarah Jessica Parker and Charles Kimbrough are the stars of the Gurney play.


The Semantics Game May Be the Only Game in Town
This was supposed to be the last week of the season.
This was supposed to be the week that the Yankees prepared for their first post-season appearance since 1981, that the Cleveland Indians ended their post-1954 post-season drought.
This week was supposed to be filled with games that would determine the makeup of the playoffs.
This weekend Cincinnati and Houston were supposed to be playing for the first championship of the National League's new Central Division.
In other season-ending series, Atlanta was going to play Montreal for the National League East championship and Los Angeles was going to try to hold off San Francisco for the N.L.
West title.
The league's first wild-card playoff team was going to emerge from those final series.


Skeptical and Confused, Mozambicans Prepare to Vote
After four centuries of colonialism and two decades of one-party rule, Amelia Filipe explained with a preacher's passion to the villagers she had assembled in this lush palm grove, they were about to have the chance of a lifetime.
"You are going to choose your leaders," she said.


Lotus and Oracle in a Deal On Marketing Development
The Lotus Development Corporation's hot-selling Notes groupware package won another strong endorsement yesterday when the Oracle Corporation, the industry's leading maker of data-base software, agreed to a strategic marketing and development alliance.
The agreement will bring together Notes and Oracle's powerful multimedia data base program, the Oracle Media Server.
It also fueled speculation that the two companies might be candidates for a merger.


Scimed Life Systems Inc.(SMLS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Paul C. Echols, 50, Musicologist, Dies
Paul C. Echols, a musicologist, conductor and director of the Mannes Camerata, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 50.
The cause was a brain tumor, said Charles Kaufman, the dean of the Mannes College of Music.


Mercantile Stores Stock In 30% Fall as Talks End
The Mercantile Stores Corporation said yesterday that it had ended talks with a potential acquirer, causing an avalanche in its stock price.
Mercantile shares plunged $16.375, to $38.75, on the New York Stock Exchange, where its fall of nearly 30 percent led the exchange's decliners.


In Pennsylvania, Feeling the Consequences of One Vote
President Clinton's budget, increasing taxes and cutting Federal spending in a bid to reduce the deficit, is a hot topic across the nation this fall as Republicans seek to oust enough Democratic incumbents to seize control of the House of Representatives for the first time in 40 years.
The test case is Pennsylvania's 13th Congressional District.
The target is Representative Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky, a first-term Democrat.
Sometimes a Congressional race turns on a single vote among the hundreds any member casts on the floor of the House, and so it is here and now.


Live Performances Enlivened by Some Short Film Clips
The X factor in the various concert accouterments suggested in the American Symphony Orchestra League's notorious report "Americanizing the American Orchestra" is artistry.
Why, after all, drag down a good performance, or compound a mediocre one, with rum graphics, lighting or whatever?
But Allan Miller, the president of Symphony Space and, not incidentally, an Academy Award-winning film producer, showed on Friday evening that short, charming film clips could enhance good live performances.
This was the first of three Camera Concerts presented, over the weekend, by Symphony Space and the Concert Artists Guild and performed by artists from the San Juan Islands Chamber Music Festival in the State of Washington.


H.R.A. Chief Tells Council Of Deep Cuts
The head of the city's Human Resources Administration told a City Council committee yesterday that she had been ordered to cut the agency's budget by an additional $90 million.
But as she was questioned, the H.R.A.
Commissioner, Marva L. Hammons, offered a portrait of an agency that has not yet adjusted even to the cuts already imposed this year.


Alpheus C. Beane, Investment Banker And Executive, 84
Alpheus C. Beane, a Wall Street investment banker for more than five decades, died last Wednesday in Aurora, Colo., where he was vacationing.
He was 84.
Mr.
Beane, who lived in Delray Beach, Fla., where he had moved from Greenwich, Conn., in 1978, died of heart failure, his family said.


As Scores Skyrocket, Guess Who's Unhappy
Scoring is up, and so is Mike Nolan's blood pressure.
And the Giants' defensive coordinator isn't alone.
Rumor has it that defensive coordinators throughout the National Football League are starting group therapy sessions to help them cope with the new rule changes that are leading to touchdowns by the bunches.


New York Looks to S. I. Site to Revive Port
The Howland Hook Marine Terminal on Staten Island was once a prosperous shipping hub, but since 1986 it has been virtually abandoned.
Every so often, a maintenance crew cleans and powers up the cranes that used to hoist containers on and off freighters.
The multilegged machines are put through a lonely pantomime of the chores that they once did, in the hope that someday New York City will again be a world-class port and they will be needed.
That day may now be coming.
Howland Hook is scheduled to reopen by December, giving the city perhaps its last chance to win back some of the shipping business that fled en masse across New York Harbor to New Jersey in the 1960's.


Nautica Enterprises Inc.(NAUT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Chess
Mikhail Botvinnik complained during the first of his three world championship matches with Vasily Smyslov, in Moscow in 1954, that his great rival was not only prepared to confront his usual openings repertory but was also primed for Botvinnik's surprises.
This must mean, so Botvinnik inferred, that his second was divulging his secret analysis to the enemy.
Accordingly, Botvinnik labored without the help of a second in subsequent matches with Smyslov.
Betrayal is not unknown on the highest levels of chess, but there can be other explanations.
In the case of Botvinnik and Smyslov, the brilliant Smyslov was quite capable of predicting the course chess theory would take and the spin Botvinnik might give it.
And even if he was surprised, Smyslov was extraordinarily adept at thinking up solutions over the board.


Broad Market Mixed, but Dow Gains 17.49
Stock prices closed mixed yesterday in advance of today's Federal Reserve policy-making meeting on interest rates.
Almost one stock advanced for every one that declined on the New York Stock Exchange.
Economists are split over whether the Fed will act today to raise short-term interest rates a sixth time this year, a move that would hurt bonds and most stocks.
Some economists, citing the higher-than-expected Producer Price Index for August, say the Fed will raise rates.
Others say the Fed will wait for more data.


Donaldson Co.(DCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
The actor BRONSON PINCHOT has been a serious collector since age 11, when he did chores for neighbors so he could buy first editions of the Oz books and posters of the "Wizard of Oz" movie.
Fifteen years later, when he became an instant celebrity by starring in the television comedy "Perfect Strangers," his tastes expanded.
"I began to heavily collect original letters and first editions of Victor Hugo and Charles Dickens because I formed an attachment to those two dudes," Mr.
Pinchot, now 35, said yesterday.


Eggs on Feet and Far From Shelter, Male Penguins Do a Shuffle
EVER since explorers at the turn of the century surmised that the emperor penguin must breed during the coldest part of Antarctica's deadly winter, this charming but peculiar species has inspired wonder and curiosity.
But after 83 years of penguin watching, scientists are still encountering surprises, including a recent discovery made with a night-vision device that revealed emperor penguins to be even hardier than had been supposed.
Knowledge of the winter behavior of emperor penguins has come slowly because it is hard for human beings to survive under such conditions, much less conduct scientific research.
High winds, temperatures around minus 60 degrees Fahrenheit, round-the-clock darkness and frequent sudden blizzards make the Antarctic habitat of the emperors, the Ross Sea and McMurdo Sound, dangerous places in winter.


Turner's Possible Role in N.B.C. Talks
Although Ted Turner, chairman of the Turner Broadcasting System Inc., has not publicly acknowledged an interest in acquiring NBC, the television industry has begun assuming that he would like to buy the network from the General Electric Company.
But industry experts say Mr.
Turner would encounter regulatory and financial obstacles in trying to complete such an acquisition.
Indeed, one NBC executive, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that General Electric and NBC considered Mr.
Turner's ambitions so unrealistic that they did not take him to be a serious bidder.


Right to Life Nominee Looks Beyond Albany; Diverting Votes as a National Message
For all the ballot-proven fervor of the Right to Life Party in state elections, its dedication this gubernatorial year is extra heated and targeted to teach a larger national lesson to Republicans intent on retreating strategically from the politics of the abortion issue.
The party's dapper, affable gubernatorial candidate, Robert T. Walsh, is incensed not just by the fact of legalized abortion but also by the party's former favorite son, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Right to Life leaders say the Senator epitomizes this retreat in his masterminding the nomination of State Senator George E. Pataki as the Republican gubernatorial candidate.


Restoration of Long Island Sound Is Pledged
The top Federal environmental official came to Long Island Sound yesterday with pledges that its cleanup is a priority -- as long as Congress comes through with money to do the job.
"Long Island Sound is a national treasure and one of the nation's most important waterways," said Carol M. Browner, administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, who joined Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York and Eunice S. Groark, the Lieutenant Governor of Connecticut, in signing a joint agreement to restore and protect the Sound, estimated to cost $7 billion over 20 years.


High Court to Review Kansas City School Desegregation Case
The Supreme Court announced this evening that it would review a long-running Kansas City school desegregation case as well as seven other new cases in its new term, which does not formally begin until next Monday.
The Justices, who met privately for much of the day to consider the more than 1,700 new appeals that have accumulated since June, when the Court's last term ended, gave no explanation for their unusual early evening announcement.


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co.(NWSW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Assessing Responsibility


A Parliament That Looks Like Sweden
Sweden's election last week put the Social Democrats back in office after three years of conservative rule.
It also brought the share of women in the Swedish Parliament to 41 percent, the highest in the world.
Europe's Nordic countries set a high standard for sexual equality in politics.
The Finnish and Norwegian Parliaments are both 39 percent female; the Danish percentage is nearly as high.
Even before this election, the Swedes had 33 percent.
Sweden's big jump this time resulted from the Social Democrats' insistence that every other candidate on its list be female.
With counting nearly complete, at least 80 Social Democratic women have been elected.
Adding those from other parties, the new Parliament will include 142 women.


No Way to Pick a Judge
Talk about cozy.
As a member of the New York State Assembly, George Friedman sponsored a bill this summer creating a new state Supreme Court judgeship in the Bronx.
Wearing a second hat as chairman of the regular Bronx Democratic Party organization, Mr.
Friedman helped orchestrate the party's judicial convention, which met last week to nominate candidates for that new judgeship and two others at stake in the Bronx this November.
Now, guess who is going to be a judge?
None other than Mr.
Friedman.
The convention, controlled by party leaders, chose him for one of the three coveted openings, virtually insuring his election in the overwhelmingly Democratic borough.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  MILITARY POLICE MOVE IN  American military police visited Haitian police, drawing thousands of excited people into the streets of Port-au-Prince to rejoice in the discomfort of the Haitian officers.
A1


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Patterns
Isaac Mizrahi Plays Himself
Not since Richard Avedon and Diana Vreeland were brought to the silver screen in "Funny Face," in 1957, has the fashion industry been as immortalized, scrutinized and satirized on film as it will be in the coming months.


NATIONAL HEALTH PROGRAM, PRESIDENT'S GREATEST GOAL, DECLARED DEAD IN CONGRESS
National health insurance legislation, President Clinton's grandest legislative goal and the dominating issue before Congress all year, officially died today.
After the legislation had staggered under its own weight and the withering attacks of Republicans and insurance interests for months, Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, bowed to the inevitable and announced that Congress would not pursue the issue any further this year.


Insect Extremes


Market Place; After a summer stock surge, Helene Curtis still has doubters.
THIS spring, when Helene Curtis Industries' common stock was limping along below $25 a share, down from more than $47 in early 1993, analysts were divided about whether a major rebound was in sight.
Since then there has been only uplifting news -- a large investment by Shamrock Holdings Inc. disclosed in May, strong earnings for the company's first quarter ending May 31, the ripple effect of Johnson &amp; Johnson's willingness in August to pay handsomely for the Neutrogena Corporation, a smaller rival, and, yesterday, earnings of 70 cents a share for the second quarter ending Aug. 31, far above the Wall Street mean forecast of 53 cents a share.
Investors who bought the stock have been rewarded.
After rising $1.875 to finish at $36.125 in trading yesterday, the shares are at their highest level in more than a year.
But the company still faces doubters on Wall Street who expect the stock to run out of steam long before it breaks $40 unless the entire stock market takes off, pulling Helene Curtis and its rivals along for the ride.


Breaking the Color Barrier in Tennis
He came from a poor black family.
He became a sports legend.
Then he encountered tragedy.
No, this is not the football star whose murder trial threatens to be a sorry circus.
This particular legend was a tennis champion, and his triumphant life is honored tonight in a moving HBO Sports documentary called "Arthur Ashe: Citizen of the World."
The hourlong film, written by Frank Deford and narrated by Ossie Davis, unabashedly celebrates a life of stunning accomplishment and unfailing dignity.
Admittedly, the overall approach borders on canonization.
Mr.
Ashe no doubt had his flaws, but few people were more adept at keeping them under wraps.
He was, with remarkable consistency, that increasingly rare creature in the modern world: a gentleman.


Providing a Haven for the Neglected and Rejected
We tend to think of musical history as a serene, all-knowing judge, separating, over the generations, the gold from the dross.
History leaves us with Beethoven and filters away Czerny; it elevates Wagner and relegates most of Meyerbeer to a specialty taste.
And its verdicts, at least during the last 50 years, have tended to seem quite wise.
Is there anybody clamoring for a staged revival of Michael William Balfe's once wildly popular opera, "The Bohemian Girl"?
But Leon Botstein, as music director of the American Symphony Orchestra since 1991, has opened a court of appeals.
His brand of "thematic programming" is often concerned with the fallibility of history's judgment.
Mr.
Botstein reaches over history's head to the audience, and asks it to reconsider the neglected and rejected.
Mr.
Botstein urges his listeners to hear the case from the beginning, without being prejudiced by the defendant's previous record.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about shopping in White Plains misstated the opening schedule for a mall on the east edge of downtown that is to be anchored by Nordstrom and Neiman-Marcus.
The opening is scheduled for the spring of 1995.


Japan Plans Last-Ditch Visit To Avert U.S. Trade Curbs
With a deadline looming on Friday in trade talks with the United States, Japan's trade minister will leave for Washington on Tuesday in a last-ditch effort to avert sanctions against his country.
Ryutaro Hashimoto, the Minister of International Trade and Industry, is expected to meet on Wednesday with Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, and probably with Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown, officials here said today.
Mr.
Hashimoto and Mr.
Kantor spoke by telephone this morning.


2 Candidates Plan to Debate
The two major candidates for State Attorney General said yesterday they want to debate each other before the Nov. 8 election.
They still have to work out how many debates, when, where and who else may take part.
The Democratic candidate, Karen S. Burstein, sent her Republican rival, Dennis C. Vacco, a letter yesterday asking him to agree to three debates.


A Lawyer Warns About Vigilantism
The Abuse Excuse  And Other Cop-Outs, Sob Stories and Evasions of Responsibility  By Alan M. Dershowitz  341 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.
Erik and Lyle Menendez admit they gunned down their parents as they watched television, but say they acted in self-defense after suffering years of sexual and emotional abuse at the hands of their father.
After a six-month trial, the juries for both brothers deadlock, unable to reach a verdict.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A 5-year-old tries to do for Welch's what Mikey did for Life cereal.
IS Travis Tedford the next Rodney Allen Rippy?
The next Mason Reese?
Perhaps even the next Mikey?
Those with long memories -- or lives spent on Madison Avenue -- might recognize the last three as children who achieved measures of fame during the 1960's and 1970's as diminutive pitchmen in commercials aimed at adults.
Now Welch Foods Inc. and its agency, Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, are gambling that the small shoulders of Travis, a 5-year-old actor, will support a big campaign for the Welch's brand of grape juices, jellies and other products.


Hampton May Play Sunday
It still isn't clear whether the Giants' Pro Bowl running back, Rodney Hampton, will be able to play Sunday against the Saints in New Orleans.
Coach Dan Reeves said Hampton was doubtful for the game, but didn't rule him out.
One reason he won't is that Hampton, who was in shorts and a sweatshirt, ran with the team today, though, he didn't participate in drills.


Capriati's Return Delayed
Jennifer Capriati confirmed yesterday that her comeback, intended for next week in Europe following a yearlong layoff from competitive tennis, has been postponed because of a groin strain she re-aggravated during a practice session two weeks ago.
Capriati was uncertain when she would make her comeback but said she has every intention of resuming this year.
The 18-year-old Capriati, unranked and unseeded because of her absence from the Tour since a first-round loss at the 1993 United States Open, announced last week that she had received wild cards into the main draws of the European Indoors at Zurich and the Porsche Grand Prix at Filderstadt, Germany.


China Ready To End Feud On Missiles
China and the United States are making "a serious push" to resolve their dispute over China's sale of ballistic missile technology to Pakistan, a Western diplomat said here today.
The Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, Liu Huaqiu, and the United States Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, are going to Washington this week to take part in an intense round of negotiations at the State Department aimed at breaking the 13-month deadlock over China's missile technology sales and the American trade sanctions that followed.


A Belgian Is Backed For Top NATO Job
The Belgian Foreign Minister, Willy Claes, won the backing today of all 16 NATO members to succeed the late Manfred Worner as secretary general after the last remaining challenger withdrew.
NATO officials said Mr.
Claes, 55, a Flemish Socialist who has held a succession of top Government jobs over the past two decades, would be formally named by NATO foreign ministers either in New York on Thursday or at a later meeting at the Brussels headquarters.


Haiti Update
In a speech at the UNITED NATIONS, President Clinton said the United States would lift travel, trade and most other sanctions against Haiti to hasten the rebuilding of the impoverished country and urged other nations to do the same.
But Administration officials said the lifting of the sanctions would not go into effect immediately.
In PORT-AU-PRINCE, American military police began setting up in Haitian police stations and their presence drew thousands of excited people into the streets of to jeer at Haitian police officers.


Corrections
The dance listing in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday misstated performance times for the Lyons Opera Ballet.
It will perform at the Joyce Theater in Manhattan tonight through Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.


Treasury Issues' Prices Are Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in a quiet session as the market awaited the outcome of a meeting that will determine the Federal Reserve's monetary strategy for the next few months.
For weeks, dealers and investors have been split over the timing of another increase in interest rates by the Fed, which has already raised rates five times this year.
Some expect a move to increase short-term rates to take place during a meeting of the Fed's policy-making committee that starts today, while others lean toward an action after the November meeting, which would allow the Fed time to assess the most recent economic data to see if the last few increases have worked their way through the economy.


Wolves Sign Marshall
The Minnesota Timberwolves said yesterday they have agreed to terms with DONYELL MARSHALL, the Big East player of the year from Connecticut, on a multiyear contract.
Marshall, a 6-foot-9 forward, was the fourth selection over all in June's draft.


H.M.O. Drug Plans Are No Consumer Bargain; Perot's Good Idea
To the Editor:
Like many other Americans, I am relieved that the health care bill as proposed has failed.
Aside from my opposition to government-controlled or mandated insurance as a business owner, the idea of implementing a gargantuan plan without any tests or careful surveys of the general population is reckless and bound to waste billions of taxpayer dollars.


Refugees Fleeing Plague Carry It South to Bombay
At the height of the evening rush hour today, two young men moved with faltering steps through the dense crowd at Victoria Terminus, the railway station here.
When they reached the medical table in front of platform 9, they seemed on the verge of collapse.
In the register kept by the duty doctor, Prashan Nayak and S. K. Jainuddin, textile workers from the pneumonic plague-afflicted city of Surat, were listed as the 23d and 24th patients of the day.


Patterns
Isaac Mizrahi Plays Himself
Not since Richard Avedon and Diana Vreeland were brought to the silver screen in "Funny Face," in 1957, has the fashion industry been as immortalized, scrutinized and satirized on film as it will be in the coming months.


How Fashion Killed The Unloved Waif
If Cathy, the comic strip that's a litmus test of working women's views, is any indication, someone in fashion has some explaining to do.
For two weeks, Cathy's been whining to sadistic retail sales clerks about the new glamour, with the clerks gloating: "It's over! Comfy is out!" and "Out with last year's bare-faced waifs!"
Cathy tracks fashion as if there was an industry conspiracy.
Usually, she's wrong.
There is no Yalta summit of fashion's heads of state.
Considering what a big business fashion is, and how much money can be wasted when things go wrong, the industry is frighteningly haphazard.
That's why so few fashion houses can successfully go public.
Fashion, with its meandering course and dependence on fickle customers with fluctuating bank accounts, doesn't tolerate the sort of business plans that make other industries more predictable and bankable.


People
*
Elizabeth A. Torlee was named president and chief executive at Bozell Palmer Bonner Advertising, Toronto, succeeding Michael Palmer, who continues as chairman.
Ms.
Torlee was previously president at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, Toronto. *
Tom Collinger, a senior vice president at the Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, was named to assume responsibilities for the agency's direct marketing and promotion services department from Jerry Reitman, 56, an executive vice president, who will retire at the end of the year.


Bosnians Easing Demand for Lifting of Arms Embargo
The Bosnian Government, in a concession that will be welcome to President Clinton, is ready to relax its insistence that an arms embargo on Bosnia be lifted as soon as possible, a senior Bosnian official said today.
The official, Kemal Muftic, a top aide to President Alija Izetbegovic, said the President would set out new ideas on the embargo in a speech on Tuesday to the United Nations General Assembly.
These ideas, he said, would demonstrate "some flexibility and softening in our position in the interests of compromise."


S.E.C. Wants Mutual Fund Risk Disclosed
Concerned about the increased riskiness of certain mutual fund portfolios, the Securities and Exchange Commission recommended today that fund sponsors be required for the first time to provide shareholders with some quantification of that risk.
The commission also suggested a tighter limit on portfolio investments that cannot easily be sold.
The proposals, which the commission could carry out on its own, are aimed specifically at investments known as derivatives, because their value is derived from an underlying security, but one result would be a new dimension of disclosure by the entire fund industry.


The 49ers' New Runaway Train Derails the Saints
There were only a few seconds left in Sunday afternoon's game, New Orleans was driving toward the end zone, and a touchdown would give the Saints an upset over San Francisco on 49er turf.
Under normal circumstances, 49er Coach George Seifert and the fans would have loved a turnover.
The offense could then run out the clock and San Francisco could escape with a 17-13 victory, after trailing by 13-10 at halftime.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline for Nasdaq Stocks
Bucking a trend that has seen the short-selling of stocks rise to record levels at exchanges around the country, the volume of uncovered short sales of Nasdaq stocks fell for the first time in four months, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Nasdaq said that the number of shares borrowed and sold short fell 1 percent during the month ended Sept. 15, to 840.5 million shares.
That compares with 849.2 million sold short during the previous month.
The decline marked only the second monthly decrease this year.


THE HEALTH CARE DEBATE: NEWS ANALYSIS -- Autopsy on Health Care; Many Had Hand in Killing the Legislation, But a Surly Electorate Just May Not Care
Who killed the health care overhaul?
It is a question of more than academic interest six weeks before Election Day, with the voters in a surly mood, angry with Congress and with incumbents in general.
But many analysts say that, like every other aspect of the two-year struggle over restructuring health care, the answer is muddled.
As in "Murder on the Orient Express," most of the suspects had their hands on the knife at one time or another: a divided Democratic Party on Capitol Hill, an overreaching Clinton Administration, a fiercely partisan class of Republicans, an insatiable collection of interest groups.


N.H.L. Talks Strain to Beat The Deadline
Negotiators for the National Hockey League and its players association met for about four hours today at union headquarters in an attempt to reach a new collective bargaining agreement that would allow the season to begin as scheduled on Saturday night.
No agreement was reached, but Commissioner Gary Bettman said the two sides would meet again here on Tuesday.
He said he didn't want to discuss details of the conversations and didn't want to label them positive or negative.


Early Beckett Play In a Belated Debut
Samuel Beckett's first full-length play, "Eleutheria," previously unperformed, received its first staged reading yesterday afternoon at the home of Barney Rosset, a friend and publisher of the author.
The play was read by a group of 13 actors under the direction of Peter Craze.
In the audience were about 100 invited guests, including actors and directors as well as Beckett scholars.
The unauthorized reading, initiated by Mr.
Rosset, was to take place at the New York Theater Workshop, but because of legal complications resulting from the objection of the playwright's estate, the event was moved to a studio space in Mr.
Rosset's apartment on Fourth Avenue in the East Village.
Although this made it a quasi-private affair, there was still some nervousness about legal questions, and a New York Times photographer was not allowed to take pictures of the event.


School Supervisors Have the Responsibility Without the Pay
To the Editor:
"An Honest Day's Garbage Collection" (editorial, Sept. 20) praises Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for his negotiation of a new contract with the Uniformed Sanitationmen's Association.
You say there is but one contract left, with the correction officers, and then New York City will be ready to begin the next round of negotiations, starting with the police.


Growing Peril on South African Roads: Wave of Carjackings
During the bleakest days of apartheid, when schoolchildren were shot for picketing and funerals were used as a forum for protest, township militants often forced motorists into funeral processions all in the name of the struggle.
Now the struggle has apparently been won, but the practice of diverting motorists continues, this time in a context that has nothing to do with politics.


Simpson Trial Starts With Search For Jurors Free for Next 6 Months
The laborious process of finding 12 citizens who can try O. J. Simpson fairly and impartially on murder charges, despite the torrent of fact, rumor and falsehood that has inundated them over the last three months, began today before Judge Lance A. Ito.
This afternoon, 15 weeks after Nicole Brown Simpson and a friend, a waiter named Ronald L. Goldman, were slashed and stabbed to death in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles and Mr.
Simpson was charged with the killings, Judge Ito and the lawyers in the case began reviewing the first jury candidates, culled from lists of drivers and registered voters in Los Angeles County.
Of utmost concern at this stage were not attitudes toward guilt or innocence, but whether jurors could serve -- including some amount of sequestering, the judge said -- for what could be a six-month trial.


Bosnia: Now, Persuade Europe
For two and a half years, Bosnia's main goal has been an immediate end to the lopsided arms embargo.
The Clinton Administration has wanted President Alija Izetbegovic to compromise.
Now, Mr.
Izetbegovic is reportedly ready to settle for a U.N. vote this fall to lift the embargo next spring unless a peace agreement is reached.
Mr.
Clinton must now work hard to get Britain, France and Russia to approve a Security Council resolution implementing this compromise.
His meeting today with Boris Yeltsin is an opportunity to lobby for Russian support.


Unidentified Jogger Pregnant When Slain
The jogger found strangled last week in a truck trailer in the West Village was 11 or 12 weeks pregnant, the police said yesterday.
Despite earlier reports, they said that there was no evidence of rape.
In addition, the police said that about 100 people have told them the woman looks familiar; that a check of her fingerprints showed she had no criminal record; that they had sent her description to police departments around the United States, and that they are working on the case with the F.B.I. and other agencies.


For Democrats, Voter Turnout Slips in South
In a troubling sign for the Democrats, their party suffered pronounced losses in turnout in the South during this year's midterm primaries, according to an analysis made public today.
The analysis, by the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, found that the overall turnout in statewide primaries was an estimated 19 percent of eligible voters, about the same level as in 1990.


Oxford Industries(OXM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2


Auto Repair Shop Called Hub Of Cocaine-Trafficking Ring
The W&amp;G Auto Repair shop seemed like just another little business in a gritty section of Long Island City, Queens, where mechanics pounded out dents and overhauled engines.
But investigators said yesterday that the owner of the shop, Freddy Lasso-Reina, had a lucrative specialty: building secret compartments into ordinary Ford and Volvo sedans for transporting cocaine and drug money throughout the country.


He Shoots, He Scores! By Pony Express
It was, according to the winning patron, "the most exciting goal in the two and a half thousand years polo has been played." That assessment came from Doug Matthews, whose Aspen team beat Peter Brandt's White Birch squad in the final game of the United States Open polo championships at the Meadowbrook field at Bethpage State Park on Long Island Sunday.
"The stands just exploded," Matthews said yesterday, recalling the closing seconds of the sixth and final chukker when his teammate Carlos Gracida, chasing his own long shot from a midfield throw-in, galloped 150 yards, surging ahead and overtaking a defender at the endline.
The move came just in time for Gracida to hit an arcing 20-yard lateral shot under the neck of the rival's mount to score the goal that sent the game into sudden-death overtime.


A Nonfamily McDonnell Helmsman
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation yesterday named Harry C. Stonecipher as chief executive and president, ending 102 years of family leadership and capping a five-year restructuring program that has restored the St.
Louis-based aerospace company to health.
Mr.
Stonecipher, who is 58, was chairman and chief executive of the Sundstrand Corporation, a maker of aircraft components and industrial power systems in Rockford, Ill., that has come back under his leadership from a devastating military overbilling-fraud scandal in the late 80's that cost the company $115 million in fines.


Justice's Order Delays Merger Of Housing and City Police
A State Supreme Court justice issued a restraining order yesterday to delay Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to merge the housing police with the New York City Police Department, giving her time to determine if the merger is legal under state law.
But Paul A. Crotty, the city's Corporation Counsel, said he would immediately appeal the order in the hope that the merger could go into affect as scheduled, on Saturday.


Extinction of the Fittest May Be the Legacy of Lost Habitats
THE best adapted and most dominant species of wild plants and animals may be, paradoxically, the most vulnerable to long-term extinction as a result of habitat loss, say ecologists in the United States and Britain.
But since the species do not actually go extinct for 50 to 500 years after the fragmentation of their habitat dooms them, the researchers report, natural areas may now look healthier than they really are.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  The Clinton Administration and the Federal Reserve proposed to require banks and savings institutions to collect data on the race, ethnicity and gender of small-business loan recipients.
But regulators also planned to abandon proposed formulas for measuring the proportion of loans issued in poor communities.  [ Page D1. ]


Analogic (ALOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


On My Mind; The Buenos Aires Massacres
The two massacres do not appear on the agenda as presidents and prime ministers gather in New York to attend the new session of the U.N.
General Assembly.
But the plain reality is that they are the essence of what the U.N. is supposed to deal with: aggression and expanding threats to international peace and security.


Twin Sees Herself Stymied
BY most objective measures, Dr.
Julie A. Swain is, like her twin sister, a stunning success.
She is the chief of cardiovascular surgery at the University of Nevada School of Medicine, a member of a Food and Drug Administration committee that evaluates new devices, a member of an Agency for Health Care Policy committee that develops medical practice guidelines and a member of the Defense Department's peer-review committee for quality assurance.


Rearranging Drugstore Shelves
In a surge of activity not seen in years, at least seven big pharmaceutical companies are pressing for Federal permission to sell some of their most important drugs without a doctor's prescription.
With profit margins on prescription drugs already squeezed by the growing pressure to lower health care costs, the companies are scrambling to win Food and Drug Administration approval for over-the-counter versions of prescription drugs.
This strategy is especially attractive for drugs whose patents have expired, making them vulnerable to brutal price slashing as generic copies come on the market.


Norand Corp.(NRND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Why Not Discuss Menopause First?
To the Editor:
Jane E. Brody's Sept. 21 Personal Health column on sorting out the myths of depression at menopause lays out a convincing explanation, even if it is not empirically derived, for looking at depression among menopausal women as a function of shifting roles, aging and societal explanations.


John Cale in a Quiet Phase
While thousands of collegiate participants in the CMJ Music Marathon were out hearing young alternative rockers abusing guitars, one of the style's founding fathers played a decorous two-night stand that put most of his progeny to shame.
John Cale, a founding member of the Velvet Underground, performed on Friday and Saturday nights at the Bottom Line, accompanied by his own piano or guitar, the Soldier String Quartet and a pedal steel guitarist, B. J. Cole.
Mr.
Cale's music has swung between the two extremes of his classical-music training and his love of noisy rock.
He's now in a quieter phase, surveying his songwriting since he left the Velvets in the late 1960's.
In 1992, he released a live recording of a solo concert, "Fragments of a Rainy Season" (Rykodisc), and he has just put out a retrospective, "Seducing Down the Door" (Rhino).


Uncovered Short Sales Decline for Nasdaq Stocks
Bucking a trend that has seen the short-selling of stocks rise to record levels at exchanges around the country, the volume of uncovered short sales of Nasdaq stocks fell for the first time in four months, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Nasdaq said that the number of shares borrowed and sold short fell 1 percent during the month ended Sept. 15, to 840.5 million shares.
That compares with 849.2 million sold short during the previous month.
The decline marked only the second monthly decrease this year.


Insects Adapted to a Single Twig: Specialization in the Extreme
SCIENTISTS have long known that insect species can hone their skills over evolutionary time to become expert at attacking a single species of plants.
Now, in a series of new studies, researchers are finding that insects take their specializations to surprising extremes, becoming highly adapted to eating not just plants of a particular species but specific plants.
So fine-tuned are these pests that they can fail to thrive even on plants of the same species growing as little as a few feet away from the one they are adapted to.
The discovery of this evolution of eating preferences has helped explain the long-puzzling observation that some plants can be devastated by voracious insect pests while others of the same species, some close enough to have their branches entwined in their beleaguered neighbors', remain virtually untouched.
Researchers say the studies also provide new insights into the evolutionary race between insect pests and the plants they attack, revealing both how quickly insects adapt to their hosts and how variable plants' defenses can be.
At the same time, the new work has signaled the importance of maintaining heterogeneity in crops as a means of preventing pest outbreaks.


No Headline
"There has never been a defendant of his stature in  organized crime who has made the leap he made from one planet to another." -- JUDGE I. LEO GLASSER, on sentencing the mob informer Salvatore Gravano in Brooklyn.  [ B4:4. ]


Health Reform -- Dead for Now
The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, buried health care reform yesterday, asserting that it would be impossible to pass even a scaled-back bill in the days before Congress breaks for elections.
That is probably true.
Congress has thereby blocked President Clinton's main legislative initiative and consigned 40 million uninsured Americans to another year of medical roulette.
The defeat ought to trigger an orgy of blame, and there is no shortage of deserving recipients.
White House insistence on secret deliberations produced a bill that no one on Capitol Hill was committed to support.
A politically inept health adviser, Ira Magaziner, designed a legislative behemoth that scared most members of Congress -- and the public.
Hillary Rodham Clinton alienated the pharmaceutical industry and other interest groups that she ultimately needed to push reform through Congress.
Demagogic special-interest lobbying and cynical Republican obstructionism designed by Bob Dole in the Senate and Newt Gingrich in the House played a role in the final stall.
So did the listless advocacy of Mr.
Mitchell and puzzling embrace of defeat by Mr.
Clinton and his disorganized White House staff.
There will be plenty of time to figure who did the most damage.


Microwaves From 4 Stars Buoy Search for Life
MICROWAVE emissions of unusual intensity have been detected from four relatively close-by stars that resemble the Sun.
Since these are far greater than the Sun's own microwave emissions, and since this type of frequency is used as a means of communication, at least among humans, the finding has stirred a ripple of excitement among those searching for evidence of life on other worlds.
The four stars will be among about 1,000 to be scanned for signs of intelligent life with the Parkes radiotelescope in Australia, one of the largest in the Southern Hemisphere.
The search is to run from Jan. 16 to the end of May.
Since Congress eliminated the budget for a more ambitious program, it is being financed privately.


Observer; Sobs at Road's End
If you tend toward suicide, listening to talk radio is even more dangerous than reading newspapers.
Apparently it's all over for the good old United States.
The country's dead broke.


Mall Shoppers Voice Anxiety After Shooting
If it were appropriate for a husband to forbid a spouse to do something, Michael Putelo of East Rockaway said today, he would prevent his wife from going alone to the Green Acres Mall.
Mr.
Putelo's concerns about his wife's safety at the large shopping mall here at the border of Queens and Nassau Counties have escalated sharply since he learned about the shooting of a 44-year-old woman during an attempted robbery shortly after 8 P.M. on Saturday.


'Glass Ceiling' Is Pervasive, Secretary of Labor Contends
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said today that subtle but pervasive patterns of discrimination dominate the public, private and nonprofit sectors of society because of a "myopia" on the part of many white male managers who "unthinkingly discriminate" without having any idea they are doing so.
Speaking in New York at the fifth and final hearing of a Congressional commission studying discrimination at the executive level, Mr.
Reich said artificial barriers to advancement are holding back many women and minorities from attaining positions commensurate with their skills, training and numbers, and preventing the economy from growing to its full potential.


Fighting for the Right To Bear Leaf Blowers
THE sky is falling.
Joe Tinelli sees it landing smack on his business -- unless he can use his leaf blower.
"Absolutely essential," he said.


NBC Asks F.C.C. to Halt Fox's Growth
NBC has filed a petition with the Federal Communications Commission, seeking to put the brakes on the Fox network's ambitious campaign to expand its broadcasting interests.
In the petition, filed on Friday, NBC said Fox Inc. had improperly set up a corporation to gain control of a Wisconsin television station, calling the move a brazen violation of F.C.C. regulations.


Unbridled Inspector or Unsafe Incinerator?
Last June, Steve Jones, one of the Pentagon's strictest overseers of industrial safety, reached a pinnacle in his profession.
The 44-year-old engineer was hired as the chief safety officer for the Army's new nerve gas incinerator, where about 14,000 tons of chemical weapons left from the cold war are to be destroyed.
But Mr.
Jones's career with the $450 million plant in Tooele, Utah, was short-lived.
Two weeks ago the engineering company that managed the incinerator's construction dismissed him, saying his management style was too zealous.
But Mr.
Jones, who was a former chief safety and security officer at several Navy installations, said he was dismissed because he found the plant's design flawed and potentially unsafe.


Mysterious White Spot Is Spreading Over Saturn
A BIG white spot has bloomed on the face of the ringed planet Saturn, and astronomers believe that the new feature, which may last for years, has been spawned by a gigantic storm.
The spot, which is not greatly different in color and brightness from the surrounding clouds, was first noticed in August by astronomers at the Pic du Midi Observatory on Mont Blanc, France.
The United States Naval Observatory and astronomers in New Zealand have reported that the spot is several thousand miles wide.
Since it appeared near Saturn's southern rim last month, the spot has been spreading eastward.


Helene Curtis Industries(HC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Pataki Riding Anti-Cuomo Wave, Poll Shows
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo faces a difficult battle for re-election, an independent poll released yesterday shows, as an increasing number of voters say they disapprove of his performance and are prepared to vote for his Republican rival, State Senator George E. Pataki, even though he remains relatively unknown.
The poll by the Marist Institute for Public Opinion in Poughkeepsie shows Mr.
Pataki leading Mr.
Cuomo by six percentage points, 44 percent to 38 percent -- a statistical dead heat, given the poll's margin of sampling error.
The Right to Life Party candidate, Robert Walsh, received 3 percent.


Odd Keyboards May Help You Type; On the Other Hand, They May Not
"DO NOT REMOVE THIS TAG!" advises a sticker on the cord.
A bigger sticker bears a bigger orange "WARNING" and a discussion of the perils of typing.
These alarming admonitions appear on a mostly plastic product that the Microsoft Corporation bills as "natural."
Natural?
The Microsoft Natural Keyboard looks surreal, as if it had been fished from the seas bloated, warped and whitened.
It is the latest member of a growing collection of odd-looking "ergonomic" models pioneered in the general market by Apple Computer Inc. and sharing one tenet: the keyboards most of us use are unfit for human hands.


Food 4 Less Supermarkets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


U.S. Bridge Teams Advance
Three United States bridge teams have survived in the Rosenblum Open Team Championship here at the NEC World Championships.
At least one will be involved in semifinal play, since two of them, captained by Dan Rotman of Aventura, Fla., and Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., face off today.
The third American team, an unheralded squad headed by Bob Binsky of Columbus, Ohio, faces an uphill task against a strong Swedish team.
The Binsky team includes Kitty Munson of Manhattan, the only woman to reach the round of 16.


Mexico's Pact for a Stable Economy
Mexico's President-elect, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, does not take office for two months, but the renewal of a crucial agreement among the Government, business and labor already provides clear evidence of how he plans to run the Mexican economy for the next six years.
The pact, which the incumbent President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, signed on Saturday, sets an inflation goal of 4 percent for 1995 and holds wage and price increases to the same level.
It leaves the exchange-rate policy alone, and offers modest tax breaks and financial incentives to get the economy moving.


2 Candidates Plan to Debate
The two major candidates for State Attorney General said yesterday they want to debate each other before the Nov. 8 election.
They still have to work out how many debates, when, where and who else may take part.
The Democratic candidate, Karen S. Burstein, sent her Republican rival, Dennis C. Vacco, a letter yesterday asking him to agree to three debates.


Kodak to Sell Its Home Products Unit to Reckitt
The Eastman Kodak Company neared the end of its divestiture program yesterday when it agreed to sell its household products operation to Reckitt &amp; Coleman P.L.C. of Britain for $1.55 billion in cash.
The products to be sold include the Lysol line of cleaners, Mop &amp; Glo cleaner and polish, Resolve carpet cleaners, Chubbs Baby Wipes and Wet Ones moist towelettes.
The products constituted most of those made by Kodak's L &amp; F division.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Judith Lea Swain; The Double Life of Dr. Swain: Work and More Work
DR.
JUDITH LEA SWAIN, director of the division of cardiology, director of a molecular biology laboratory and professor of genetics at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, is determinedly, decisively, at the top of her highly competitive, male-dominated field.
She planned it that way and would never accept anything less.
Dr.
Swain, 45, is well known among molecular geneticists for her groundbreaking work on a surprising and significant finding called genetic imprinting.
She is also the only woman to direct a cardiology department at a major medical center and, as the president-elect of the prestigious American Society for Clinical Investigation, the only woman to achieve that rank since the society was founded in 1909.


An Abundance of Passion At Public Smoking Debate
Some spoke passionately about the danger of secondhand smoke and pleaded for measures to restrict smoking.
Others talked with equal fervor about smokers' rights and the economic threat to their businesses from any move to further curtail smoking in restaurants and public places.
The City Council held a full day of often emotional hearings yesterday on a bill that would effectively ban smoking in virtually all public places in New York City.
And a wide array of New Yorkers -- and even people from other cities -- descended on City Hall in droves to testify before the Council's Health Committee, from the powerful tobacco industry, restaurant owners and surgeons to ministers, public officials and a beauty queen.


INSIDE
High Court Docket
In an usually early announcement, the Supreme Court said it would take up a long-running Missouri school desegregation case and seven other cases in its new term beginning next Monday.
Page A23.
The Vote That Counts
A Pennsylvania Representative, Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky, is finding that her re-election is turning on one fateful vote: the one that passed the Clinton budget.
Page A22.
A Revitalized Port
With the Howland Hook Marine Terminal on Staten Island reopening, New York has a chance to win back some of the shipping business lost to New Jersey in the 60's.
Page B1.
Disclosing Mutual Fund Risks
The Securities and Exchange Commission recommended that mutual funds provide some quantification of risk, in a move aimed at investments in derivatives.
Page D1


Proteon
Shares of Proteon Inc., a maker of computer networking equipment, rose sharply yesterday after the company, based in Westborough, Mass., said it expects a profit of 10 cents to 20 cents a share in the third quarter ending Oct. 1.
It has had six quarters of losses since reporting its last profit.


Esiason Is Out As Trudeau Takes Over
One Jet quarterback was on crutches and the other knows what it's like to hear mean-spirited fans who always seem to prefer the backup.
The man on crutches, Boomer Esiason, realized he was in trouble when he got up this morning.
His left ankle, he said, "was the size of a tennis ball."


Lifting Sanctions on Haiti Will Take Up to 2 Weeks
Administration officials said that the lifting of sanctions on Haiti, announced today by President Clinton, would not go into effect immediately.
It would take several days to lift the ban on most financial transactions with Haiti, and at least a week or two before scheduled flights are resumed to Port-au-Prince, they said.
In an address today to the United Nations General Assembly, the President said that one part of the unilateral sanctions would not be lifted: the freeze on the assets of Haiti's military officer corps and their close financial supporters.
The freeze on those 600 individuals would remain at least until the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, is restored to power, State Department officials said.


Kutztown Player, 46, Is Learning to Tackle His Problems Head On
When Chuck Roseberry -- a 46-year-old grandfather, veteran of Vietnam and the Persian Gulf War, former police and corrections officer, father of children older than his teammates -- showed up for spring football practice at Kutztown University, some of the younger players thought he was a coach.
Many thought he was a joke.
"People were thinking, should I take it easy on him or should I try to kill him?" said Del Hufford, a sophomore offensive tackle who jousted daily with Roseberry on the defensive line.


Frequency Chart Shows Jets Weren't in a Rush
Pete Carroll, in his first year as a head coach at any level, is faced with his first losing streak, a situation he may have played a part in by not overruling his offensive coordinator.
In bowing to the Bears, 19-7, on Sunday night at Giants Stadium, their second loss in a row, the Jets ran the ball only six times in the first half.
This despite the fact that Chicago came into the game as the worst team in the National Football League defending against the run.


Ending Free Ride at Senegal University Brings Turmoil
Under the optimistic glow of independence, this West African country bet heavily on higher education, believing that no expense should be spared to train a core of professionals to help Africa emerge from underdevelopment.
But Senegal, home of French-speaking Africa's premier university, has found that things have gone terribly wrong with higher education, as with much else in Africa since the bright early days of freedom from colonial rule in 1960.


Haiti Will Require a Lot of Rebuilding
To the Editor:
As a former Fulbright professor in Haiti and one who has continued to visit the country, I believe that President Clinton gave compelling reasons for invasion of Haiti.
But getting out will not be easy or early.


President's Words: Fight Between Hope and Fear
Following are excerpts from the speech given yesterday by President Clinton to the United Nations General Assembly, as transcribed by The Associated Press:
Today I am proposing a first step toward the eventual elimination of a less visible but still deadly threat -- the world's 85 million anti-personnel land mines -- one for every 50 people on the face of the earth.


How a Tense Standoff in Haiti Erupted Into Deadly Shootout With the Marines
On one side of the narrow street, two dozen members of the Haitian security forces played cards on the sidewalk or tended to business inside the blocklong central police headquarters.
On the other side of the street, their backs against a building wall, 14 marines stood in full battle dress, M-16 rifles and machine guns locked and loaded.
Since 5 P.M. on Saturday, the two sides, ostensibly partners in policing Haiti's second-largest city, had eyed each other icily from 20 feet away in a tense war of nerves.
Several hundred civilians had thronged to each end of the cordoned-off block hurling insults at the hated Haitian policemen and cheering their newly arrived American protectors.


A Season of Horton Foote Begins
"Talking Pictures," like many of Horton Foote's plays, is set in Harrison, Tex., a hamlet where yes is pronounced "yea-yus," a mixed marriage is one between a Baptist and a Methodist, and going to the movies is considered in some quarters a risky moral undertaking.
The year is 1929, and Myra Tolliver, a grass widow with a 14-year-old son to raise, is facing a crisis.
She plays piano accompaniment for the silent films at the local picture palace, and the management is about to switch over to talkies.
The good folks from whom she rents her furnished room may soon be moving to another town.
And while the soft-spoken bricklayer next door would very much like her hand in marriage, he's still legally wedded to the floozy who ran out on him five years earlier.


Frazier Has Blood Clot
TOMMIE FRAZIER, quarterback for No. 2 Nebraska and a strong contender for the Heisman Trophy, may be lost for the rest of the season because of a blood clot in his right calf.
Nebraska Coach TOM OSBORNE said yesterday that Frazier was admitted on Sunday to Bryan Hospital in Lincoln, Neb.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SECURITY CAPITAL BANCORP, Salisbury, N.C., a bank holding company, acquired First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Charlotte for approximately $41 million from Fairfield Communities.


Lesson of Plague: Beware of 'Vanquished' Diseases
The epidemic of pneumonic plague in India that has led to panic and mass evacuations from the industrial city of Surat over the last week is a grim reminder that diseases commonly thought vanquished remain an immense threat to the world.
Although some officials of the Indian Government said over the weekend that the epidemic had been contained, new reports today, though incomplete and often conflicting, made it clear that the threat continues from the world's first epidemic of pneumonic plague since early in the century.
It is clear that the bacterial infection has killed scores, perhaps hundreds, of people and has now apparently spread to Bombay and New Delhi and several other cities in India


Bills Leave Broncos, and Elway, a Slippery Pass Short
On a dreary autumn night, with rain falling intermittently, the Broncos were hoping to salvage some respect and turn around a season on the brink of collapse against the Bills here tonight.
Ultimately, the dampness of the night would work to their undoing.
The Broncos fought back from a 24-7 Bills lead early in the third quarter on the strength of quarterback John Elway's guile and grit.
Twice they narrowed the Bills' margin to 7 points on field goals by Jason Elam.


To Vaccinate Is Safer
To the Editor:
"First Deaf Miss America" (news article, Sept. 19) says Heather Whitestone "became deaf when she was 18 months old after a reaction to a diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus shot." As practicing pediatricians, we want to let readers know that the relationship between deafness and the pertussis (whooping cough) component of this vaccine has not been proved.


Infinity Picks Interep For Radio Stations
The Infinity Broadcasting Corporation said yesterday that it had named the Interep Radio Store in New York as the sole commercial sales representation company for its 24 radio stations.
Those duties, to sell an estimated $100 million worth of commercial time, had previously been divided between Interep's Torbet Radio Group and D&amp;R Radio units and the Banner, Christal, Eastman and Katz units of the Katz Media Corporation in New York.


The Joys of Monopoly In the Electronic Age
FOR almost 60 years, Monopoly has been the king of board games, with more than 100 million sets sold worldwide.
Everybody knows how to play it.
First, clear a space on the dining-room or kitchen table.
Then, set up the board and count out the money, sort the houses and hotels and vow that this time you will arrange the title deed cards and the other paraphernalia neatly when you are finished.
Monopoly, from Macplay of Irvine, Calif., is a handsome computer version.
You won't lose player markers or run out of hotels, but it is hard to imagine up to eight people gathering around the Macintosh.
On the other hand, some of the players can be the computer itself, so you can start a game at 3 A.M. without waking up spouse or sibling.


Echlin Inc.(ECH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


U.S. Seeks To Revise Bank Rules
The Clinton Administration and the Federal Reserve proposed today to require banks and savings institutions to collect data on the race, ethnicity and gender of small-business loan recipients.
But regulators also proposed to abandon rigid formulas that they had planned to impose for measuring the proportion of loans that financial institutions issued in poor communities.


Man Shot and Wife Beaten By Robbers on Brooklyn Street
Only blocks short of her destination, Marisol Pagan ended her Sunday trip to her mother's house in devastation -- her husband critically wounded in a brutal explosion of gunfire and she beaten until her bones broke and she lay helpless on the streets of Brooklyn.
Two attackers, who pretended to ask for directions as they approached the Pagans' car on Underhill Avenue shortly after 6 P.M. on Sunday, tried to rob Mrs.
Pagan, ordered her husband out of the 1982 Honda and shot him three times in the head, then beat Mrs.
Pagan with the metal steering-wheel lock with which she had rushed to defend her husband, the police said.


Q&amp;A
Cannibal Spiders
Q.  Are some spiders cannibals?
A.
Yes, there is a group of spiders sometimes called cannibal or pirate spiders, members of the family Mimetidae, that feed on other spiders, creeping into their webs and killing them.
"American Spiders," by Willis J. Gertsch (Van Nostrand), says many authorities believe the pirates never spin their own webs and feed exclusively on other spiders.


MDS Health Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Tourist Raped in Central Park, Police Say
A 20-year-old Austrian woman who had run out of money while visiting New York City was raped in Central Park late Sunday night by a man who befriended her and promised her a place to stay, the police said.
The victim, who flew to the United States from Austria two weeks ago with no itinerary, told the police that she had gone to the park to meet a friend who was going to help her, Detective Louis Llanes, a police spokesman, said.


Applying the First Coat of Sand to a New Jersey Beach


Four Are Charged in Beating of Black Family
Four white people have been charged with breaking into the home of a deaf black woman and beating her and her teen-age son with aluminum bats in what the police here say was a racially motivated attack.
The police said today that they were investigating the possibility that a fifth person was involved in the attack.


CHRONICLE
THE DUCHESS OF YORK and PRINCE ANDREW are reconciling.
Or they are on the verge of signing divorce papers.
Depends on what you read.
The Daily Express, in London, quoted an unidentified courtier as saying that lawyers had been instructed to draw up final details of the divorce.
The newspaper said that the Duchess had agreed to give up her royal title as part of the agreement, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Atom Plant Is Assessed At a Hearing
The Indian Point 3 nuclear reactor will not be worth reopening unless it can operate much more reliably than it has in the past and can cut operating expenses sharply, both opponents and supporters agreed in testimony today at a legislative hearing.
And even supporters acknowledged that if the plant were closed, the economic consequences might be quite small.
The plant, which has faced stiff political opposition through most of its 18 years, has been shut for 19 months because of safety problems.
It has been producing power in the last few years that is more expensive than the electricity from plants that use oil, coal or natural gas.
But the New York Power Authority, the state-owned utility that runs the plant, hopes to reopen it next spring, after extensive retraining of workers and improvements in equipment.


H.M.O. Drug Plans Are No Consumer Bargain
To the Editor:
Overlooked in the headlong rush to embrace the health maintenance organization managed-care concept as a solution to the health care crisis is one crucial fact.
The H.M.O. bottom line imperative creates an environment in which subscribers are often forced to pay exorbitant amounts for relatively inexpensive medication.
The "prescription plan" is the vehicle for overcharging patients.


Ex-Mob Underboss Given Lenient Term For Help as Witness
Citing his "invaluable" aid in the war against the Mafia, a Federal judge yesterday rewarded a once-powerful mob figure who became a major Government informer by sentencing him to just five years in prison, despite his admitted involvement in 19 murders.
The sentence meant that the informer, Salvatore Gravano -- who had faced up to 20 years in prison under his plea deal and who has already served almost four years -- could be released in eight months or less, his lawyer and prison officials said.


Clinton Presses U.N. to Increase Its Force at Sarajevo if Necessary
Warning that Sarajevo again stands in danger of strangulation, President Clinton called on the United Nations today to show its resolve by enforcing its peacekeeping efforts there with additional force if necessary.
Mr.
Clinton's appeal was a veiled reference to the reluctance of United Nations commanders in recent weeks to call for punitive air strikes against Bosnian Serb forces.


At the Summit, It's All Uphill
Bill Clinton's meetings with Boris Yeltsin have been, more than anything else, a series of photo-op's for reform -- a chance for America to vote its confidence (however shaky) in Russia's progress toward democracy and free markets.
The summit talks today and tomorrow are different.
Their real content is, for a change, diplomacy.
The increasing political and economic stability over which President Yeltsin presides means that the two leaders can spend less time on ritual heavy breathing about the abstract principles that unite them and more on the concrete policy disagreements that divide them.


Cardinals And Simms Call Things Off
The brief flirtation between the Arizona Cardinals and Phil Simms, the former Giants quarterback turned broadcast sports analyst, ended yesterday when the two sides couldn't bridge a contract gap that was about $1 million wide.
"Phil's going to be staying with ESPN," said David Fishof, Simms's agent.
"Phil wanted a commitment and they just weren't willing to do it. The door is closed."


Why Health Care Fizzled: Too Little Time and Too Much Politics
Everyone in the White House, in Congress and in the lobbyists' offices in Washington now agrees that major health care restructuring is dead for 1994.
But people disagree on precisely what killed what might have been the boldest legislative initiative in decades.
Talking to those involved in the debate that consumed the first 18 months of the Clinton Administration is like taking depositions from witnesses in a complicated legal case: everything depends on where they stand.


Back to the Present in a Long-Lost Novel by Verne
Jules Verne's publisher said it pained him to write so blunt a letter but, after the success of the young storyteller's first book, "Five Weeks in a Balloon," he felt obliged to warn that publication of his new manuscript would be "a disaster" for his name.
"I did not expect something perfect," the disappointed publisher, Pierre-Jules Hetzel, wrote the author in late 1863, "but I expected better." And as if testing fate, Hetzel added, "My dear Verne, if you were a prophet, no one would believe your prophecies today."


Orioles Sack Oates For Finishing Second
JOHNNY OATES, whose high-priced lineup did not produce enough to satisfy ownership, was fired last night as manager of the Baltimore Orioles.
The Orioles were 63-49, second to the Yankees in the American League East, when the players went on strike Aug. 12.
But the new owner, PETER ANGELOS, had made it clear in the off season that with the addition of such free agents as RAFAEL PALMEIRO and SID FERNANDEZ, more was expected.


RESULTS PLUS
VOLLEYBALL  New Rules Will Open Up the Game Players will be allowed to use all parts of their body, including their feet, and to touch the net accidentally under new rules approved by volleyball's world governing body yesterday.
The International Volleyball Federation, meeting in Athens, said that the rule changes, effective Jan. 1, are designed to make the game more spectacular to viewers and spectators.
"Each referee's interruption is an obstacle to keeping the interest of the spectators and viewers," the federation president, Ruben Acosta, told a news conference after the federation's 24th congress adopted the rule changes.
"We must repeatedly commit ourselves to reducing to a minimum the interruptions, making them only when necessary." Under the rules now in effect, players are not allowed to touch the ball with any part of their bodies below the knee.
The new rules also will allow players to serve from any point along the end line, and teams will not be subject to double-fault calls on their first reception of the ball. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.71
3.16
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.79
4.77
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.22
5.19
3.02
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.55
7.55
5.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.79
7.79
5.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.64
8.63
6.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.53
6.53
5.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


High Fever to No Pulse
1991  NOVEMBER: Harris Wofford, a Democrat running for the Senate from Pennsylvania, wins an upset victory with a campaign that centers on health care, demonstrating the issue's political power. 1992


Lifetime Moves Account In-House
Lifetime Television, the cable network in New York with programming aimed at women, has moved its estimated $7 million account in-house after only six months at Lois/ USA in New York.
Meredith Wagner, a spokeswoman for Lifetime, confirmed a report of the shift this week in Adweek.
After the network recently built up its creative services department, she said, "it makes a lot of strategic and business sense to bring the business in-house." Before Lois was awarded the account in March, Frankfurt Balkind Partners in New York had handled it for two years.


U S West Chooses Campbell Mithun
U S West Inc. said yesterday that it had named Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis to handle its corporate advertising account, which had been at Grey Advertising in Los Angeles since 1988.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $10 million to $15 million.


By Design; Belting It In
It's been a while since the belt was an important accessory, except with jeans or trousers.
But with the current emphasis on fitted clothes, the belt is back.
For starters, it's the pencil-slim variety -- one-half inch or so wide -- that defines the waist without constricting it.
To give a new look to last year's wardrobe, buckle a belt around a long sweater pulled down over a skirt, loop the belt below a cropped sweater, or belt a jacket to give it the latest waist-defining shape.
These are some of the looks Calvin Klein showed in his CK collection, demonstrating that he was on the same wavelength as two European trend setters: Prada and Jil Sander.


Berlin Journal; The G.I.s' Legacy: Basketball and Sweet Memories
If it's a giant American-style basketball tournament, featuring tens of thousands of spectators, and cheerleaders, and break dancers, and MTV stars -- it must be Berlin.
Such displays of American culture are commonplace here.
Berliners have lived closely with United States soldiers for nearly half a century, and although the last troops withdrew from Berlin a few weeks ago, this remains the most Americanized of European cities.


It Didn't Count, but Isles Liked the Feeling
Yes, it was only an exhibition game.
And, no, Mark Messier, Brian Leetch, Adam Graves, Sergei Zubov and Mike Richter were not in uniform.
But when someone pierced the silence of Madison Square Garden midway through the second period of last night's exhibition game with the lament of "what's going on here?" most of the 17,995 in attendance must have been thinking the same question.


Kirby Out for Season
The Miami Dolphins yesterday placed halfback TERRY KIRBY on injured reserve and re-signed AARON CRAVER, who was cut in the preseason.


Fate of a China Hand
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 21 obituary of Lawrence K. Rosinger praises his confidence as an author of books on China.
It also states that in 1952 he refused to tell the Senate whether or not he had been a member of the Communist Party; that, as a result, "the possibility of getting a job in his field dried up" and that later he taught English in Michigan.


HAITIANS REJOICE AS AMERICAN M.P.'s VISIT POLICE POSTS
American military police visited Haitian police stations for several hours today, and their presence was enough to draw thousands of excited people into the streets to rejoice in the discomfort of the Haitian officers.
A thin, glum line of Haitian policemen stood this morning in the doorway of one station house, known as the Cafeteria, as the crowd outside cheered the waning of the officers' power over Haiti.


Sports of The Times; Remember: Mitchell Is Only 23
THE press guide says Johnny Mitchell is in his third year with the Jets, but the truth is, he should be only a rookie.
There is an old sports phrase "rookie mistake," which surely includes being in the wrong place at the wrong time, which Mitchell did Sunday night.
This wasn't the reason the Jets lost to the Bears, 19-7.
The Jets all wore sheepish looks as they clumped down the runway after the game, and yesterday at their home bunker.
They knew they had played only five minutes of football, the first drive, and they should have been ashamed, players and coaches alike.


METRO DIGEST
TURNCOAT MOB UNDERBOSS IS REWARDED
Citing his "invaluable" aid in the war against the Mafia, a Federal judge rewarded a once-powerful mob figure who became a major Government informer by sentencing him to just five years in prison, despite his admitted involvement in 19 murders.
The sentence meant that the informer, Salvatore Gravano, could be released in eight months or less, his lawyer and prison officials said.
A1.


Prince Louis Ferdinand, 86, Grandson of Kaiser, Is Dead
Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia, the man who would have been Kaiser if Germany still had a throne, died on Sunday in the north German city of Bremen.
He was 86 and had a home outside Bremen.
He died after a long illness, said The Associated Press, which did not immediately report where in Bremen he had died.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Atlantic Coast Conference
For the small segment of coaches and fans around the country who believe the Atlantic Coast Conference is vastly overrated, a look at results over the weekend should erase any doubts about the strength of the conference.


Tense Calm in Cap-Haitian
A fragile calm settled over this tense city today, but American military commanders braced for possible outbreaks of looting and violence.
A day after civilian mobs stormed and ransacked the city's four police stations and the central military barracks, residents here in Haiti's second-largest city began returning to their daily lives: walking to market, sweeping their stoops and swapping gossip on park benches.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $40 million of notes due in 1996 through Smith Barney Inc.
The notes, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 6.22 percent and are priced at par.


One Tribute Has Inspired Another
On the day of Arthur Ashe's funeral in February 1993, Michael Fuchs, the president of HBO; Seth Abraham, the president of HBO Sports, and Ross Greenburg, the executive producer of HBO Sports, rode in a bus for mourners from the church in Richmond to the gravesite.
They had just heard eulogies by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, Maya Angelou and Douglas Wilder.
"All of a sudden, we saw thousands of people lining the streets, with tears in their eyes, holding up placards that said, 'We love you Arthur,' " said Greenburg.
"We felt we were in a documentary. And Michael said, 'We have to make a documentary on Arthur.' We didn't sit around thinking about it."


Corrections
An article on Saturday about relations between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and former President Jimmy Carter referred incorrectly to earlier comments by Mr.
Carter about the Secretary.
In the interview earlier last week, Mr.
Carter spoke specifically of his unhappiness with Mr.
Christopher; he did not allude to Mr.
Christopher without naming him.


Firm Invests In Russia Deal
A Washington-based merchant bank and venture capital firm headed by Howard H. Baker Jr., the former United States Senator, announced yesterday that it had bought a controlling interest in a Russian manufacturer of advanced electrical components.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
But Richard C. Jacobs, president and chief executive of Newstar Inc., the firm whose chairman is Mr.
Baker, said in a telephone interview that the size of the investment would eventually exceed $5 million.


Penn's Stokes Is Content With Present Surroundings
Whether they will admit it or not, most college football players harbor the fantasy that their hidden talents will suddenly emerge in front of a lurking National Football League scout, that they will soar into the pros and become wealthy.
You never know, they say to themselves.
Terrance Stokes, a 165-pound running back for Penn, has no such illusions.
Arguably the Ivy League's best player this season, Stokes said the pro dream is "not a career goal of mine."


City Yawns, Roads Snarl As Clinton Visits U.N.
"Clinton's here?" asked Mary Smith in amazement, squatting at her usual sidewalk beggar's post on Lexington Avenue, two doors down from the Waldorf-Astoria hotel, from which the President and his security phalanxes moved yesterday, on barricaded streets that seemed decidedly more hermetic than kinetic.
"So that's why I'm a few dollars lighter," said Ms.
Smith, rattling the day's slimmer-than-usual pickings but maintaining her moon-faced smile for passing New Yorkers who seemed equally unattentive to the President's visit as they went after their own daily bread.


Succoth Observance Reaffirms a Couple's Bond


Wine Talk
KEAT'S "season of mists and mellow fruitfulness," currently upon us, has turned out to be a siege of rain and mud for Bordeaux.
It may mean that prices of the 1990 Bordeaux wines, as well as those of 1988 and 1989, both good years, will climb.
Burgundy, too, was hit by rain, and prices there, always more volatile than those in Bordeaux, should also go up.
For serious collectors, these are serious matters; casual drinkers need not be concerned.
There is plenty of good wine around at reasonable prices.
What follows is a sampling of what can be found in shops at the lower end of the price scale.
Any good store should have at least a few of them.
Prices quoted are from shops in the New York area, but they can vary considerably.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Beauties And Beasties
THE black-and-white grainy film shows Bobby Thomson, 43 years ago next Monday, knocking a baseball over the left-field wall in the Polo Grounds in the ninth inning of the third and final playoff game to win the National League pennant and provide what may be the single most dramatic moment in baseball history.
The Giants are familiarly jubilant and the shocked and despairing Dodgers trudge to the clubhouse in center field.
Jackie Robinson, though, stands near second base, back to camera, hand on hip.
Why?
In all the confusion, Robinson alone watches keenly to make sure Thomson touches all the bases.
It was one of baseball's greatest unnoticed, unknown, unrealized plays.


Graves, Out Two Weeks, Joins the Rangers' Injury List
If you're a Ranger fan, maybe a delay in the start of the National Hockey League season would not be such a bad idea.
With Mark Messier, the captain, still absent because of an unresolved contract situation, Adam Graves tonight joined the list of players who will either definitely not make the scheduled season opener Saturday or might not make it.
Graves, a 52-goal scorer last season, is suffering from a sore lower back and will be out for two weeks.


The Cost of Freedom: Romanian Gymnasts Stage Training Slowdown
The idea of athletes going on strike, which has led to the cancellation of the World Series, has found resonance in the most improbable of places -- among teen-age female gymnasts of Romania.
Less than two months before the world team gymnastics championships in Germany, the favored Romanians have staged, if not exactly a work stoppage, then at least a disruptive slowdown in training, the effects of which have reverberated to the top levels of the Romanian Government.


Mr. Yeltsin Takes the Lead on Arms
While the Pentagon seems to be deflecting President Clinton from negotiating deeper cuts in U.S. and Russian nuclear arms, Russia's President, Boris Yeltsin, remains firmly on course.
In a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, he urged further arms reductions -- and more.
Mr.
Yeltsin wants to speed up the talks to prohibit nuclear tests by having a global ban ready for signing by October 1995, the 50th anniversary of the United Nations.
In their get-together this week Mr.
Clinton would be wise to join him in setting that target date and pressing to meet it.
If the two leaders do not hit the accelerator, the talks are likely to stall.


U.S. Plans Vast Restoration for Everglades
The Federal Government has drawn up an ambitious plan to restore the Everglades of southern Florida, reshaping much of the region's 11,000 square miles into something closer to the undisturbed wetlands of a century ago.
The far-reaching project, which would take many years to complete, is still in the early planning stages.
It would be the most complicated venture so far in the new science of managing whole ecosystems instead of tinkering with them one problem at a time.


Davidson Nicol Is Dead at 70; Was Doctor and U.N. Official
Dr.
Davidson S. H. W. Nicol, who was an Under Secretary General of the United Nations and the executive director of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, died on Sept. 20 at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge, England.
He was 70 and lived in Cambridge and in Freetown in his homeland, the West African country of Sierra Leone.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter-in-law, Ann Nicol.


C.I.A. Reportedly Taking a Role in Haiti
In a move that some lawmakers say could subvert the democratic process in Haiti, President Clinton has approved a secret contingency plan that authorizes unspecified political activities to neutralize the opponents of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, senior Administration officials said today.
In addition, the $5 million plan authorizes the Central Intelligence Agency to spend $1 million on propaganda to help ease Father Aristide's return and to use covert means to protect American forces there from hostile groups, they added.


Market Place; Not everyone is surprised as a dental-industry deal goes awry.
THE proposed takeover of New Image Industries, a dental supplier, died yesterday.
But it looks as though some traders may have been less surprised than others.
New Image, which had signed a letter of agreement on July 28 to be acquired by Dentsply International, a much larger company, at $16.375 a share, plunged $5, to $8, yesterday after an announcement that Dentsply had backed out of the deal.
Dentsply said issues uncovered in due diligence had not been resolved to its satisfaction.


The G.O.P's Deceptive Contract
Over 300 Republican candidates for the House of Representatives promised yesterday that, if elected, they will provide a positive new vision for their party and for the country.
The body and soul of this vision is to be found in 10 bills they plan to offer in the next session of Congress.
It is a vision that looks backward, Reaganism in a rear-view mirror.
What this self-styled "Contract With America" says to voters is that these Republicans do not speak candidly.


Lack of Space Delays Kindergarten for 2,300 Children
In the worst bottleneck of pupils in memory, more than 2,300 kindergartners were delayed from starting classes in New York City this year because school officials were unable to find places for them in overcrowded classrooms.
Nearly 800 New York City kindergarten pupils have yet to begin classes because of the overcrowding.
An additional 1,500 children are just now being offered spots and being enrolled in classes.
Some of the children will have to ride buses for more than a half-hour to schools outside their neighborhoods and some districts are considering offering abbreviated sessions so that two classes can share a room.


Even Rio's Poor Seem Sold on the Inflation Fighter
Armed and shirtless, young "soldiers" of the Red Command control the muddy alleys of Vigario Geral shantytown in Rio.
But, belying radical appearances, many residents say they will vote next week for Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a presidential candidate with an economic program endorsed by the International Monetary Fund.
In Brazil, where political landscapes are often deceptive, voices from a Rio favela, or slum, help explain why Brazilians will probably elect as President on Monday a man whose name many voters did not know six months ago.
In a country where three-quarters of voters get by on less than $500 a month, poor people swing elections.


One Client That Wall Street Regrets
The classic stock market rip-offs are those in which the naive customer from Main Street -- the little old lady or the retired railroad worker -- gets taken by the Wall Street sharpie.
Every so often, though, it is the Wall Street broker who is said to have been taken to the cleaners by the customer.
Such is the claim of the securities industry in the story of Wall Street versus Michael J. Morse -- the tale of a single investor who traded from his Atlanta home and wound up causing millions in losses for Wall Street.


U.S. Club Aiming to Go the Distance
Have America's milers -- the heirs to the mantle of Glenn Cunningham, Jim Ryun and Marty Liquori -- run out of gas?
Steve Scott, the American record holder in the mile at 3:47.69, is 38.
Jeff Atkinson, surprise winner of the 1,500 meters in the 1988 Olympic trials, has had a string of injuries and at age 31 his future is cloudy.
Jim Spivey, the only other American men's 1,500-meter Olympic finalist since 1976 (fifth in 1984, eighth in 1992), is 34.


ACCORD MAY GIVE NYNEX CUSTOMERS A BREAK ON RATES
Nynex and the staff of the New York State Public Service Commission announced yesterday that they had struck a tentative deal for a new kind of regulation that would give customers a break on rates and remove almost all limits on how much the company could earn.
The accord, if approved soon by the Public Service Commission itself, would make New York the first state in the nation to let long-distance carriers compete easily with local phone companies in handling medium-distance calls.
Michigan plans to allow such competition beginning in 1996.
In theory, this means that customers could end up dealing with three different phone companies: one for local calls, one for medium-range calls and one for long-distance calls.


House Acts To Allow I.R.S. Fees
In a move likely to make taxes more taxing for millions of Americans, the House today approved a bill allowing the Internal Revenue Service to collect up to $119 million in user fees that the agency would have a bureaucratic incentive to impose.
Passage within days by the Senate is considered a formality.
Within months, the I.R.S. expects to impose new levies on individuals and businesses, which it can keep rather than turn over to the Treasury.


Jets Shift Frase to the Left, Casillas to the Right, and Cross Fingers
With Marvin Washington unlikely to play on Sunday because of a hyperextended left knee, the Jets shuffled their defensive line today for their game against the Browns in Cleveland.
Paul Frase, who had been starting at right tackle, will replace Washington at left end.
Tony Casillas, who signed last week as a free agent, will replace Frase at right tackle.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended today for the Jewish holiday of Simhath Torah.


Karl Donch Bass-Baritone, 80
Karl Donch, a bass-baritone who sang at the Metropolitan Opera, died on Sept. 16 at a hospital in Vienna, where he lived.
He was 80.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


CONGRESS DECIDES TO CONDUCT STUDY OF NEED FOR C.I.A.
Having concluded that the Central Intelligence Agency cannot ably chart its course in the post-cold-war world, Congress is creating an independent commission to rethink the agency's role and review its continued existence in its present form.
The commission, being formed despite active opposition by the C.I.A.'s leaders and passive resistance from the White House, will have the broadest possible mandate to propose changes in the structure, the power and the budget as well as the very existence of the C.I.A. and the nation's 11 other military and civilian intelligence agencies.
In effect, Congress is forcing the C.I.A. to become something like a company undergoing a court-supervised bankruptcy reorganization.


AT LUNCH WITH: Martin Short; A Comic Chameleon At Play in Prime Time
MARTIN SHORT, in sweatshirt and jeans, flashes his brilliant U-shaped smile.
The comic actor has a distinctively mobile face, heavily freckled, which, depending on whether he's playacting or talking seriously, seems to toggle back and forth from an apparent age of about 23 to his real age, 42.
During lunch recently at Canyon, a vaguely Southwestern restaurant near the Studio City sound stage where his eponymous new television series is taped, Short the Younger does much of the talking.


Lyons Biennial Focuses on African Influences
Like any successful festival, the current Lyons Dance Biennial is full of strong, even contrasting, images.
This year's focus on black dance in Africa and beyond ("Mama Africa") is especially stimulating.
Many of the images are unexpected.
The African Jazz Pioneers, distinguished by a 1950's big band beat that comes out of South African black townships, are supposedly instrumentalists, not dancers.
But every so often, these superb musicians break into a series of cross steps, rocking gently in a complex dance phrase.
The elbow-swinging sequence is mesmerizing in its precision and repetitive patterns.
It is an obvious beacon to any aspiring American avant-gardist looking for new ideas.


If They Build Yanks-Expos World Series, Steinbrenner Will Come
Remember that farfetched proposal about the Yankees and Montreal Expos opposing each other in a World Series, in the season in which owners voted against conducting a World Series?
George Steinbrenner remembers it and adores it.
The Yankees' principal owner is in favor of playing the series and is curious about what has happened to the proposal.
Apparently, little has happened to orchestrate a series between the teams that sported the elite records in the American and National Leagues when the players went on strike Aug. 12.


Eating Well
IT has been two years since the plum torte recipe was last printed in The New York Times.
This is not exactly stop-the-presses information, but every year for the last 12, as fall is beginning, requests for the recipe have started to arrive.
Several years ago, one editor decided it would be the last year for the recipe, and when the announcement accompanying the recipe was made saying there would be no more reprints, fans stormed the barricades.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
The Many Extremes Of Nil Lara  S.O.B.'s
Natural talent can sometimes look like a bad thing.
Musicians who have it often seem lost or lazy.
It confuses people.
Nil Lara, a singer, guitarist and songwriter who was recently the subject of a mildly heated bidding war between record labels, has natural talent.
And he seems at a loss with what to do with it.


METRO DIGEST
SO MUCH YET TO DO: CUOMO MAKES HIS CASE
By his own acknowledgment, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has not accomplished nearly enough in his 12 years in office on a variety of issues from education to mental health.
But he argues that voters should re-elect him this year because of what he has managed to achieve in the face of a divided Legislature and a feeble economy, and because his opponent would not try to complete the work he has left undone.
A1.
MYSTERY SLAYING VICTIM IS IDENTIFIED
In the end, it was an application for a security guard's license that solved the mystery, giving a name to the disheveled woman in the rumpled jogging suit.
It was Carol Ann Artutis, the police said, a 23-year-old from New Jersey who apparently had been estranged from her family for several years.
A1.


Revco D.S. Inc.(RXR,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Aug 20


No Fed Rate Rise, and No Big Market Moves
The Federal Reserve's top interest rate policy committee adjourned after a four-hour meeting today without announcing any change in short-term interest rates.
But the consensus of economists was that the committee probably gave Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, considerable leeway to raise rates again before the committee next meets on Nov. 15, particularly if Government economic data issued in the next six weeks show signs that inflation is rising


INSIDE
Health Care Bill in '95 With the funeral for the health care bill barely over, the White House is already looking for ways to try again next year.
Page B7.
U.N.
Warns Hutu Refugees
After reports that the new Tutsi-dominated Government in Rwanda has killed thousands of Hutu, the United Nations has stopped encouraging refugees to return.
Page A7.
Plague Spreads in India
The first cases of pneumonic plague outside Surat, India, were confirmed far across the country, in New Delhi and Calcutta.
Page A6.
Eager to Judge O. J. Simpson
With Los Angeles residents eager to serve on the Simpson jury, weeding out those who are biased as the result of news coverage could start soon.
Page A14.
Restoring the Everglades
The Federal Government is drawing up an ambitious plan to restore Florida's Everglades to the wetlands of a century ago.
Page A14.


One Client That Wall Street Regrets
The classic stock market rip-offs are those in which the naive customer from Main Street -- the little old lady or the retired railroad worker -- gets taken by the Wall Street sharpie.
Every so often, though, it is the Wall Street broker who is said to have been taken to the cleaners by the customer.
Such is the claim of the securities industry in the story of Wall Street versus Michael J. Morse -- the tale of a single investor who traded from his Atlanta home and wound up causing millions in losses for Wall Street.


Dropout Rates for Minority Students Keep Rising in Cities
Although the nation's largest urban school systems have successfully involved more parents in their children's education than in previous years, the dropout rates for minority students continue to increase, a report by the Council of the Great City Schools says.
"The public has gotten used to hearing bad news about urban education," said Michael Casserly, executive director of the council.
"We realize we have a long way to go."


Saudi Prince Is Buying Big Hotel Stake
Four Seasons Hotels, a Canadian-owned chain as praised for its luxury and service as its accounting practices have been criticized, said yesterday that a Saudi Arabian Prince had offered to acquire 25 percent of the company for $122.1 million.
The investor, Prince Walid bin Talal, has gained increasing prominence since 1991 as he took major stakes in Citicorp, Saks Fifth Avenue and Euro Disney.


In Haiti Reporting, CNN Acted Responsibly; Coercive Diplomacy
To the Editor:
Secretary of Defense William Perry spoke with obvious pride of our Haiti operations on a MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour interview Sept. 19, when the landing of American troops had begun.
He called it a "textbook example of coercive diplomacy."


In Haiti Reporting, CNN Acted Responsibly; The Dictator at Home
To the Editor:
"Despite Role as Negotiator, Carter Feels Unappreciated" (front page, Sept. 21) shows how tyrants deceive highly placed emissaries.


Hillenbrand Industries(HB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Pennsylvania's Senators Hear Closings in Impeachment Trial
The impeachment trial of a former Pennsylvania Supreme Court Justice moved toward conclusion today when the State Senate was told in closing arguments that the justice, Rolf Larsen, should be found guilty for "a shocking pattern of conduct that redefines official corruption."
The Senate, after a five-week trial this summer, is expected to impeach Mr.
Larsen in a vote scheduled for next Tuesday.
If found guilty on any charge, Mr.
Larsen, a 60-year-old Democrat from Pittsburgh, would be removed and barred from holding public office.


An Anti-Drinking Campaign, and How It Flopped; Police Want to Break Up Teen-Agers' Beer Parties, but Parents Won't Let Them In
After two teen-agers were killed driving home after a night of drinking last winter, village officials here thought they had a fresh approach to combat unsupervised teen-age drinking parties: asking parents to waive their privacy rights and allow the police into their homes to rout drinking teen-agers.
Mayor Patrick A. Mancuso, Police Chief Louis J. Mader and their aides spent long hours mounting the campaign.
Given all the national publicity on the dangers of teen-aged drinking, they had high hopes.
They got the school board's mailing list of families with teen-agers.
They wrote, reviewed and then rewrote a letter explaining civil liabilities posed by unauthorized beer parties.
In early summer, they mailed copies of the letter and permission slips for police entry to about 2,700 homes in this upscale suburb.
Then they sat back and waited for the responses to pour in.


CHRONICLE
IVANA TRUMP is getting married again, to -- no surprise -- her longtime beau, RICCARDO MAZZUCCHELLI.
Mrs.
Trump, the former wife of Donald J. Trump, told The Associated Press yesterday that Mr.
Mazzucchelli, an Italian businessman, had proposed to her many times since they met, in England, at the Ascot races in 1991.
She did not accept until now, she said, because "I had to be comfortable with the idea of getting married."


Saatchi to Handle MGM/UA Account
The MGM/UA Distribution Company, the distributor of MGM and United Artists films based in Santa Monica, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in Torrance, Calif., to handle the media-buying portion of its account, which had been at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Los Angeles for the last two years.
Billings on the account were estimated at $30 million to $45 million, but are expected to rise as high as $100 million as the company releases more films.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 23
Sept 16
Sept 24
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.8
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.3
3.2
Gasoline stocks
209.6
211.1
207.6
Distillate stocks
142.1
142.5
129.4
Crude imports, daily
7.1
8.4
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.7
1.9
Crude stocks
328.0
321.4
327.5
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
93.6
93.8
93.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about President Clinton's address to the United Nations General Assembly misstated the title of Haris Silajdzic.
He is Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, not Foreign Minister.


Personal Health; Discovering life after cancer: a guided tour.
DR.
WENDY SCHLESSEL HARPHAM is a cancer survivor -- so far.
In the four years since she learned that she had a form of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph nodes, she has experienced repeated remissions and recurrences and, in the process, learned a great deal about how to live with and after cancer.
As a doctor, she had read widely about people who had to deal with chronic and life-threatening illnesses.
But she said it was not until she became a cancer patient that she realized that "I wasn't even close to understanding what it was like and I was blind-sided by how difficult it was to feel normal again."


Thomas Moran, 69; Ran a Fleet of Tugs
Thomas E. Moran, who led the Moran Towing Corporation of Greenwich, Conn., for more than three decades until its sale earlier this year, died on Monday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 69.
The cause was heart failure, said Malcolm W. MacLeod, president of Moran Towing.


A Boom for New York Restaurants? Maybe
JUST 10 days old, the refurbished Monkey Bar in the Hotel Elysee on East 54th Street in Manhattan resembles halftime at a football stadium's concession stand.
On a recent evening, its cocktail lounge teemed with after-work revelers.
In its stylized 1950's dining room Sylvester Stallone and his entourage held court in a corner banquette, food groupies were exchanging opinions about the penne with shredded lamb shank, and the irrepressibly hip dropped by to case the scene -- but not to eat.
Down at C. T., the acclaimed new restaurant of Claude Troisgros on East 22d Street, the dining room was packed with customers ordering the likes of $24 crispy snapper with confit of eggplant and $26 beef tenderloin in red-wine sauce with yuca biscuits.
Earlier in the day at Cafe Centro, the gleaming new 230-seat brasserie in the Met Life (ne Pan Am) Building, lunch customers were 12 deep at the reception desk.
And at Gramercy Tavern, reservations for a weekend night -- if you are lucky enough to get through on the telephone -- must be made three to four weeks in advance.


Upset by McCall Helps King Reign Again Among the Heavyweights
Just in case anyone hadn't got the message that Don King has regained a position of power atop the heavyweight division, the boxing promoter was in Manhattan yesterday to rub it in.
"It is my crowning achievement," King said. "I beat Seth Abraham."


Everett Quinton Puts His Stamp On His Theatrical Inheritance
When Everett Quinton took over the Ridiculous Theatrical Company after the death of Charles Ludlam in 1987, there was trepidation in this Off Broadway fun house.
As founder, playwright and star, Mr.
Ludlam seemed irreplaceable.
Since then, while respecting the theatrical legacy of his mentor and longtime companion, Mr.
Quinton has given the company his own irreverent signature: Ludlamania has been Quintonized.
He has reconceived Ludlam comedies like "Bluebeard" and "Camille" in his own image, offered his own adaptations of classics (including his quasi-modish variation on "The Hunchback of Notre Dame") and also presented plays by other Ridiculous hands (Georg Osterman's "Brother Truckers").
The season begins tomorrow night with "A Midsummer Night's Dream," a first for the Ridiculous and, of course, a first for Shakespeare.
In so doing, Mr.
Quinton is fulfilling one of Mr.
Ludlam's own dreams.
He had always wanted to direct Shakespeare; before he died, he was scheduled to stage "Titus Andronicus" for Joseph Papp in Central Park.


Foley Starts Race of His Life Far Away From the Crowds
Just days after an anemic showing in his primary and one local poll that put him well behind his Republican challenger, Speaker Thomas S. Foley returned to his district for a weekend of politicking.
But of all places in his sprawling territory to visit, he picked this outpost near the Canadian border, a place so sparsely settled that cows amble across the road in their own sweet time and voters seem as scarce as mountain lions.


Cleaving To the Goal Of Cleavage
THE New York woman knows what she wants.
She wants rent control, good restaurants, a seat on the subway and -- apparently -- better cleavage.
And so it is that in this hardhearted, troubled city, there is joy to be found as women greet the Wonderbra.
"Ah-h-h-h" exclaimed Mary DeLaCerda the other day on the third floor of Macy's at Herald Square.
She was strolling past a flock of Wonderbras displayed under a sign that said "One Little Push." That "push" was exactly what Ms.
DeLarCerda, a 33-year-old AT&amp;T manager, said she wanted.


Agreeing to Disagree


Judge Denies Freeze Of Harriman Assets
A Federal judge in Manhattan refused yesterday to freeze the New York assets of Pamela C. Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France, and Clark M. Clifford, a former Secretary of Defense, who were accused in a lawsuit filed by the heirs of W. Averell Harriman of squandering most of a $30 million trust.
Judge John S. Martin of Federal District Court said lawyers for the heirs had failed to establish that there was a "real threat" to their ability to collect damages if their suit prevailed.


Cortines Cuts Plans for New Schools and Repairs
The Board of Education's five-year construction budget is so inadequate that thousands of deteriorating classrooms will get no repairs and only a handful of new schools will be built despite surging enrollments, school officials said yesterday.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that under the city's new five-year, $3.4 billion capital spending program, conditions in many of the city's 1,070 school buildings will deteriorate rather than improve.
Robert Buxbaum, the board's chief executive for school facilities, called the plan "a disaster scenario for the schools."


Cuomo on the Record: Excerpts From Views On Campaign Issues
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo met with editors and reporters of The New York Times for 5 hours 15 minutes on Monday to discuss the issues in the gubernatorial race, his record in 12 years in office, and his goals for a fourth term.
A transcript of the session ran to almost 44,000 words.
Here are excerpts.
ECONOMY  The Budget
[ In a wide-ranging discussion of the state economy and budget, the Governor was asked how his proposals to cut taxes, still partly unspecified, would affect both local governments and the state's own recurring gap between revenues and expenditures. ]


One Mole, One Mountain of Trouble
Aldrich Ames was deceitful, but he told the truth at his sentencing in April when he bragged that he had done at lot more damage to the Central Intelligence Agency than the agency was admitting.
An internal C.I.A. assessment now says that in his nine years as a double agent, Mr.
Ames exposed 55 U.S. and allied spy operations and up to 34 individual agents, leading to the execution of at least 10.
The blow he dealt the agency's reputation, though not fatal, was punishing.
His largely unfettered career as a turncoat raises serious doubts about the the C.I.A.'s competence and even about the value of spying itself.


Time Served for Sammy the Bull
Because he had given much to organized crime, Salvatore Gravano had much to give the Government.
The former right hand to John Gotti delivered key testimony that sent the boss of the Gambino crime family to prison for life for murder.
Involved in 19 underworld rub-outs and enforcer of brutal extortion schemes and jury tampering, "Sammy the Bull" Gravano turned and helped imprison three dozen of his colleagues in those enterprises.
A grateful Justice Department plea-bargained, and on Monday a Federal judge in Brooklyn delivered in kind: instead of serving a life term for his own crimes, Mr.
Gravano will serve out most of a five-year sentence.
He could be released by spring -- basically a sentence of time served.


Israeli Police in Haiti? Suit Blocks Move
Just as it was about to join the American-led forces in Haiti, a contingent of Israeli police officers has had to unpack its bags while the legality of its mission is argued in the courts.
The 30 officers, said to be the first Israeli police detachment to be sent overseas, were to have left over the weekend.
Now, the earliest they can go is the end of the week, assuming they get clearance from the High Court of Justice.
Its members suggested in their questions during a hearing on Sunday that they are skeptical about this use of the police.


Morehouse Financial Questions Reach Board Chairman
The financial questions that led to the abrupt resignation of the president of Morehouse College last weekend have spread to the chairman of the board, who was a main ally of the president, even as students and faculty members tried to come to terms with the disruption.
The president, Leroy Keith Jr., 55, resigned as of Friday after a special audit raised questions about his compensation and living expenses.
Several trustees pressed him to explain how such expenditures had been authorized.


Martha Graham Troupe Receives $300,000 Grant
The Martha Graham Dance Company has received a $300,000 grant from the Doris Duke Foundation to ease cash-flow problems and encourage donations to the troupe.
A spokesman for Bernard Lafferty, the chairman of the Chicago-based foundation, said Mr.
Lafferty had been troubled by reports of the Graham company's inability to pay its dancers two weeks ago and of labor unrest in the troupe.
Miss Duke, the tobacco heiress and philanthropist who was a friend of Miss Graham, arranged a $1 million loan to the company in 1993.
The $300,000 gift comes from the foundation established during the lifetime of Miss Duke, who died last October.
Her will, which left more than 95 percent of her $1.2 billion estate to charity, is being contested in New York Surrogate's Court.


There's No Stoppage in Sight, but the N.B.A. Is Very Much in the Labor-Woes Lineup
There has been no progress in negotiations since the National Basketball Association's collective bargaining agreement expired in June.
And the two sides remain far apart on major issues.
Those facts have fueled concern that the N.B.A. is flirting with the same kind of labor turmoil that curtailed the major league baseball season and threatens to delay the start of the National Hockey League season.


From Governor Whitman, A New Quest for Tourists
A decade ago, a popular New Jersey Governor sought to bolster the state's image, along with his own, in an advertising campaign that featured the slogan, "New Jersey and You, Perfect Together." Gov.
Thomas H. Kean appeared in a frequently aired television commercial, walking barefoot along the beach while extolling the state's virtues.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who would also like to lure more tourists and businesses to New Jersey, said today that her administration had reinvented Mr.
Kean's idea.
For six months, state officials have been researching and field-testing a new slogan, and today they made public the results: "New Jersey, What a Difference a State Makes."


A Tour of London, Seen Through a Glass Darkly
The city of London is not a hospitable-looking place in Patrick Keiller's exceedingly arch cinematic meditation on England's largest city.
Filmed during Prime Minister John Major's 1992 re-election campaign, "London" examines a metropolis whose stately old architecture is increasingly dwarfed by hideous post-modern skyscrapers and mocked by garish billboards.
A gray pall of air pollution hangs over the Thames.
Members of the English royal family, shown discharging their ceremonial duties, look like wind-up dolls surrounded by toy soldiers.
And terrorist bombings by the I.R.A. inflict staggering property losses in the heart of the city.
Because the film has no live soundtrack apart from the narration and some faraway sound effects, it has the feel of an examination conducted through thick one-way glass.


For Booty, Playing Is a Costly Proposition
Football was not the problem.
The business of football was the culprit in John Booty's career.
Every time he seemed to grasp the principles, the numbers would throw him for a loss.
"After a while, you don't think about the money, you just want to keep playing," Booty, a Giants safety, said the other day.
He then echoed the credo for 10th-round draft picks:


A new chief at Saatchi New York seeks to get a many-headed agency to think as one.
MICHAEL JEARY and Bill Muirhead are speaking softly and carrying a small stick.
The stick is a souvenir of a meeting they held with 40 executives of the flagship New York office of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising shortly after Mr.
Jeary became chairman and chief executive of the troubled agency in July.


Corrections
An article yesterday about New Yorkers' reaction to President Clinton's visit referred incorrectly to the recipient of a human rights award given by the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, which prompted a protest at the Hotel Pierre.
The award was given only to a single Argentine, President Carlos Saul Menem, not to a group of Argentine leaders.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.78
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.71
4.79
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.16
5.22
3.03
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.59
7.55
5.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.79
5.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.68
8.64
7.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.55
6.53
5.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Energizer Enlists Darth Vader for Ad
Darth Vader, the villain in the "Star Wars" series of movies, is back battling a new rival.
This time, his opponent is not Luke Skywalker but a pink drum-beating toy bunny.
In a commercial by Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., the Darth Vader character tries to incinerate the bunny, the long-running symbol of Ralston Purina's Energizer battery brand.
Efforts to destroy the rabbit with a laser sword fail when it runs out of power; Darth Vader opens the sword, only to find batteries that are not Energizer.


Greyhound Plans a Default
Greyhound Lines Inc., the beleaguered bus company, came closer yesterday to leaving the driving to its creditors.
The company announced that it planned to default on a $4.2 million interest payment due at the end of the month because it was considering various options for reorganizing its operations, which have faltered as more airlines have adopted low-fare, short-haul routes that compete with its buses for passengers.


Allen Ginsberg Should Donate the Stuff
To the Editor:
Allen Ginsberg sells his papers and relics to Stanford University for $1 million and needs an agent to make the sale too (news article, Sept. 20).
Among the artifacts is the pair of sneakers he was supposedly wearing when he was thrown out of Prague in 1965.
What about the athletic support he took off at a Living Theater performance in Brooklyn in 1963?
Was that among the relics too?


Ameron Inc.(AMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Saudi Arabia Arrests 110 Muslim Militants
In a rare admission of trouble at home, Saudi Arabia has acknowledged the arrest in the last three weeks of 110 Muslim militants accused of joining "foreign interests" in plotting to "spread sedition" and destabilize the country.
The crackdown, announced Monday night, is remarkable both in its breadth and because it was disclosed publicly by the usually reticent Saudi Government.
Only a few days ago, Saudi Arabia had denied reports of mass arrests that appeared in the Arab-language press.


CBS Is the Big Loser In Season's First Week
The first week of the new television season produced encouraging results for three broadcast networks but dismal news for CBS, the network that has claimed the Nielsen title the last three years.
CBS was soundly beaten in the overall ratings by ABC and NBC, both of which had an outstanding opening week, which began Sept. 19 and ended Sunday.
It even lost to the Fox network among the younger viewers who are most valued by advertisers, the first time any network had been beaten by Fox in the premiere week among viewers between 18 and 49 years old.


SWAT Team for Berkeley
The University of California at Berkeley now has a SWAT team.
Over the summer the university police donned black military-style fatigues and, armed with automatic weapons, practiced how to rescue hostages from armed assailants and how to capture barricaded gunmen.


Stocks Are Up Slightly, With the Dow Advancing 13.80
Many stock traders correctly guessed yesterday that the Federal Reserve would not raise interest rates.
Traders therefore bid up stock prices, but not by much.
The bond market dropped a little and so did the dollar.
Gold promptly jumped, possibly, some analysts said, on fears the Fed was weakening its inflation-fighting resolve.
But it did not break above the important, $400-an-ounce barrier.


In Haiti Reporting, CNN Acted Responsibly
To the Editor:
At a time of war in the age of satellites and with the ability to report in real time, news decisions about what to show and tell and when are very difficult.
For most of us in electronic news, without meaning to speak for the other networks, I think the decision to delay reporting of United States planes taking off for Haiti was made in full awareness of the turbulent history of recent Pentagon-news organization traumas.


The Cuomo Legacy, as He Would Tell It
Governor Cuomo was asked what legacy he thought he had left to New York after 12 years in office, and what he hoped to accomplish in another term.
CUOMO I don't talk about legacies.
This is a big argument I had with my son a long time ago and he said unless you go out there and talk about legacy and pick one thing and say it over and over they'll never remember you for anything.
And that's probably the way it will come out.
Except I was against the death penalty.


Haiti's Priest-President Faces A Hostile Catholic Hierarchy
Barely a day goes by without Haitians taking to the streets to cheer the impending return of their elected President.
But from the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy that educated and ordained the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, there has come no word or gesture of rejoicing or support -- only silence.
To the President's many supporters within the church, it is clear that the mere thought of Father Aristide back in power is nearly as alarming to Haiti's Roman Catholic bishops as it is to the Haitian military.


Lyons Biennial Focuses on African Influences
Like any successful festival, the current Lyons Dance Biennial is full of strong, even contrasting, images.
This year's focus on black dance in Africa and beyond ("Mama Africa") is especially stimulating.
Many of the images are unexpected.
The African Jazz Pioneers, distinguished by a 1950's big band beat that comes out of South African black townships, are supposedly instrumentalists, not dancers.
But every so often, these superb musicians break into a series of cross steps, rocking gently in a complex dance phrase.
The elbow-swinging sequence is mesmerizing in its precision and repetitive patterns.
It is an obvious beacon to any aspiring American avant-gardist looking for new ideas.


In a Blighted Landscape, a Tale of Two Brothers
The title "Jason's Lyric" says a lot about what's wrong with this picture.
Jason is the name of the hero and Lyric the name of the woman he loves.
The phrase "Jason's Lyric" makes it sound as if he owns her instead.
That's just the first of several thoughtless problems in a muddled film that takes a standard urban action movie and adds a veneer of overwrought romance.
This is the first film directed by Doug McHenry, who has been more successful as a producer ("New Jack City").
It is the good brother-bad brother story, set in the run-down black section of Houston called the Wards.
Jason (Allen Payne) is the responsible young man who has a job in a television repair shop and lives at home with his hard-working mom.
Joshua (Bokeem Woodbine) is the brother just released from jail and obviously bound for some violent end.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Generation Conflict, 1956: Two Refugees and a Daughter  28th Street Theater
Tired of heartwarming plays about thin-skinned, struggling Jewish immigrants?
Meet Karl and Trude, the Austrian refugee couple in a London boardinghouse in Geraldine Sherman's "Broken English," a British import at the 28th Street Theater (120 West 28th Street, Chelsea).
They're loud, insensitive vulgarians who walk around in their underwear and make love like animals.
He steals and cheats at snakes and ladders with his daughter, while she's suspicious of anyone who won't take money for favors.


Officer Shoots Boy Holding A Toy Gun
Playing with a toy gun in the Gowanus Houses in Brooklyn, where real guns are all too common, a 13-year-old boy was shot and wounded last night by a police officer.
Nicholas Heyward was one of about a dozen boys playing cops-and-robbers just after sunset, chasing each other in the project with toy firearms.
The boys said the rules of the game, played in the grimy halls and dimly lit stairwells of the 14-floor tower at 423 Baltic Avenue, were these: Each boy got three lives, and after being "shot" three times had to change sides.


Roadway Services Inc.(ROAD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
On Cello, an Illustration Of a Good Side of Aging  Colden Center at Queens College
At the age of 70, Janos Starker inevitably does not command the cello as he did two or three decades ago.
He sometimes has trouble projecting his tone, and the second half of one of his recitals may not sustain the energy or focus of the first.
But these problems are outweighed, greatly outweighed, by Mr.
Starker's undiminished musical mastery, which made itself known in a recital on Sunday afternoon.


Federal Reserve Lets Rates Remain Steady
The Federal Reserve left interest rates unchanged after a meeting of its policy-making committee.
But economists said the committee probably gave Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, considerable leeway to raise rates again before the committee next meets on Nov. 15.
The markets showed little reaction.
Article, page D1.


Broncos' Elway Loses His Legendary Grip On Last-Minute Magic
Denver quarterback John Elway, the master of the fourth-quarter comeback drive, seems to have lost his magic touch.
Coming into this season, according to the Denver public relations department, Elway had guided 32 fourth-quarter, last-minute comeback drives, and the Broncos had a 31-0-1 record in those games.
This season he has fizzled in two comeback attempts, and both with the ball slipping from his hands as he tried to pass.
As sensational as his comebacks have been, Elway's recent miscues have been just as glaring.


Plague Cases Confirmed In Regions Across India
The first confirmed cases of pneumonic plague outside the stricken city of Surat were reported today far across the subcontinent, in New Delhi and Calcutta.
The reports appeared to confirm fears that the mass exodus from Surat that began after the first plague deaths there last week has carried the disease to wide areas of India.
At least 20 different cities and towns have now reported cases of suspected plague sufferers, including each of the country's three largest cities, Bombay, Calcutta and New Delhi.


Bates to Promote Hong Kong Tourism
The Hong Kong Tourist Association said yesterday that it had named Bates Worldwide to handle its global account, previously at Bozell Ltd. in Hong Kong.
Billings were estimated at $13 million.
Bates was awarded the account after a five-month review that also included Ogilvy &amp; Mather Ltd. in Hong Kong.
A campaign from Bates, with its Hong Kong office serving as the lead agency, is expected to begin in the spring.


Angry Turner Says He Wants NBC
Ted Turner lost his temper today, confirming in an angry speech here that he wants to buy the NBC television network and then complaining that Time Warner Inc. -- one of his biggest investors and a rival bidder for NBC -- won't let him do it.
"They're holding me back, and it just isn't right," Mr.
Turner, chairman of Turner Broadcasting System Inc., said.
"I want to be able to play in the big game," he added.
"I don't want to be pushed around anymore."


Military Appeals Court Doesn't Ban Cameras
To the Editor:
"Federal Courts, Back in the Dark" (editorial, Sept. 22) appraises the decision of the Judicial Conference of the United States to ban cameras in Federal courtrooms.
But your reference to a "total ban on cameras" is not quite correct.


Owen Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


G.I.'s Take Over the Parliament in Haiti
American soldiers took over the Haitian Parliament Building today as the United States military continued a vast expansion that is amounting to a virtual occupation of this country.
Thousands of Haitians, mostly poor and tattered-looking, frolicked around the Parliament Building -- curious and cheering crowds gather wherever the Americans appear -- as the soldiers put up barbed wire and checkpoints in preparation for a special session of the legislature on Wednesday.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the death of national health insurance legislation referred incorrectly in some editions to the home state of Senator Tom Harkin, a Democrat who advocated further negotiations.
He is from Iowa, not Indiana.


Book Notes
As the host of "In the Kitchen With Bob," a quick-and-easy cooking show on the QVC home-shopping channel, Bob Bowersox has a ready-made captive audience.
So when he produced his own cookbook, it was natural that he took it to QVC first, for an intensive two-hour selling session (with follow-up mini-sessions throughout the day) on Sunday.
Twenty hours later, the book, "In the Kitchen With Bob," had sold a truly astonishing 155,000 copies, becoming the most successful in a growing list of books sold on QVC along with consumer goods like jewelry, sports equipment, wristwatches and pots and pans.
None of the books have come close to selling as many as Mr.
Bowersox's, though, probably because of his high-profile position on the channel.
"Every week consumers are writing to him asking, 'What is this recipe, what is that recipe?' " said Amy Rosen, a merchandising director at QVC.


Recount Upholds a Slim Victory
A recount in a Republican primary on Long Island showed that former Assemblyman Daniel Frisa of Westbury defeated Representative David A. Levy of Baldwin by only 54 votes out of more than 24,000 votes cast, Nassau County officials said today.
The results of the recount are to be certified on Wednesday by the Nassau County Board of Elections, said David Kremer, acting clerk of the board.


At Dinner: Hot Lights, Light Food
Standing in the receiving line at the state dinner tonight in his honor, President Boris N. Yeltsin mopped his brow, his cheeks and his upper lip and rearranged his jacket.
Using hand signals, he asked the photographers to turn off their lights. No response.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the sale of Eastman Kodak's household products division misspelled the name of the acquiring company in some copies.
It is Reckitt &amp; Colman P.L.C. of Britain.


From a Study of Birth Defects, Clues to Accelerated Aging
AMONG the many surprises at school reunions is that people seem to age at different rates.
Some former classmates look like Fred and Ethel Mertz while others have scarcely lost the blush of youth.
Researchers say these varied appearances, while partly due to diet and living habits, may also have a deeper biological explanation than previously thought; some men and women may actually age faster than others.
Their external features and internal organs may be biologically older than their chronological age.


Johnson Is Released by the Rockies
HOWARD JOHNSON, with hit only .211 with 10 homers in the strike-shortened season, became eligible for free agency when the Colorado Rockies decided yesterday not to exercise a $2.95 million option.
The 33-year-old former Mets infielder and outfielder made $1.7 million in 1994 and will get a $400,000 buyout from the Rockies.


Allen Ginsberg Should Donate the Stuff
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 20 news article on Allen Ginsberg brings back memories.
I met Mr.
Ginsberg only once, at the San Francisco Human Be-In in the 1960's, but I spent the first 30 years of my life in or near his birthplace, Paterson, N.J.
And in the 1950's, when he was beginning his poetic career, I was a graduate student in English at Stanford University, which has just bought the Ginsberg archive.


Monk-Austin Inc.(MK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Treasury Issues Retreat As Rates Don't Change
Prices of Treasury long-term securities fell yesterday after the Federal Reserve left interest rates unchanged.
The 30-year bond fell 18/32 , to a price of 962/32 , for a yield of 7.84 percent, up from 7.79 percent on Monday and the highest since June 23, 1992.
The rates on shorter-term Treasury bills fell, however, as investors sold long-term notes and bonds into less volatile three-month and six-month bills.


Appeal for China Dissident
The family of Chen Ziming, the accused leader of the Tiananmen Square uprising, appealed today to Chinese security officials to "provide a humanitarian environment" for his "medical treatment and convalescence."
Mr.
Chen had surgery this month for testicular cancer after he was released on medical parole last May at the request of President Clinton and 54 United States senators.
He was serving a 13-year sentence.


Lomas Financial Corp.(LFC,N) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Blinking First on Trade; The U.S. and Japan Duel for High Stakes As Clinton Wields the Threat of Sanctions
Japanese and American negotiators engaged in a high-stakes economic duel today, with Japan insisting that it would make no more trade concessions to Washington and the Americans insisting that they would hit Tokyo with trade sanctions if more concessions were not forthcoming.
The Clinton Administration's confrontation with Japan, one American official remarked, is the economic equivalent of the confrontation with Haiti, with only one major difference: "This is really important."


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc.(SNTV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve's rate-setting committee adjourned without announcing a change in short-term interest rates.
Economists said it probably gave the chairman, Alan Greenspan, leeway to raise rates before its next meeting.  [ Page D1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  FERRY SINKS; HUNDREDS DEAD  A night ferry bound from Estonia to Sweden sank in a Baltic storm, and rescuers picked up only a few dozen of the 867 people on board.
A1  CHURCH IS COOL TO ARISTIDE  To the exiled Haitian President's many supporters, it is clear that the mere thought of Father Aristide back in power is nearly as alarming to Haiti's Roman Catholic bishops as it is to the Haitian military.
A1


Monk-Austin Inc.(MK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Far From Commercial and Quirky to the Hilt
Plenty of works at this year's New York Film Festival are assured a commercial afterlife.
You can spot them faster than you can say Quentin Tarantino or even Woody Allen.
At the opposite end of the spectrum are the two films in the program called "Avant-Garde Visions," works that revel in their nonnarrative styles and quirky, nontheatrical lengths.
Made by masterly film makers -- Alexander Sokurov from Russia and Mani Kaul from India -- they are like elegant visual riffs on literary themes.
"Whispering Pages" is Mr.
Sokurov's haunting black-and-white meditation on themes from 19th-century Russian literature, most conspicuously "Crime and Punishment." There is a murderer, the Raskolnikov character, who lives in a hovel and wanders the banks of a river.
There is a woman, the holy prostitute figure.
She becomes the focus of he murderer's philosophical questions about life, guilt and God, phrased in the film's sparse dialogue.
Mostly there is extraordinary photography, a palette of dusty gray tones that echo the faded look of 19th-century photographs.


Food Notes
Instant Oktoberfest
Oktoberfest, the annual German beer celebration, began in 1810 as extended festivities for the marriage of Crown Prince Ludwig of Bavaria.
The largest Oktoberfest is still the one in Munich, where more than a million gallons of beer are consumed at the annual 16-day citywide party.
Now, you can organize your own Oktoberfest, albeit on a more modest scale -- for just an afternoon, perhaps, and with a few six-packs.
An "Oktoberfest Kit" by Jim Horzen comes complete with an instruction book that illustrates traditional Bavarian costumes and dances and suggests the appropriate kinds of beer and food, including recipes.


Acquittal in Recruit Bribery Case Stuns Japan
After a chaotic year of rebuilding Japan's badly tainted political system, the country was stunned today when a politician was acquitted in the landmark Recruit bribery case, raising the prospect that several disgraced politicians might be rehabilitated.
Takao Fujinami, once a rising star in the Liberal Democratic Party and a former Chief Cabinet Secretary, had admitted to receiving nearly $500,000 in cash and securities in the mid-1980's from the Recruit Company, a publisher of job information magazines that stood to benefit from his influence.


Teen-Agers in Love But Otherwise Morose
During a rare meeting with his father, who openly acknowledges he has little time for his son, Gilles (Cyprien Fouquet) stands by uncomfortably while his parent speaks rapturously of Caravaggio.
"Few images of suffering move me more than this," says the father, pointing to a reproduction in an art book, and ignoring the subtler but more immediate unhappiness manifested by his son.
Not long afterward, Christine (Virginie Ledoyen), the bored, restless beauty with whom Gilles is shyly in love, wanders through an anarchic teen-age party.
Goaded by private demons and by the churning sounds of a Janis Joplin record (the year is 1972), Christine picks up a pair of scissors as she walks and begins hacking angrily at her hair.


Gharb al Banawaan Journal; Peasants See the Promised Land Snatched Away
Picking through his possessions under the pale glow of a kerosene lamp, the farmer placed his most precious in a dirty sack and plotted his escape.
"We will go at night," he said of his wife and 10 children.
"We will go to Alexandria and sleep near the train station. There we can find work as porters."


Washington Legislators Ready to Take the Field Again
The nation's capital, which hasn't had a baseball team since 1971, has become the only place for baseball in the absence of games and labor negotiations.
For the second successive Thursday, a Congressional subcommittee will hold a hearing aimed at ending the season-shattering strike and insuring a whole 1995 season.
Tomorrow's session deals with a House of Representatives bill that would impose binding arbitration on the dispute between the owners and the players if they have no agreement by Feb. 1.


Reporter's Notebook; A Cold War Later, Allies Once Again
The Clinton Administration was not much pleased when, at the insistence of President Francois Mitterrand of France and other European leaders, Russians were excluded from this summer's commemoration of the 50th anniversary of D-Day.
Nor were the Russians, for whom the savage struggles at Leningrad (now St. Petersburg) and Stalingrad (now Volgograd) constitute a sacred chapter in their nation's history.
Russians never forget that they suffered 20 times the casualties suffered by the British and the Americans in World War II, or that they inflicted three-quarters of all the losses taken by the Germans.


Bosnian Leader Agrees to 6-Month Delay in Lifting Arms Embargo
Asserting that "the free world neither supported nor defended freedom" in Bosnia, President Alija Izetbegovic said today that he would nonetheless agree to postponing the lifting of an arms embargo against his country for six months in return for stronger international protection.
The shift by the Bosnian Government, announced in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, followed more than three years of demanding the right to import weapons to defend itself against the better equipped Bosnian Serbs.


No Headline
"Most of the bishops have sold their souls to the devil. People don't forget, and that's why the bishops are scared." THE REV.
GERARD JEAN-JUSTE, an Aristide supporter.  [ A1:1. ]


A Drink a Day Keeps Clots Away, Study Says
A study published today suggests that a moderate consumption of alcohol might protect against the formation of dangerous blood clots that lead to heart attacks.
The finding appears to explain in part the observations in many previous studies that moderate drinking, defined as one or two drinks a day, was associated with a reduced risk of heart attacks.


Cavaliers' Nance Retires After 13 Seasons
Robbed of the spring in his legs by age and arthroscopic surgery, the three-time all-star forward LARRY NANCE retired yesterday.
Nance, 35, split his 13 seasons between the Phoenix Suns and the Cleveland Cavaliers and was the league's career shot-blocking leader among forwards with 2,027.
He was also a deadly outside shooter, a consistent scorer and rebounder, and one of the best defensive forwards in the game.


For 2,300 Kindergartners in New York City, the School Bell Rings Late


Clinton and Yeltsin Smile and Hug and Set Bosnia Aside
President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia tried today to sidestep disagreements on sticky issues between them, including what to do next in Bosnia, and put on a public display of shared affection as they opened a two-day summit.
The meeting between the Russian and American leaders is the first in the capital in more than two years, and from the moment Mr.
Clinton threw a bear hug around Mr.
Yeltsin at the diplomatic entrance to the White House this morning, almost everything about it seemed designed to project warmth and goodwill.


Image of Life Insurers Takes a Hit in a Consumer Survey
Insurance companies have long had problems with their image, but a recent survey by the industry shows that insurers of homes and automobiles are seen in an increasingly favorable light by consumers, while the reputation of life insurers is deteriorating.
Negative publicity during the last year about improper sales practices of some life insurance agents contributed to a decline in their favorable rating to 42 percent, from 48 percent a year earlier.
For the first time since the survey was started in 1968, life insurers fared worse than auto and home insurers, which received a 45 percent favorable rating, up from 41 percent in 1993 and a low of 33 percent in 1991.


Personal Digital Assistant, Part III
First there was the EO Personal Communicator from AT&amp;T, which was deemed so expensive and hard to use that it is no longer made.
Then came the Newton Message Pad from Apple, whose initial handwriting recognition software became the butt of jokes, and which has had total sales of only about 100,000 units after more than a year on the market.
Now, hoping for better results, the consumer-electronics giant Sony Electronics is introducing the latest attempt at a portable computer-communications device -- with, as it turns out, the help of the AT&amp;T Corporation and Apple Computer Inc.
Not to mention Motorola Inc., another partner in this multi-corporate effort, in which the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan and Philips Electronics N.V. of the Netherlands also have roles.


World News Briefs; Doubts Arise on Accord By U.S. and North Korea
Six weeks after the United States and North Korea endorsed a framework for settling their nuclear dispute, the latest round of negotiations is deadlocked, raising doubts about whether they can agree on steps to put last month's accord into effect.
After their session today, the fifth since talks resumed here last Friday, the United States team headed by Assistant Secretary of State Robert L. Gallucci issued a terse statement: "We can report no progress." On Monday, North Korea's chief delegate, Kang Sok Ju, gave a similar assessment.


Jeff Wadlington, Dancer, Dies at 29
Jeff Wadlington, who danced with the Paul Taylor Dance Company, died on Saturday at his home in Galisteo, N.M.
He was 29.
The cause was AIDS, said Nelson Bloncourt, his companion.


Accounts
*
Diversified Specialists Inc., Houston, to Sive/Young &amp; Rubicam, Cincinnati, to handle the toy manufacturer's account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Fired Gene Clines, batting coach.


An Insurer Is Expanding In California
The American International Group, one of the country's most profitable insurance companies and the leader in insuring businesses, is poised for a major expansion into personal automobile insurance, under an alliance announced yesterday with 20th Century Industries, a once-thriving California automobile insurance company that was laid low by losses from the Los Angeles earthquake early this year.
The alliance calls for American International to invest up to $432 million in 20th Century and for the two companies to cooperate as joint owners in new insurance companies that will sell insurance outside 20th Century's home market of California.
American International is no stranger to low-cost automobile insurance, which it sells through AIG Marketing, a little-known but rapdily growing Delaware subsidiary that specializes in direct mail marketing of personal automobile insurance.


Canucks' Coach and a Player Suspended
Forward GINO ODJICK of the Vancouver Canucks has been suspended for the first 10 games of the National Hockey league regular season, and his coach, RICK LEY, has been banned for the first 5, both without pay, in the aftermath of a fight during an exhibition game against the Los Angeles Kings on Sept. 12.
In announcing the suspensions yesterday, BRIAN BURKE, senior vice president and director of hockey operations for the N.H.L., also fined the Canucks $10,000 and Ley $1,000 for the incident.


N.H.L. Talks Drone On, With Bettman an Issue
Hockey keeps storming the fort of pop culture, sometimes crashing the side gates.
First it was rappers wearing team jerseys.
Next it was Mark Messier at the MTV awards.
Most recently, it was Mike Myers, one of the few live wires left on "Saturday Night Live," showing his puck passion by taking sides in the collective bargaining deadlock.
It happened over the weekend when Myers wore an "N.H.L.P.A." sweatshirt at the end of the season debut of the dusty, old satire show on NBC.
When the cast gathered on stage for its traditional good-night wave, Myers moved front and center to model his apparel.


Off the Menu
Pier Dining Is on the Way
More mega-restaurants are in store for New York.
The developers of Chelsea Piers, a complex of sports centers and film studios to be built by next summer on the Hudson River piers between 17th and 23d streets, have left space for two: one with 18,000 square feet and the other with 12,000.
A third restaurant will have a mere 4,000 square feet.
The restaurants are part of a project that includes an ice-skating rink, a climbing wall and a golf driving range.
They will also offer a whiff of history.
In April 1912, this stretch of the waterfront (the piers were completed in 1910) waited in vain for the Titanic, which was headed there on its inaugural voyage.
Sports Figure's Sports Bar
On a far more modest scale, there is Boomers, due to open next month in the space once occupied by Alcala, 349 Amsterdam Avenue (near 77th Street).
Boomer Esiason, the New York Jets quarterback, is a partner in this brick-walled sports bar with Rand Neveloff and Jeff Freedman.
Like all new sports-bar owners these days, they say theirs will emphasize food.
The chef, Keith Seaman, previously worked at the Hard Rock Cafe.
On Irving Place
The debut of Verbena, on Friday, will expand the brief list of restaurants in New York where women are chefs.
Diane Forley, who worked at the River Cafe and Gotham Bar and Grill, is both the chef and an owner of this intimate new dining room at 54 Irving Place (near 17th Street).
The town houses at Nos. 54 and 56 are being converted into a small hotel, the Inn at Irving Place, due to open in December.
The restaurant will serve contemporary American food and will have a lovely courtyard garden next spring.
Tavern City
Has Danny Meyer, a co-owner of the popular new Gramercy Tavern, started a naming trend?
Zachary's, at 51 West 64th Street, has new owners who have renamed it Lincoln Tavern.
And in November, Dutch Tavern, owned by Angelo Pietrunti and Peter Mendelsohn, will open at 393 Third Avenue (near 28th Street).
Dutch Tavern, of course, will serve Italian food.
Brazilian Lite
"Nouvelle Brazilian" conveys the gist of the cuisine at Circus, to open in a week or so at 808 Lexington Avenue (62d Street).
Paulo Olivera, one of the owners and a native of Rio de Janeiro, said the chef, Valquir Silva, who was formerly at Antiquarius, a popular restaurant in Rio, will be interpreting traditional Brazilian dishes to make them lighter and healthier.
"We'll use leaner cuts of pork," he said, and less palm oil, which has saturated fat.
The circus theme will be carried out in wall paintings and decorative artifacts.
'Architectural' Chinese
Michael Tong, the owner of Shun Lee Palace, 155 East 55th Street, is reopening the 25-year-old establishment today after a two-month face lift performed by the designer Adam Tihany.
There are two new chefs in the kitchen, one from Taiwan and one from Hong Kong, to prepare food from six regions of China.
Mr.
Tong says his chefs will be paying particular attention to stylish "architectural" presentation of the food.
A New Steakhouse in Town
Also opening today is the West 63d Street Steakhouse, at 44 West 63d Street, owned by John Kluge and Stuart Subotnick, who together own 1,500 restaurants around the country.
A glass elevator whisks customers from street level to the luxurious second-floor dining room.
Salaam!
Salaam Bombay, a big new Indian restaurant with lots of marble underfoot, has opened at 317-319 Greenwich Street (near Duane Street), in TriBeCa.
And like most of the newer Indian restaurants, it is turning to the tandoor oven for creative dishes.
Rack of lamb and whole fish stuffed with spices are among them.


11,500 Employees Strike At a Major G.M. Factory
About 11,500 workers at a General Motors manufacturing complex in Flint, Mich., walked off their jobs today in a union-led protest, asserting that the strain of keeping up with a robust demand for cars was ruining workers' health.
"We have more than 1,000 workers on sick leave," said Dave Yettaw, president of Local 599 of the union, the United Automobile Workers.
"At some point, organized labor has got to get off its knees. We haven't learned the lessons of our forefathers, that an injury to one is an injury to all."


Still Zany, Python And Cult Turn 25
The show wasn't always going to be called "Monty Python's Flying Circus." An early working title was "Owl-Stretching Time." Then, briefly, "The Year of the Stoat" and "The Venus de Milo Panic Show," before someone hit on the idea of "Gwen Dibley's Flying Circus." Naturally it made no sense, but it was only a short step from there to television history.
"There was really no reason why we did anything the way we did," explained Michael Palin, the actor and writer who was one of the six creators of "Monty Python." "But of course, there was a reason why we did things for no reason at all."


Crime Victims Call for Hard Labor
One woman was raped in her apartment in Budd Lake, N.J., three years ago.
Another's mother was shot to death as she closed her bar in East Rutherford eight years ago.
Another's husband was kidnapped and murdered in Paramus in 1989.
They came together here today with seven other New Jersey women, all of whom have endured the murder of a child.
The women publicly shared their grief and torment, their scorn for the state prison system and their support for a bill, moving slowly through the State Senate, that would create a new prison that would force inmates to do hard labor 10 hours a day and offer them few amenities.


Learning to Love Greens
CERTAIN Americans, particularly Southerners and those who grew up in Italian-American families, grew up eating greens.
But for the rest of us, greens with a bitter edge are an acquired taste.
As it turns out, it is an easily acquired taste, as this unusual combination of lamb with fennel and bitter greens shows.
It is especially good over bulgur, a nutty-flavored grain, and with steamed green beans dressed with a hot, sweet mustard.


White House Regrouping For Round 2 on Health
With funeral rites barely over for the year's effort to overhaul health insurance, Hillary Rodham Clinton and other White House officials are talking inside and outside the Administration about why they failed and how a pared-back proposal might be sold next year.
How much it would be pared back will not be decided until November, after elections determine how many Democrats will be in Washington next year to offer support.
A senior White House official who insisted on anonymity called the discussions strictly informal: Even the most basic issues, including whether the Clintons should put their names on a new plan, will not be resolved until after Congress goes home and serious work on the 1996 Federal budget begins early this winter.


Police in 2 States Trace Identity Of Slain Woman in West Village
In the end, it was an application for a security guard's license that solved the mystery, putting a name to the disheveled woman in the rumpled jogging suit.
It was Carol Ann Artutis, the police said yesterday, a 23-year-old woman from New Jersey who apparently had been estranged from her family for several years.
The application included a set of fingerprints that enabled the police to identify her.


Plague Cases Confirmed In Regions Across India
The first confirmed cases of pneumonic plague outside the stricken city of Surat were reported today far across the subcontinent, in New Delhi and Calcutta.
The reports appeared to confirm fears that the mass exodus from Surat that began after the first plague deaths there last week has carried the disease to wide areas of India.
At least 20 different cities and towns have now reported cases of suspected plague sufferers, including each of the country's three largest cities, Bombay, Calcutta and New Delhi.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Brandenburg Opera Gives 'Sonnambula' in Concert Liederkranz Club
"La Sonnambula" is an opera more lovable in microcosm than for any overarching dramatic sense.
Beneath the overall silliness lie Bellini's wondrously beautiful music and the ways he makes it explain, color and motivate the lives of his characters.
In Amina's great sequences, time stands still for reflection and sentiment; the duets are like waves of motion perfectly calculated to the cadences of Italian speech.
The use of hesitation and fragmented phrases to express mental confusion is an endearing bit of tone painting and one of Bellini's happier touches.


Investors Lose Money In 'Safe' Fund
Money market funds have long been thought to be among the safest investments for the average person, because they hold safe, short-term assets that do not stand to lose value if interest rates change.
But the Securities and Exchange Commission said today that for the first time in memory investors in a money market fund had lost money.
More than a dozen other money market funds have experienced portfolio losses as a result of ill-advised investments in recent months, but their managers have made up for those losses themselves so that their investors did not lose any money.
In this case, however, the fund manager, Community Assets Management, based in Denver, cannot afford to pay off investors, and will liquidate the fund at a loss.


No Headline


Allen Ginsberg Should Donate the Stuff
To the Editor:
I attended Allen Ginsberg's reading in Berkeley.
He read more than the two poems you name.
He read for about 15 minutes, reading older and newer poems, the newer ones reflecting his perspective on earlier times.
We would have loved an hour more, he did seem frail.


Lomas Financial Corp.(LFC,N) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Judge Cites New York City On Homeless
A state court judge yesterday held New York City in contempt for leaving more than 100 homeless families a night sleeping on chairs, tables and the floor of a city office while they waited for shelter during the last two months.
Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan had repeatedly cited the Dinkins administration for failing to shelter homeless families promptly, but yesterday's order was the first time that she rebuked the Giuliani administration.
A state rule requires that the city immediately shelter homeless families.


U.S. Sets Out New Antitrust Guidelines for the Business of Health Care
The Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission announced a new policy today to judge the legality of mergers, joint ventures and other financial arrangements that are revolutionizing the way doctors, hospitals, health insurers and home care companies do business.
The agencies defined "safety zones" for certain activities that will not be challenged under Federal antitrust law.
For example, the agencies said two small hospitals with low occupancy rates would have no trouble merging.
Likewise, they said, two hospitals of any size could team up to buy expensive equipment like a magnetic resonance imaging unit if each hospital by itself did not use the machine enough to pay for it.


Trump Wants to Build Big Tower on Island
The developer Donald Trump wants to buy an island from this tax-starved city and build Westchester County's tallest building on the 77-acre site known as Davids Island.
In a presentation to city leaders this morning that he stressed was "conceptual," Mr.
Trump and his associates described a 45-story tower that they said would become a regional architectural landmark similar to the Eiffel Tower or the Empire State Building.


Many Willing to Serve on Simpson Jury
With Los Angeles residents more eager to sit in judgment of O. J. Simpson than anticipated, Judge Lance A. Ito said today that the heart of the jury selection process -- weeding out candidates for bias or contamination from saturation coverage of the case -- could begin as early as Friday.
All afternoon, lawyers for both sides huddled with Judge Ito, weighing hardship claims of prospective jurors.
But with fewer of them invoking the usual excuses to avoid long jury service he said he might not have to summon an additional 250 candidates for consideration.
The judge said candidates were proving 25 percent to 30 percent more willing to serve than they ordinarily do.


Corrections
A review in some copies yesterday about a performance of "Pagliacci" at the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night misstated Luciano Pavarotti's history in the work.
His appearance at the Metropolitan on Monday was his first live performance of the role, although he has sung it on recordings.


CHRONICLE
JERRY NACHMAN, a former editor of The New York Post and longtime television newsman, who left it all behind to move to New Mexico two and half years ago, is coming back.
He will become vice president of news and general manager of WCBS-TV in New York.
"They won't let me do the job from here, " he said yesterday from Santa Fe, explaining that he would return within two weeks after attending a hot-air balloon festival.
"We had Faustian negotiations, and I had to surrender."


Hoping for Best on Frazier's Injury
With Nebraska's TOMMIE FRAZIER still hospitalized, Coach TOM OSBORNE was hopeful yesterday that the second-ranked Cornhuskers would not lose their quarterback for the remainder of the season.
Frazier was undergoing treatment to dissolve a blood clot behind his right knee and will probably remain hospitalized for at least a few more days, Osborne said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about a Federal hearing on racial and sexual discrimination at the executive level misstated the day of the hearing.
It was Monday, not yesterday.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Camacho Back on Right Side of the Ledger  Hector Camacho outpointed Pat Lawlor of Ireland in a 10-round welterweight bout last night in Bay St.
Louis, Miss., for the three-time world champion's 47th career victory.
Fighting at 153 pounds, the 32-year-old Camacho (47-3) won every round on two of the judges' cards and lost just one round on the other final card.
Camacho knocked Lawlor (20-5) down in the first round with a straight left to the nose.
Ranked 16th by the World Boxing Council, Camacho hopes to use his latest showing as a springboard to yet another title bid.
Camacho lost earlier this year to Felix Trinidad, the International Boxing Federation welterweight champion. (AP) TENNIS  Pierce Opens With Dispatch in Germany  Top-seeded Mary Pierce used powerful ground strokes to beat Jana Kandarr, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday in the opening round of the Volkswagen Cup in Leipzig, Germany.
Pierce inherited the top seeding when Steffi Graf pulled out because of a back injury. (AP) GOLF  Met PGA Senior Title Goes to Straub  Austin Straub of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., shot a two-under-par 68 yesterday and finished with a 36-hole total of 135 to win the Met PGA Senior championship at the Gardiners Bay Country Club in Shelter Island.
Gene Borek of White Plains, N.Y., finished second with 139. (AP)


Prodigy Exploring Services for Children
The Prodigy Services Company said yesterday that it had begun talking with agencies about developing on-line computer services programs aimed at children.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Aztar Corp., Phoenix, is selling $180 million of 13.75 percent senior subordinated notes due in 2004 priced at 98.68 to yield 14 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The notes are callable in five years and are rated B-2 by Moody's Investors Service and B by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Exxon Valdez Damages Imperil Environment
To the Editor:
Re "Long Shadow of the Exxon Valdez" (editorial, Sept. 21):
As a lawyer representing Capt.
Joseph Hazelwood in the Exxon Valdez litigation, I have been involved in the issues surrounding the Exxon Valdez grounding since the accident on March 24, 1989, and believe that your approval of the jury's $5 billion punitive damage award to 34,000 fishermen and other Alaskans illustrates a general ignorance of such an award's likely ramifications.


New Plan Realty Trust(NPR,N) reports earnings for Year to July 31


Just 'Like a Mom,' Baby Sitters Stepped In (and Reaped Fame)
They hang out, drifting from house to pizza parlor to train tracks, trading drags on cigarettes and nuzzling each other.
But for two weeks, this group of six friends led by 14-year-old Angela Morris worked in shifts cooking, cleaning, dressing, bathing and disciplining four young children whose parents were supposed to be gone for the weekend but who never came back.
At times, the teen-agers despaired.
Some of the children came down with fevers, coughs and runny noses.
There was no heat and no gas in the house.
For the children's baths, the sitters had to heat water in an electric coffee pot.


Hasek Returns, Is Expected to Sign Pact
DOMINIK HASEK, the top goalie in the National Hockey League last season, ended his five-day contract holdout yesterday and returned to the Buffalo Sabres' training camp.
Hasek will resume practice today in anticipation of signing a three-year contract extension, the team's vice president, GERRY MEEHAN, said.
Terms were not revealed.


MTV To Make 42d Street Rock
MTV will develop a studio complex in three adjoining Times Square theaters, it was announced yesterday by Frank J. Biondi Jr., the president of Viacom, MTV's parent company.
Mr.
Biondi mentioned the project almost offhandedly in an informal question-and-answer session at a breakfast meeting of the Association for a Better New York.
He said that as part of the 42d Street Development Project, MTV had taken an option on the Apollo, Times Square and Lyric theaters, all on the north side of 42d Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues.
The Lyric and the Times Square are shuttered.
At the Apollo, the promoter Ron Delsener presents about 100 rock concerts a year, using the 43d Street entrance.
The leases on the buildings are held by the New 42d Street, a nonprofit organization established by the city and state in 1990 to find new uses for six theaters on the block.


Metropolitan Diary
GENE MILLER of Miami was on a Continental Airlines flight about to take off from Newark earlier this month when a young woman jumped up, grabbed her backpack from the overhead rack and raced down the aisle to the exit.
"I'm staying," she said. "I'm in love."
Wouldn't it be nice to know the rest of this story?
. . .
Dear Diary:
Like many busy business people, I can't always find time to go out for lunch.
So recently I ordered in from a nearby restaurant-deli.
I asked for a tuna salad sandwich -- on a pita -- and a soda.
When it was delivered, I unwrapped my healthful lunch and to my surprise found a whole tuna sandwich on white bread -- sitting on top of an empty pita!
Literally, a tuna sandwich on a pita.
It's a good thing I didn't order my beverage on the rocks! ANDREI LLOYD
. . .
Dr.
Lois Shane of Waverly, N.Y., overheard this exchange at a Lower East Side glatt kosher deli counter featuring potato and kasha knishes.
Tourist with Midwestern accent: "What's kasha?"
Counterman: "If you have to ask, you wouldn't like it. Take the potato."
. . .
Dear Diary:
After ending an office romance, a female friend of mine threw a bag full of her former paramour's love letters, cards and poems into an outside dumpster.
The following day he called and wanted to know why she would throw out his letters.
She was stunned.
He explained that a homeless person going through the garbage read the correspondence and called the number found on a piece of stationery.
The homeless man was curious as to why two people who seemed so in love could now be apart.
"I would have called you sooner," he told the former boyfriend, "but this was the first quarter I was given today." PETER DeMARCO
. . .
Louise Demirjian of Bronxville, N.Y., was visiting the Frick Collection in Manhattan when she observed a group of white-haired women in what she described as "travel pantsuits" looking at the paintings.
First woman: "Look, look at that Degas painting."
Second woman: "Oh, I have a Degas in my dinette."
. . .
Each attendee at a recent block party in Upper Montclair, N.J., received a team shirt to compete in the various games and immediately changed into it.
Gregg Peters Monsees was the team captain assigned to pass out the shirts.
The day after the party, a neighbor called to say that when his wife went to reclaim the blouse she had taken off, it was missing.
Like most people, he thought of a number of replies after the fact:
(1) I am flattered.
(2) Am I the first person you called?
(3) I was in charge of handing out the shirts, not taking them off.
(4) Can my answer be used against me in a court of law?
(5) If I had your wife's blouse, you'd be the last person I'd tell.
(6) I'll check the bedroom.
And what did he say?
You guessed it.
"I just kind of said I didn't have it," he admitted.
. . .
The place: East Hampton Town Beach.
The time: Labor Day weekend.
Two brothers, about 5 and 7, are digging enormous holes in the sand.
The older one is obviously unhappy with the younger's level of concentration.
Finally, the dissatisfaction was voiced.
James R. Cohn overheard the following plaint: "What's the matter with you, Alexander? Do you have attention deficit disorder?"
. . .
Elizabeth R. Garside of Norfolk, Conn., said this poem "smacked into me as I sat on the porch desperately hoping for summer to come back."  AUTUMN SERVE  It should not be this dark so close to seven.
There should be brightness, where is the long easy fade?
It could be the low clouds, but still here is this early gloaming.
Now is toe-dragging season.
U.S.
Open gone, last ups, last swim, one final porch and tonic.
My toe hangs behind the line, unwilling to slip over into speed, shock of fall and winter.
Hold the line.
I will not fall.
. . .
Linda Hanrahan was in front of the Industria Studio on Washington Street in Manhattan when the following exchange took place between a woman in a suit, standing in front of a limousine, and a woman in jeans, balancing a cat carrier.
"Oh, kitty coming from the vet?"
"No, kitty coming from Vogue shoot."
Now that's one upmanship!


For Leader Who Lost, No Regrets
Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, sounds satisfied with himself as he insists that he does not regret giving up a nomination to the Supreme Court to work on health insurance legislation that now lies shattered.
"I think the decision I made was the right one, on the circumstances and facts that existed at that time," the 61-year-old Maine Democrat said in an interview today, less than 24 hours after he pronounced the effort dead.


The Scars of Disease, External and Internal
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FACE
By Lucy Grealy
223 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.
Suffering is exact.
Each kind has its own weight and measure.
Fearing you are ugly is not the same as knowing you are.
Anticipating pain you have never felt is different from dreading pain you know inside out.
Feeling that you have been asked to bear too much is a far cry from learning to bear it anyway.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMCAST INDUSTRIAL CORP., Dayton, Ohio, said its joint venture with Izumi Industries of Japan had been awarded a contract for General Motors suspension components valued at about $100 million.
CHARTER BANCSHARES INC., Houston, declared a 5 percent common stock dividend to be paid on Oct. 31 to holders of record on Oct. 15.


George H. Lesch, 84, Ex-Chief of Colgate
George H. Lesch, a former chairman and chief executive of the Colgate-Palmolive Company, died last Thursday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 84.
Mr.
Lesch was president and chief executive of the Manhattan-based company, whose headquarters are at 300 Park Avenue, from 1960 to 1971.
He was chairman from 1961 to 1974.


Republicans Offer Voters a Deal for Takeover of House
With flags waving, a band playing and a bank of television cameras rolling, Republican candidates for the House of Representatives mustered on the steps of the Capitol today to sign a list of tax cuts and other measures that they promised to press in their first 100 days if they win control of the House in November.
They called it their "contract with America."
In a way, it was a throwback to the Reagan era with pledges of deep reductions in taxes for individuals and companies, a stronger military and a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget.
In Reagan fashion, there was little mention of exactly where Government spending would be cut so that the lower taxes would not worsen the budget deficit.


Public &amp; Private; The Price of Privacy
The city was haunted.
Not by the little girl who is said to bounce a red ball through the halls of the Dakota, many decades after death, saying happily, "It's my birthday." Not by the weeping Olive Thomas, the long-ago Ziegfeld Follies star who has been sighted from time to time, vaguely transparent, in the New Amsterdam Theater.
This newest ghost was a contemporary one, a young woman in a brightly colored running suit with blond hair framing even features.
Her face was not spectral; it appeared on posters taped to the door of nearly every coffee shop and deli in lower Manhattan.
Tuesday of last week she was discovered dead in a long-haul trailer on the western outskirts of that pleasant low-slung area known to New Yorkers simply as the Village.
She had been strangled, her clothes disarranged, her body badly decomposed.


Heavy Metal Band Sues Record Label
Metallica, one of the country's most popular heavy metal bands, filed a lawsuit yesterday in California Superior Court against its record label, Elektra, seeking to end its contract with the company.
The band's lawyer, Jody Graham Dunitz, said that she hoped to release the band from its relationship with the record label under a section in the California Labor Code that permits an employee to be freed from a personal-services contract after seven years.
Metallica has been under contract with Elektra for 10 years.
"To this day," said Lars Ulrich, the band's drummer, "we're still operating under the same contract we had with those guys in 1984, and getting the same royalty rate."


People
*
Diane Spencer, senior vice president and print services director, and Don Davis, senior vice president and group media director, both at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, were promoted to media planning directors.
They assume the responsibilities of Beth Rockwood, executive vice president of media planning and associate director of the Y.&amp; R. communications services department, who resigned in June. *
Susan R. Rerat was named to the new position of associate publisher at Garden Design magazine, New York.
She was previously advertising director at Bon Appetit magazine, New York.


Jackson, Ex-Giant, Signs With the Colts
With a three-game losing streak and a passing game that ranks last in the National Football League, the Indianapolis Colts signed the former Broncos and Giants receiver MARK JACKSON yesterday.
The eight-year veteran gives the Colts experience at one of their most vulnerable positions.
Terms of the contract with Jackson were not disclosed.
The Colts would not confirm a three-year, $1 million offer to Jackson, reported yesterday by The Indianapolis Star.


Charles Sopkin, 62, Author, Editor and Publisher
Charles Jeremy Sopkin, an author, book editor and publisher, died on Thursday at Stanford University Medical Center.
He was 62 and had lived in Palo Alto, Calif., for the past five years.
Mr.
Sopkin had been in poor health for several years, and died apparently after a heart attack, said his brother, Elliott.


Giuliani Considers Expanding Severance Offers to Avert Layoffs
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is considering offering voluntary severance packages to even more New York City workers than already announced, in an effort to trim the city payroll and save money while averting widespread layoffs, officials said.
The idea of expanding the severance program beyond the 6,139 who accepted it last spring and the 3,000 to 4,000 more under consideration came as the Mayor summoned officials of the city's municipal labor unions to an unusual meeting at Gracie Mansion yesterday afternoon to give what officials described as a sobering briefing on the city's latest budget shortfall.


So Much Yet to Do: Cuomo States His Case
By his own acknowledgment, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has not accomplished nearly enough in his 12 years in office on a variety of issues from education to mental health.
But he argues that voters should re-elect him this year because of what he has managed to achieve in the face of a divided Legislature and a feeble economy, and because his opponent would not try to complete the work he has left undone.
The Governor spent five hours and 15 minutes delivering that message -- and demonstrating his endurance -- in a marathon interview with waves of reporters at The New York Times on Monday.
Even for Mr.
Cuomo, who has never had trouble talking at length, it was an uncommon performance.


Clinton Sends Congress Global Trade Measure
President Clinton today sent to Congress a bill to carry out the new global trade agreement, and Administration officials predicted that it would be approved before Congress adjourns next week, despite opposition from a top Democrat and uncertain support from some leading Republicans.
Senator Ernest F. Hollings, the South Carolina Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, has been pressing for provisions in the bill that would tighten restrictions on textile products entering the United States that compete directly with those from his state.


Merrill Ousts a Couple, Who Disappear
In a bizarre episode, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has dismissed a rising young broker, accusing her of creating phony and inflated accounts for her clients, and she has apparently vanished.
Merrill Lynch, which calls its brokers "financial consultants," said Janie D. Thomas, 32, spent the last six months creating the fictitious accounts at the firm's branch in Las Vegas, Nev.


U.N. Stops Returning Rwandan Refugees
In a sharp reversal of policy, the United Nations has stopped encouraging Rwandan refugees to return and is refusing even to assist those who wish to go home because of a report that the new, Tutsi-dominated Government in Rwanda has killed thousands of members of the Hutu ethnic group.
The report, which has been prepared by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees but has not been released, has set off a bitter dispute within the world organization and led the Secretary General to demand that United Nations officials refrain from discussing it.


McNair Is Man of the Hour in Mount Olive
The drive is 50 minutes south from the Jackson, Miss., airport to the Big M.O.
The air is crisp and clean, and the usually oppressive heat is mild on this midweek afternoon.
Before you know it, you have arrived in Mount Olive, population 900.
The Big M.O., some residents here affectionately call it.
Steve McNair, Alcorn State's senior quarterback, a Heisman Trophy hopeful, grew up here in the Mt.
Pleasant community in Mount Olive.
The Big M.P.
All around are pleasant signs of the cherished bridge he has crossed from anonymity to stardom.
On this day he has just made the cover of Sports Illustrated, the only Mississippi athlete to achieve that distinction other than another quarterback, Archie Manning, 24 years ago.


Opening-Night Rituals, With Passion
There is often a kind of rote ritual to opera performance.
Love, jealousy and death are enacted again and again, night after night, to stormy musical accompaniments in the hope that once in a while something real will break through the art and artifice, and that the passion enacted will become passion felt.
Even such hopes, though, are usually put aside for opening night at the Metropolitan Opera, another sort of ritual in which the company honors its wealthiest and most loyal patrons and they return the favor.
Usually no one expects too much from these often fractured evenings, although occasionally, as in Placido Domingo's performance last season in the first act of Wagner's "Walkure," real opera breaks through the ritual.


From Fanfare to S.E.C. Accusations
The Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday charged a New Jersey company that had once been promoted as a promising small company on the American Stock Exchange with fraud.
Several of its top officers and an outside auditor were also accused of fraud and insider trading.
The company, PNF Industries, a maker of flame retardants, stopped trading and was delisted from the exchange in 1992 after it was disclosed that Alfred Avasso, its largest shareholder, had pleaded guilty to mail fraud and had once been barred from associating with the exchange in the mid-1980's.


In Dead Heat Now, Feinstein Is Trying to Take Fight to Foe
After months of battering in one of the longest and most expensive television attack campaigns in Congressional election history, Senator Dianne Feinstein has seen her wide lead in pre-election polls in California evaporate and is now turning to attack advertising herself in an effort to salvage her campaign for re-election.
The latest polls show that Ms.
Feinstein's wealthy Republican opponent, Representative Mike Huffington of Santa Barbara, has pulled even in the race, which will not only decide Ms.
Feinstein's political future but will also help determine whether her party retains control of the Senate and whether President Clinton can hold this crucial state in 1996.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
A Fringe Benefit of Roses
Q.
I've heard that the small berries on roses are good to eat.
How do I get them to form on my plants and how are they used? -- Angela Rodgers, Marblehead, Mass.


Settlement for Brown's Female Athletes
Citing what they described as significant recent improvements in the way Brown University treats its women's athletic teams, the Brown women who brought a two-pronged Federal sex discrimination suit against the university two years ago have agreed to a tentative settlement on one set of their claims while they continue to pursue another.
The settlement, which was reached two days after the full suit went to trial in Federal District Court in Providence, R.I., calls for Brown to continue what the women have formally accepted as equitable treatment with men's teams and for the women to drop their claim that Brown had given its women's teams short shrift in the past.


IN THE STUDIO WITH: Cassandra Wilson; Singing a Song of the South
CASSANDRA WILSON crafts her melodies in an apartment that looks out over the Harlem River.
It is a space imbued with the past, the same sense of memory that guides Ms.
Wilson's spirit and shades her music.
It is here that she practices jazz licks and smoky riffs under the watchful gaze of her elders.


U.N. Commission Recommends Rwanda 'Genocide' Tribunal
A commission set up by the United Nations Security Council is to recommend that an international tribunal prosecute charges of genocide and similar crimes in Rwanda, diplomats said today.
The Security Council is expected to act quickly on the recommendation, which is to be made public on Thursday.
A Security Council resolution on the tribunal, drafted by the United States, states that "systematic, widespread and flagrant violations of international humanitarian law, including acts of genocide, have been committed in Rwanda."


Schnitzer Steel Industries(SCHN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Four Unknown Works, Four Different Styles
One of the Juilliard School's happier ideas has been its new new-music group.
Conducted by experienced professionals and staffed by students, this New Juilliard Ensemble opened its second season at the Juilliard Theater on Sunday afternoon.
The music was unknown to most of us, and mostly worth hearing.
Joel Sachs led his young players in four pieces, using chamber orchestras of various sizes.
Looking back in time at musical trends is always easier than trying to catch history in midflight.
The present crowds us; we have no perspective on it.
Series like this, on the other hand, are not a bad way to make an attempt.
Sunday's four items, all premieres of a sort, went in four different directions.
They offered provocation mostly for what they were not.


METRO DIGEST
IN BROOKLYN, TOY GUNS LEAD TO TRAGEDY The rules of the game were these: there would be two teams, one cops, the other robbers; each team member would have three lives; get shot by one of the plastic guns everybody had and you would lose a life.
Then one 13-year-old's life was ended by a real gunshot from the revolver of a real police officer on routine patrol.
A1.
A second youth with a toy weapon was wounded by the police in a separate incident.
B3.


Nebraska's Frazier Leaves the Hospital
Nebraska's star quarterback, TOMMIE FRAZIER, was released from a hospital yesterday after treatment dissolved a blood clot behind his right knee.
Frazier declined interviews, but issued a statement of thanks to the fans, doctors and his teammates through Nebraska's sports information office.
"I feel good and I am anxious to see my teammates," Frazier said in Lincoln, Neb.


Giants' Brown Emerges As Impressive Bargain
Dave Brown is 3-0.
He has amazed people with his toughness and his skill.
Once it was Dave who?
Now, it's Downtown Dave Brown.
He is doing television commercials with Boomer Esiason and Joe Namath and Phil Simms.
People know who he is and what he can do.
He is approaching big time.
Well, big time in every way but one: his salary.
Brown is the only undefeated quarterback in the National Football Conference and the Giants are one of only two undefeated teams in the entire National Football League (the Chargers are the other at 4-0).
Yet Brown is the second-lowest-paid starting quarterback in professional football, earning $1.25 million this season, according to the National Football League Players Association.
Only Jim Harbaugh of Indianapolis makes less -- $877,000.


Cuomo Shifts His Focus to Children's Issues
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that if he is re-elected, he would ask the Legislature to expand the state's program of subsidizing health insurance for the children of the working poor.
Mr.
Cuomo said he also would propose changing the state's formula for allocating money for school construction to local governments, a change that could double the $120 million in capital funding that the state gives annually to the New York City Board of Education.
Board officials have complained that their new five-year, $3.4 billion capital budget is so inadequate that conditions in many buildings will deteriorate rather than improve.


Procter &amp; Gamble Is Biggest Spender
America's largest advertisers spent $37.9 billion in 1993, up 5.2 percent from 1992, according to Advertising Age's 39th annual ranking of the 100 leading national advertisers.
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company headed the list in 1993, as it did in 1992, with spending of $2.4 billion, up 10.7 percent.
The Philip Morris Companies, second in 1992, was second again in 1993, at $1.8 billion, down 6.7 percent.
The rest of the top five were: the General Motors Corporation, $1.5 billion, up 14.4 percent; Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, $1.1 billion, up 12.4 percent, and Pepsico Inc., $1 billion, up 11.8 percent.


Disney Drops Plan for History Theme Park in Virginia
The Walt Disney Company announced last night that it had abandoned its chosen site in Northern Virginia for a sprawling American history theme park, a project that was reviled by historians and environmentalists and hotly debated at local planning boards as well as the United States Senate.
The company said it would seek another site for the development, possibly in Virginia.
Peter S. Rummell, president of the Disney Design and Development Company, made it clear in a statement that the company had bowed to a torrent of criticism, in part out of a fear that opposition could delay the project.
"Despite our confidence that we would eventually win the necessary approvals, it has become clear that we could not say when the park would be able to open, or even when we could break ground," he said.


Ouster of Chairman of New Valley Sought
Shareholders of the New Valley Corporation, the holding company that owns Western Union, have a proposed reorganization plan that seeks to oust the company's controversial chairman, Bennett S. LeBow.
Under a plan filed late Tuesday in the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Newark, the committee representing most of the company's shareholders proposed that Mark Dickstein, president of the investment firm Dickstein Partners L.P., manage the company when it emerged from bankruptcy protection.


Journal; Fire the Messengers
When a President speaks out of both sides of his mouth with the whole country watching, no press secretary's spin can save him.
So it's hardly Dee Dee Myers's fault that even some of Bill Clinton's loyal partisans use phrases like "the last straw" to characterize the President's shotgun marriage to the Haiti strongmen formerly known as thugs.
The televised images of the thugs' thugs wielding crowbars in Port-au-Prince may overpower any words emanating from the White House for some time to come.
Just the same, who can doubt that Mr.
Clinton has the worst public relations of anyone in politics, Dan Quayle included?
The President has done more than a few things right, but such is his low estate that even the foolproof tonic of a growing economy won't lift his poll numbers.
When Mr.
Clinton isn't busy being his own worst enemy, sending forth mixed messages about Haiti or his numerical definition of universal health care, his inept messengers work overtime seeing to it that the good news is garbled as well.


With Old Skills and New, India Battles the Plague
Baban Jhadav leaned forward like a medieval swordsman, both knees bent, peering intently into the darkness along the line of his wooden stave.
Standing perfectly still, he flicked his wrist sharply downward, bringing the heavy spiral of wire at the end of the stave into sharp contact with the ground.
"Yes! I got it!," he cried.
Nimbly, he dropped down on one knee and picked a menacing-looking rat, eight inches long, out of the concrete gully beside the Easy Wash laundry in the Colaba market here.


Charles King, 73, Who Worked With Troubled Adolescents, Dies
Charles H. King, a social worker known for his work with troubled adolescents, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 73 and lived on the Upper West Side.
The cause was cancer, said Chris Dolin, the executive director of Creative Arts Workshop for Kids, a Manhattan agency for which Mr.
King was a consultant.


Accounts
*
Dental Concepts Inc., Elmsford, N.Y., to Katz Dochtermann &amp; Epstein Inc., New York, to handle advertising for its Toothpaste Booster brand, previously at Carrafiello Diehl &amp; Associates, Irvington, N.Y.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Armani at Center Stage in Italian Graft Inquiry
First came the clothes and the label that made Giorgio Armani a synonym for "bella figura," Italy's defining master of chic.
Then came the fall: last Saturday, Mr.
Armani became the latest of the high-ticket, high-profile Italian fashion designers to go before corruption magistrates in Milan and, according to his lawyer, admit to paying a kickback to tax inspectors in 1990.


Return of the Plague
Like a nightmare returning from the Middle Ages, an epidemic of plague has struck India, sending hundreds of thousands of terrified residents fleeing from the industrial city of Surat.
It is primarily an outbreak of pneumonic plague, the most virulent form of the disease and the most contagious because it is spread by coughing.
But as the panic mounts in India and other countries, it is reassuring to recall that this disease, for all its historic savagery, should be controllable in the modern world.
There are potent antibiotics to treat the victims, sanitation measures to reduce rat populations that harbor the lethal bacteria, and pesticides to kill both the rats and the fleas that spread the disease.
The fight may be difficult in India, where millions of impoverished citizens live jammed together in slums with poor sanitation and rudimentary health care.
But even there, a vigorous public health campaign should be able to contain the epidemic.
Whether the Indians are mounting such an effort is a troubling question.


Carolina Freight Corp.(CAO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


Hollywood Park
Shares of Hollywood Park Inc., which operates the Hollywood Park race track in California, dropped sharply yesterday in Nasdaq trading after the company said analysts' estimates of its 1995 earnings were too high.


Rochester Community Savings Bank (RCSB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Economic Scene; Race and gender data for small-business loans break new ground.
ANOTHER shoe dropped in President Clinton's campaign to stamp out lending discrimination against poor neighborhoods and minorities, as Federal regulators proposed standards this week for what banks must do to meet obligations that have been law for nearly two decades.
But that is hardly the end of the tale.
For the proposal breaks new ground in one area -- race and gender discrimination in small-business loans -- that many economists and some regulators think would better be left untouched.
Indeed, Lawrence B. Lindsey, the Federal Reserve governor who helped negotiate the new rules, is in rebellion.
"A change in policy of this magnitude is best left to Congress, not to a small coterie of regulators," he said in a statement.


Little Hope for 800 Lost in Sinking of Baltic Sea Ferry
More than 800 people were dead or missing after an Estonian ferry capsized and sank in a stormy Baltic Sea just before 2 A.M. today in one of history's worst ferry disasters.
Rescuers pulled 126 survivors from the raging waters.
The Prime Ministers of Estonia, Sweden and Finland flew to the Finnish port of Turku to visit survivors and confer with investigators looking into the maritime catastrophe.
All three countries declared periods of official mourning.


INSIDE
Summit Pact on Weapons
President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia agreed to speed destruction of nuclear weapons but made only limited progress on other issues.
Page A10.
All the White House Women
As Naina Yeltsin tried to keep up with Hillary Rodham Clinton's frantic pace, Washington debated whether women were slipping in the White House hierarchy.
Page A18.
No Action on Haiti Amnesty
The Haitian parliament convened in Port-au-Prince under U.S. guard but took no action on amnesty for the military leaders.
Page A16.
Banker to Help Run Schools
A newly created post overseeing day-to-day management of the New York City school system has been given to a former banker, drawing criticism from the Mayor.
Page B1.
Religion in the Kennedy Race
A tight Senate race in Massachusetts between Edward Kennedy, a Catholic, and Mitt Romney, a Mormon, has both men accusing the other of religious intolerance.
Page A22.
If Medals Were Votes . . .
Senator Charles Robb of Virginia accused his opponent, Oliver North, of deceit.
The issue: Which candidate is the real Marine.
Page A22.


No Longer a Pariah, I.R.A. Leader Finds City Hall a Greener Place


CHRONICLE
Former President GEORGE BUSH and his wife, BARBARA, have a new neighbor in Houston with whom they can talk politics -- if they want to.
Secretary of the Treasury LLOYD M. BENTSEN bought a six-bedroom, six-bathroom town house in the Tanglewood district earlier this month from Joseph D. Jamail, according to the deed filed with the Harris County Appraisal District.
The purchase price was not disclosed.
The secretary paid "considerably more than $500,000," Howard M. Schloss, a spokesman for Mr.
Bentsen, said yesterday.


Mexican Political Leader Is Slain, 2d in a Year
A powerful leader of Mexico's governing party who was expected to play a major role in the government of President-elect Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon was shot to death this morning on a crowded street in downtown Mexico City.
The assassination of the politician, Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, the party's secretary general, came just six months after a gunman shot and killed the party's presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, and it shocked Mexicans who had been hoping that the country's recent problems with violence and instability had begun to subside.


Israel Weighs Expanding West Bank Settlements Near Tel Aviv
As negotiations over the occupied territories continue, Israel has signaled that it wants to strengthen its hold on parts of the West Bank near Tel Aviv by expanding Jewish settlements there.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who came to power two years ago pledging to rein in his predecessor's extensive settlement-building, has never hidden that this restraint does not apply to West Bank areas around Jerusalem.
Settlements like Maale Adumim, on the eastern outskirts of Jerusalem, have been steadily augmented, with an eye toward perhaps incorporating them fully into Israel even if the rest of the territories fall under Palestinian control.


Topics of The Times; The Big Nigerian Fiction
Why would Nigeria's military dictators seize the passport of Wole Soyinka, a Nobel laureate in literature and Nigeria's best-known citizen?
It makes little sense.
By stopping him at the airport to prevent his attending a conference in Sweden, the junta called fresh attention to Mr.
Soyinka's eloquent condemnation of its repressive policies and its jailing of Moshood Abiola, the winner of last year's canceled election.


Sports of The Times; Helping To Translate Don King
NO, Don King is not the world heavyweight champion.
It just seems that way.
Or sounds that way.
"We got a title for Mike Tyson to fight for," the hardly humble promoter has been screeching ever since Oliver McCall dethroned Lennox Lewis for the World Boxing Council championship last Saturday night.
"With Mike Tyson, you don't need a unification fight. We don't need but one title for Tyson to fight for."


9 Earlier Sinkings With Heavy Losses
MARCH 28, 1993: 175 die when a ferry capsizes in the Telulia River in Bangladesh.
FEB. 16, 1993: Overcrowded ferry sinks between Jeremie and Port-au-Prince, Haiti, killing 500 to 700.


If Schools Fail, Don't Blame Disabled Students; Prayer Excludes
To the Editor:
Growing up in the 1950's allowed me to experience public school prayer.
Not being religious, I refused to participate in this ritual.
While the other students had their heads bowed and I did not, some took notice.
As a result, I was paid with verbal and physical abuse.


Celebrating The Trends In Design
THIS week and next are annual market weeks for designers, so if you can't reach your decorator, you'll know why.
Tonight, at the Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum, I.D., the industrial design magazine, will celebrate its 40th yearly design review.
The party will honor the designers who won the magazine's 1994 jury awards in categories like consumer products, furniture, packaging and "environments." Winning products include the Vercingetorige alarm clock designed by Julian Brown, an industrial designer in Bath, England; the OHM electric-powered scooter designed by Joe Tan and Achim Anscheidt, students at the Art Center College of Design in Pasadena, Calif., and the exhibition design of the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington.


Big-Time Rutgers Faces (Bigger-Time) Miami
The Rutgers faithful have been waiting for something significant or spectacular to take place on the gridiron since New Jersey's state university projected itself into big-time college football 15 years ago.
They are still waiting.
And chances are good they will still be waiting after Saturday's game here against Miami, a three-touchdown favorite.
This matchup amounts to another opportunity for Rutgers to make a significant imprint on the Big East, something the Scarlet Knights have not done in four seasons of conference play.
Rutgers has an 8-12 record against Big East opponents.


U.S. and Russia to Speed Disarmament
In a cordial, almost jocular atmosphere, President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin agreed today to speed destruction of nuclear weapons, but they made only limited progress on several other issues.
"Relations between our nations are moving forward at full speed," Mr.
Clinton said at a joint news conference in the East Room of the White House after the signing of documents pledging cooperation on economic and security matters.


Attack on Germany
To the Editor:
The advertisement of the Church of Scientology ("Never Again," Sept. 22) parades concern about neo-Nazi skinhead activity in Germany.
But the ad is a broad-scale, unjustified attack on the democratic German Government for having banned the Scientology movement.


The Pop Life
Tarantino's Music
Quentin Tarantino, the Hollywood hotshot whose "Pulp Fiction" has won over audiences and critics at the Cannes and New York film festivals, seems to have a stronger obsession with popular music than other directors.
His last film, "Reservoir Dogs," is probably the only recent movie that opens not with a theme song, but with a textual analysis of a song.
In the first scene, the main characters ponder the meaning of Madonna's "Like a Virgin" for several minutes before moving on to "The Night the Lights Went Out in Georgia," by Vicki Lawrence.
In "True Romance," a film he wrote but didn't direct, the first words are about Elvis Presley.


New Caution About Money Market Funds
The manager of the first-ever money market fund to fail also ran two other money market funds.
But while these funds were also in financial trouble, they -- and their investors -- stayed afloat because a brokerage firm bailed them out.
The story of these funds, which were managed by Prospect Hill Advisers of Milwaukee, serves as a warning that along with looking at a money market fund's return and its holdings, investors must investigate the company sponsoring the fund to make sure it is both willing and able to pay for problems.
Otherwise, investors may have to shoulder the risks themselves.


HOME OFFICE GUIDE: Currents; Home Office Furniture
TELECOMMUTING, schmelecommuting.
If a home office doesn't have more eye appeal than the conventional 9-to-5 gear, you may as well keep punching that time clock.
Traditional office furniture will do the job, of course, but much of it is either too big or too ugly to make a comfortable transition to the domestic front.


Newspaper Network For Ad Purchasing
In an effort to simplify agencies' buying of multimarket advertising space in newspapers, a group of the largest-circulation newspapers and the Newspaper Association of America have teamed up to open the Newspaper National Network in New York.
The network, with offices in Chicago and Southfield, Mich., is intended to offer national advertisers in categories like food and automobiles a one-step, one-bill way to buy space in various newspapers.
That has historically been difficult because of differing rates, space configurations and ad requirements.


Inflation-Wary Investors Are Leaving Bond Funds
Inflation fears are striking mutual fund investors, who are moving money into gold stock funds while taking it out of bond funds, which have been damaged by rising interest rates.
"Investors are clearly responding to a perceived inflationary environment," Neal Litvack, an executive vice president of Fidelity Investments, said yesterday.
He pointed to a survey of investors, done for Fidelity by the University of Michigan, which showed more than 50 percent of those questioned this month think inflation will turn up in the next six months.
In recent months, that figure had hovered near 20 percent.


Bridge
The most exciting final in the history of world women's team competition, with the result in doubt until the last deal was over, ended here on Tuesday night in a victory for a team led by Marinesa Letizia of Chicago.
She and her teammates, Judi Radin, Jillian Blanchard and Sue Picus, all of Manhattan, and Rozanne Pollack of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., trailed the team led by Sally Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., by just one imp with two deals remaining.
With a large audience watching intently in the Vugraph theater, a part-score gain put them in the lead, and they won the McConnell Cup by 5.


Income Tax Resurfaces in Connecticut Campaign
It's back.
The debate over whether Connecticut should have an income tax, which might have seemed finished in 1991, when 40,000 shrieking protesters on the Capitol lawn failed to roll back the tax, or in 1992, when the legislature was unable to muster the votes for repeal, has re-emerged in 1994 as an unexpected centerpiece in the race for governor.


Japanese Do So Fear Rising Car Imports
To the Editor:
William C. Duncan of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association writes of automobile trade negotiations between the United States and Japan (letter, Sept. 20).


Banker Hired For a Top Job With Schools
The New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, who has been criticized for trying to run the schools by himself, yesterday filled a newly created post to oversee the day-to-day management of the school system.
But he drew immediate criticism from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for giving the job to a former banker who served as a deputy mayor to David N. Dinkins.
The new post of chief operations officer for the system of 1,100 schools will be filled by Barry F. Sullivan, who served for the final year and a half of the Dinkins administration as Deputy Mayor for finance and economic development.
Since then he has led the New York City Partnership, whose members include 150 leaders of the city's biggest corporations, and the city's Chamber of Commerce.
He has close ties to the city's business elite, like David Rockefeller, the former chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank.


Man in the News: Ernest Frederick Hollings; A Made-in-America Warrior on Free Trade
Senator Ernest Frederick Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, knows exactly what he thinks about free trade agreements: he doesn't like them and he never has.
He returned to that theme today, dismissing the pleas of a President from his own party and singlehandedly delaying passage of the most sweeping effort to reduce trade barriers in more than a decade.


Condoms Account To West Advertising
London International U.S.
Holdings Inc. in Sarasota, Fla., which markets Ramses and Sheik condoms and Confirm in-home pregnancy tests, said yesterday that it had selected West Advertising and Marketing in Tampa, Fla., to handle its advertising.
Billings on the account, inactive for the last decade, were estimated at $3 million.
Campaigns for the condoms are scheduled to begin Monday; they will take a humorous tack to encourage use, rather than emphasize serious health issues.
A campaign for Confirm is scheduled to begin early next year.


Power PC Gets a Lift At Toshiba
Lending strength to the faltering alliance between Apple Computer Inc. and I.B.M., the Toshiba Corporation will license the alliance's Power PC microprocessor, industry officials said today.
Toshiba, one of Japan's more successful computer makers, is expected to initially use the microprocessor in servers, which are powerful machines used as central data repositories in computer networks.


2 Ex-Marines Refight War In Struggle For Senate
After months of unemotional campaigning, Senator Charles S. Robb returned today to his former Marine barracks here to lash out at Oliver L. North, his Republican challenger in the Virginia Senate race, and accuse him of lying and deceit.
The dispute reflected the latest issue in the campaign: who was the better marine.
In his most spirited remarks of the campaign, Mr.
Robb said Mr.
North, who is also a former marine, had insulted him by describing Mr.
Robb as an "Eighth and I" marine, a sarcastic reference to the address of the post in southeast Washington for marines who serve in ceremonial roles at the White House and elsewhere.


Pitt's McCullough Is Lost for the Season
Pittsburgh guard JERRY McCULLOUGH, one of the Panthers' leading scorers for the last two seasons, injured his left knee and is out for the season.


The Nun, the Amnesiac, the Prostitute and the Thugs
Many romantic triangles are bizarre, but in "Amateur" Hal Hartley has concocted the most irresistibly strange one to hit the screen in a long time.
A pretty former nun is trying to earn a living by writing for pornographic magazines.
She falls for a sensitive man who has amnesia and traces of a sordid past.
He is still married to a prostitute, who is trying to kill him and leave her old life behind.
Add to this an arms dealer who sends his thugs after the prostitute, and life couldn't be more complicated or more deliciously droll.
The nun, the amnesiac and the prostitute fit neatly into Mr.
Hartley's distinctive world, a place that is always serious and comically absurd.
"Amateur" is his most ambitious view of that world yet.
Isabelle Huppert plays Isabelle, who sits in a coffee shop all day nursing a cup of coffee and talking out loud as she labors over her pornographic stories.
She is just 10 months out of the convent and still a virgin, so it's no wonder she rarely earns enough food money.


Yes, More Friends Sitting Around
Oh, no, you might well moan, not another group of pals sitting around whining and nursing their anxieties, getting up once in a while to test the passing Zeitgeist.
Oh, yes.
But click into NBC's "Friends" anyway.
The creators and executive producers are Marta Kauffman and David Crane, whose "Dream On" has been exploring new boundaries of zaniness (and permissiveness) on HBO.
"Friends," more conventional on the surface, promises to be equally offbeat and seductive.
These particular friends, six of them, live in New York City and can usually be found at a favorite coffeehouse or the somewhat cramped apartment of Monica (Courteney Cox), the one with the strongest ties to reality.
Monica's brother, Ross (David Schwimmer), discovers this evening, in an episode entitled "The One With the Sonogram at the End," that his former wife, Carol (Anita Barone), who is now in a lesbian relationship, is pregnant with his child.
That's where the sonogram comes in, prompting at one point a reference to "Star Trek."


House Panel Backs March 1 Pullout in Haiti
Brushing aside the Clinton Administration's pleas not to set a cutoff date for withdrawing American troops from Haiti, the House Foreign Affairs Committee voted today for a deadline of March 1 for pulling out American forces there.
Administration officials, who have said the American troops would be in Haiti for up to six months, reacted with only moderate disappointment to the vote, acknowledging that they were relieved that the deadline was March 1 rather than the Dec. 1 or Dec. 31 deadlines pushed by some lawmakers.


Campaign Trail; Cuomo the Ballplayer Helps Cuomo the Candidate
The next best thing to watching professional baseball is probably not listening to a politician wax rhapsodic about the virtues of the game.
Nonetheless, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo got a nice publicity boost -- at no charge -- by becoming a regular sage on "Baseball," Ken Burns's lyrical 18-hour film about the history of the game, broadcast this week and last on PBS.
Monday night's episode even featured a sepia-toned segment devoted to Mr.
Cuomo's brief foray into minor league ball, when the 19-year-old center fielder was signed by the Pittsburgh Pirates and sent to their Brunswick, Ga., farm team.
Mr.
Cuomo tells how he received a $2,000 signing bonus (not bad, considering that Mickey Mantle got $1,100 a year earlier) and used the money to buy his fiancee, Matilda, a ring.
The Governor gamely recalls his inability to hit a curve ball, his father's opposition to such a career and his permanent departure from the game after a beaning.


Illinois Jacquet Reflects the Roots of His Music
One of the nicer things to have happened to jazz in the last decade or so has been the re-emergence of the saxophonist and band leader Illinois Jacquet as one of music's biggest stars.
Mr.
Jacquet, who is 71, has blossomed under the attention, grooming one of the best big bands working, and he continues to add profundity to his own improvisations on saxophone.
He is one of the few remaining musicians who reflect jazz's roots in entertainment, and his performances whisper little vaudevillian truths, truths that come from a different era but are no less effective today.
And Mr.
Jacquet is generous as a host and as a musician.
On Tuesday night at Carnegie Hall, ostensibly a tribute to him for the 50th anniversary of his appearance in the film "Jammin' the Blues," he filled the place with an audience eager for his gifts and more than willing to jump to its feet to show appreciation.


Hampton Feeling Better but Is Unlikely to Play
Rodney Hampton worked out today, and though he is feeling and looking better it's unlikely he will play against New Orleans on Sunday.
Coach Dan Reeves said that while Hampton isn't definitely out of the game because of his sore kidney and lower back, the running back is still doubtful.


Buyout Firm Has Option For Borden Board Seats
In a provision that could temper the enthusiasm of a rival bidder, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company will receive one-third of the seats on the board of Borden Inc. when exercising an option to buy 19.9 percent of the company's shares.
The information is contained in an 8-K form Borden submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission on Monday.
That filing followed the signing on Friday of a definitive agreement to sell the consumer products giant to Kohlberg, Kravis for $2 billion.


Eschenbach to Head The Ravinia Festival
Christoph Eschenbach is to succeed James Levine as music director of the Ravinia Festival, the summer home of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, starting in 1995.
Zarin Mehta, Ravinia's executive director, and Marian P. Tyler, chairman of the board, announced on Tuesday that Mr.
Eschenbach, 54, had signed a three-year contract through 1997.
The conductor's first season will coincide with Ravinia's 60th anniversary and an $11 million renovation of the festival's pavilion and grounds in Highland Park, Ill., about 25 miles north of Chicago.


Cuomo States the Cuomo Case Best, but Will It Pay Off at the Polls in November?
SAY this for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Whatever happens on Nov. 8, he will have run what is probably his last campaign, win or lose, on his own terms.
Oh, he's given a perfunctory nod or two to the prevailing political winds.
He pledges to cut taxes, has opened the door to endorsing term limits and reminds people that a referendum on the death penalty is O.K. with him -- always carefully adding that he is sure the public would agree with him and vote for life sentences without parole instead.


Harry Saltzman, 78, Bond-Film Producer
Harry Saltzman, who with Albert R. Broccoli produced early James Bond films like "Dr. No" and "Goldfinger," died yesterday at the American Hospital in Neuilly-sur-Seine, a Paris suburb.
He was 78 and lived in a village near Versailles.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Adriana.


Jets Get Experience but Not All Good
It has been a year and two days since Jack Trudeau was a winning quarterback.
But there he was today, running the Jets' first team, barking signals in an unfamiliar cadence that made the line jump at the wrong time.
And, yes, that was Boomer Esiason, surprisingly walking with hardly a limp despite a sprained left ankle, watching closely.


Expansion Pool Approved
At a meeting in Dallas yesterday, National Football League owners accepted a recommendation from the league's Management Council to have the two new expansion teams -- Carolina and Jacksonville -- stocked with a pool of players that will draw six or seven veterans from the other 28 teams and two selections per round in the 1995 college draft.
The two teams will select from a pool of 42 players and must keep 30, or an amount worth $14 million, until July 15.
The $14 million amount was included to prevent the expansion teams from going after several high priced free agents.
There will be no kickers or punters in the pool; each of the 28 teams are allowed to offer only one veteran with 10 or more years of experience and only one player from injured reserve.
And each veteran from the existing teams must have an additional year on his contract before being placed in the pool.


Atlanta '96 Sets Golden Arches Table
Given the galloping commercialism of the Olympics, it was perhaps inevitable that the training table would come equipped with a drive-through window.
McDonald's recently announced that it will operate six of its fast-food restaurants at the Olympic Village during the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, feeding 15,000 athletes, coaches and officials free of charge, if not free of fatty, fried foods.


Court Blocks Merger of Housing and New York City Police
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to merge the housing police with the New York City Police Department on Saturday was thrown off track yesterday, after a state appellate judge upheld a restraining order against the plan until at least next week.
The action, by Justice Joseph P. Sullivan of the State Appellate Division, was dismissed by city officials as a minor setback, although the housing police union expressed satisfaction that Mayor Giuliani would not be able to carry out the merger on Oct. 1.


The Camera Watches
To the Editor:
"Federal Courts, Back in the Dark" (editorial, Sept. 22) misinterprets the constitutional right to trial by jury.
The constitutional protection of a public trial was for the benefit of the defendant, not the "public." As a trial lawyer, I oppose cameras in the courtroom.


Teams' Dress Rehearsal Also Gets an Encore
Despite their short vacation over the summer, the Rangers and the Devils showed they have an insatiable appetite for hockey and some empathy for their fans.
Aware that the opening of the National Hockey League season is in serious jeopardy, the players did something nice for their hockey-hungry fans here Tuesday night.


At City Hall, an I.R.A. Leader Gets a Warm Reception
Artfully casting off his old role as official outcast, Gerry Adams, the political spokesman for the Irish Republican Army, beamed from the steps of City Hall yesterday as New York politicians vied to be at his side and hail him as honored guest and newborn statesman.
With his State Department visa ban now a thing of the past, Mr.
Adams, once imprisoned and often denounced by Britain as a Northern Irish terrorist, received multiple awards and heroic praise from city officials who welcomed him as a "harbinger of peace" and "a civil rights activist."


If Schools Fail, Don't Blame Disabled Students; Education Spending
To the Editor:
"Study Says Small Schools Are Key to Learning" (Education page, Sept. 21) overlooks an important point.
The 10 states listed as "top performers" on the Scholastic Assessment Test represent many of the states with the smallest percentage of high school graduates taking the S.A.T.
In 6 of the 10 states, fewer than 10 percent of the graduates took the S.A.T.
The median for these states is 9 percent, with a range from 4 percent to 30 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  MOURNING FOR FERRY VICTIMS  Rescuers pulled 126 survivors from stormy Baltic seas after the sinking of an Estonian ferry.
About 800 are still missing in the accident, one of history's worst ferry disasters.
The Prime Ministers of Estonia, Sweden and Finland declared periods of official mourning.
A1


Paris Journal; Voila! The Champs-Elysees the Way It Was
Stretching grandly from the Arc de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde, the Avenue des Champs-Elysees had long seemed like the perfect metaphor for France's love of symmetry.
Or at least that is how it looked on maps, from the air and in the mind's eye of many a Parisian.
By the 1980's, however, the view from the ground had become one of disorder, not only in the form of fast-food restaurants, garish lights, strewn garbage and chaotically parked cars, but also in the shape of Hell's Angels, panhandlers and streetwalkers, who do not make for, well, visual neatness.


Essay; Leadership, Farewell
Taking advantage of a weak U.S.
President, Britain and France partners in appeasement in Bosnia -- have seized leadership of the Atlantic alliance.
The American idea was to enforce a cease-fire with NATO air power, while lifting the one-sided arms embargo to allow Bosnians to defend themselves against insatiable Serbs.
In that way, a balance of power could be achieved on a territorial division recommended by the U.N. and accepted by the Muslims and Croats.


Disney Drops Plans For Virginia Park
The Walt Disney Company said it was abandoning plans to build a giant historical theme park, Disney's America, near Civil War battlefields in Northern Virginia.


Pataki, a la Whitman, Proposes Broad Cuts in State Income Tax
Following the lead of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman in New Jersey, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, yesterday proposed deep and broad-based cuts in personal income taxes that would reduce the tax bill of virtually every New Yorker.
Coming a week after he was bitingly criticized by other Republicans for not detailing an economic plan, Mr.
Pataki said he would cut the top income tax rate by 25 percent over four years and reduce the number of people paying that rate.
By 1998, the plan would reduce state revenues by $5.6 billion, making it one of the largest tax cuts in state history.


George LeMaistre, 83, Banker And Ex-Chairman of F.D.I.C.
George A. LeMaistre, a former chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, died on Monday at University Hospital in Birmingham, Ala.
He was 83.
He died of complications after heart surgery, said his daughter Alice LeMaistre of Bethesda, Md.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column in some editions yesterday about the newsman Jerry Nachman's plan to return to New York misidentified his new position at WCBS-TV.
He will be vice president for news, not general manager.


Little Hope for 800 Lost in Sinking of Baltic Sea Ferry
More than 800 people were dead or missing after an Estonian ferry capsized and sank in a stormy Baltic Sea just before 2 A.M. today in one of history's worst ferry disasters.
Rescuers pulled 126 survivors from the raging waters.
The Prime Ministers of Estonia, Sweden and Finland flew to the Finnish port of Turku to visit survivors and confer with investigators looking into the maritime catastrophe.
All three countries declared periods of official mourning.


Executive Changes
ANDREW CORP., Orland Park, Ill., named Floyd L. English, its president and chief executive, to the additional post of chairman.
BEAR, STEARNS &amp; CO., New York, named Randi Nielsen and John Kelly managing directors in the fixed-income capital markets department.


Trade Bill Sabotage
Ernest Hollings, chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, declared yesterday that he will keep the Senate from voting this session on the trade accord that the Clinton Administration signed with more than 100 other countries last April in Marrakesh, Morocco.
This is a craven and destructive bow to the demands of textile firms in his home state of South Carolina, who fear competition from abroad under the accord.
If Mr.
Hollings is successful, as he well might be, he would thereby delay and possibly block for good approval of a bill that would add $200 billion a year to the U.S. economy.
Mr.
Hollings is the main culprit, but the White House was his enabler.
It dallied in getting the legislation to Congress.
Then it rejected advice to sidestep Mr.
Hollings's committee.
The danger is that the Senate vote could be delayed until next year, or longer.
Delay, in turn, could jeopardize approval here and abroad.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.29
3.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.50
4.71
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.15
5.16
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.57
7.59
5.34
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.81
7.84
5.99
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.68
7.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.55
6.55
5.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Regrets as Taylor Rebuilds His Fastball
The night is a blur to him because Brien Taylor has made it that.
Just like one of his old fastballs.
The night when Taylor fell on his left shoulder during a fight nine months ago and severely jeopardized his baseball career is a blur.
It happened, but Taylor considers it a slight blip in his life.
Here and gone.
Because of that night, Taylor is the Lone Yankee at their minor league complex here.
He is throwing every other day, away from the other pitchers.
He runs without a crowd.
He lifts weights for his legs and upper body, on his own.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about an expansion in Mexico planned by La Quinta Inns misidentified a tourism industry magazine whose managing editor was quoted on the planned new hotels.
It is Hotel &amp; Motel Management, not Hospitality &amp; Travel.


Marcus Allen Is a Broadcaster for a Day
MARCUS ALLEN will not take Sunday off even if the rest of the Kansas City Chiefs enjoy a bye week.
Instead, Allen will announce the Detroit-Tampa Bay game for Fox Sports with WFAN's MIKE BREEN.
"It's a great opportunity for me to see if I have any ability at all," Allen said yesterday.
He said he has "absolutely no experience" behind a microphone, but hopes to convey to viewers "the emotional swings of a player."


A Bold Lesson in Shedding Ballet's Cloak of Anonymity
The Lyons Opera Ballet from France is a company full of surprises, not the least of which is the impressive individuality of its personable and versatile dancers.
Audiences at the company's opening on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) might have been more startled by the central image of "Contrastes," in which Maguy Marin places a virtually nude couple on a table at a formal dinner attended to by a butler.


Support From Ewing On Oakley's Salary Bid
Charles Oakley's teammates, most notably Patrick Ewing, will support Oakley if he carries out his threat to miss the start of training camp next week.
Ewing, the Knicks' franchise player and All-Star center, spoke up on Oakley's behalf today when asked about Oakley's dissatisfaction with his contract and possible holdout.
Oakley, a Knick co-captain and one of the National Basketball Association's top power forwards, told teammates weeks ago that he might not report to camp if he doesn't get the extension he wants, and he re-enforced those feelings today as he was filming a television commercial at the Knicks' practice facility here.


People
*
Michael Elliot, special projects director at The Source magazine, New York, was promoted to president at Source Entertainment, a new division of its parent, Source Publications.
Also, Peter Ferraro was named to the new position of advertising director at The Source.
He was previously an account executive at Deutsch Inc., New York.


Kremlin Aide Says Yeltsin Faces a 'Struggle'
Suggesting that it will take more than democracy to chase intrigue from the Kremlin, one of President Boris N. Yeltsin's closest aides asserted today that an "unseen struggle" was under way among Mr.
Yeltsin's advisers over his political future.
"A struggle is going on for a democratic president, practically speaking, for the next term of Russia's history," the Russian President's press secretary, Vyacheslav Kostikov, told the Interfax News Agency in an interview released this evening.
"All the rest are emotions and the dust of political sideshows."


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday with an article about a number of pharmaceutical companies seeking Federal approval to sell drugs over the counter misidentified the manufacturer of two prescription drugs.
Both Pepcid and Dolobid are made by Merck &amp; Company, not Johnson &amp; Johnson.
If over-the-counter versions of the drugs are approved by the Food and Drug Administration, they will be marketed in a joint venture with Johnson &amp; Johnson.


White Sox Give Lamont New Contract
GENE LAMONT, who managed the Chicago White Sox to a first-place finish in the American League Central before the strike, signed a one-year contract yesterday.
"I'm glad I'm coming back," Lamont said from his home in Sarasota, Fla.
"I like the team we have, the coaching staff and the players." The Kansas City Royals were reportedly interested in signing Lamont, whose 1994 contract was to have expired Nov. 1.
Lamont, whose team was 67-46 at the time of the Aug. 12 strike, said: "I won't say it was really easy, but I knew what I wanted to do. The hardest part was that there is no baseball going on, so it becomes such a big thing.


Jeans Makers Flourish on Border
Here on the Mexican border, in the world's jeans-making capital, as many workers are cutting and sewing and stone-washing as ever.
In an industry that is among the most vulnerable to Mexican competition, a combination of corporate efficiency, low wages and the prestige of a "Made in the U.S.A." jeans label help explain why apparel employment here has reached a record 20,500 jobs.
But they also explain why El Paso is the country's poorest large metropolitan area, with personal incomes only 59 percent of the nation's average.


14 More Officers Arrested At a Shaken 30th Precinct
The corruption scandal surrounding the 30th Precinct in Harlem grew yesterday as the authorities announced the arrest of 14 more police officers, including two sergeants.
Five of the officers surrendered and pleaded guilty to various charges on Tuesday, while nine others were arrested yesterday morning.
They face between 7 and 75 years in jail if convicted on charges of stealing and selling drugs, extortion, tampering with evidence and perjury.


CHRONICLE
It's been 20 years since ELSA PERETTI began designing jewelry, accessories and decorative objects for Tiffany &amp; Company, adorning women with her distinctive Diamonds-by-the-Yard and her famous beans and hearts.
So the store gave her a party last night.
Besides table settings created in her honor by Liza Minnelli, Grace Mirabella, Fernando Sanchez and the photographer Hiro, guests saw a video and photographic exhibition of the museum Ms.
Peretti intends to open in Sant Marti Vell, the village in Spain where she lives much of the time.
She also has homes in Rome and New York.


House Passes Bill to Let States Limit Trash Imports
In a development long feared by New York City, the House of Representatives overwhelmingly passed a bill yesterday that would let state and local governments sharply limit imports of trash from other states.
The vote increases the likelihood that Congress will close off exports, the avenue the Giuliani administration is exploring to ward off a looming garbage crisis.
Supporters say the Senate will take up its own bill tomorrow that would let states limit imports; it passed such a bill in an 89-2 vote two years ago.


No Headline
"This is the same publication that said she adopted a space alien baby. If they already have a space alien baby, I don't know if they need another one." -- NEEL LATTIMORE, Hillary Rodham Clinton's spokesman, denying a tabloid report that the First Lady is pregnant.  [ A18:1. ]


COMPANY BRIEFS
MCKESSON CORP., San Francisco, said it would record a charge of about $7 million, or 16 cents a share, because a client failed to pay its bills.


Italy and Unions in Test of Wills Over Social Programs in Budget
The Government of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi faced a test of wills with the labor movement today after union leaders called a general strike to protest an austerity budget they depicted as hitting the old and the sick.
The four-hour stoppage, set for Oct. 14, reflected a central quandary for Mr.
Berlusconi: to restore international confidence in the Italian ecnomy, he needs to show resolve in cutting back the country's vast overspending; but to meet electoral pledges that there would be no fiscal punishment for economic reform, he needs to convince Italians that the budget is fair.


Douglas S. Morrow; Screenwriter, 81, Was Oscar Winner
Douglas S. Morrow, a screenwriter who won an Academy Award for "The Stratton Story," died on Sept. 9 in Kingston, N.Y., while on vacation.
He was 81 and lived in Glendale, Calif.
The cause was an aneurysm, said his wife, Margot Stevens Morrow.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.(GAP,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 10


Guests at a Bit of Broadway History


Hartmarx Corp.(HMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


In a first for an auto company, Saab takes its message to magazines for gay men and lesbians.
A NATIONAL automotive marketer will, for the first time, aim its sales pitches at homosexuals.
The decision by Saab Cars USA Inc., the importer of Saab luxury cars from Sweden, to advertise in two magazines read by gay men and lesbians is considered a breakthrough for efforts to persuade mainstream advertisers to set aside longstanding concerns that the societal stigma against homosexuality, still widespread, requires them to shun that market.


Tax Debate That Won't Die
The fight over Connecticut's income tax has re-emerged as an unexpected centerpiece in the race for governor.
Page B1.


Appellate Panel Deadlocks On High Court Drug Decision
A state appeals court said yesterday that it could not determine how to apply a controversial decision by the state's highest court, which ruled last year that prosecutors in drug cases must show that a defendant knew how much of a drug he possessed in order to convict him of the most serious charges.
Because they were deadlocked on the issue, the 14 justices of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said they had reduced charges in three felony drug convictions to less serious misdemeanors.


Favorite in Brazil to Stress Private Sector Over State
With this country's presidential election only five days away, its front-runner, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, promised today to break up Brazil's longstanding state monopolies and attract foreign investment in oil, mining, telecommunications, and highway and dam construction.
"We have 16 hydroelectric dams paralyzed," Mr.
Cardoso told foreign journalists here, and said this tied up the equivalent of $2 billion.


Stocks Climb Modestly in Heavy Trading
Following Tuesday's signal by the Federal Reserve that it would not immediately raise interest rates, the stock market rose modestly yesterday -- its third consecutive day of advancing prices.
So far this week, the Dow Jones industrial average has regained about 46 points of last week's 102-point fall.
After rising as much as 28 points, the Dow closed at 3,878.18, up 15.14 in heavy trading.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 2.76 points, to 464.81, and the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 4.64 points, to 760.01.


Simpson Trial Judge Rules For Quick Selection of Jury
Discounting prosecution warnings of irreparable contamination of the jury and the prospect of a mistrial, Judge Lance A. Ito ruled today that jurors hearing the O. J. Simpson murder case should first be selected, then sent home for as long as a month while lawyers wrangle over the admissibility of crucial DNA evidence.
Lawyers for the Los Angeles District Attorney's office had asked Judge Ito to suspend the selection process at its initial stage, before any of a pool of 300 willing jurors had been seriously questioned, while the DNA question was debated.
Otherwise, they warned, jurors selected now would have to spend several more weeks in a world obsessed with the fate of Mr.
Simpson and their role in determining it, then have to be questioned anew afterward, this time about what they had seen and heard in that time.


Short-Coverings Spur Rise in Treasury Issues
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday, sparked by short-coverings as the dollar strengthened and gold weakened.
The rally weathered a strong economic report, helped by talk of some progress in the Japan-United States trade negotiations and a better-than-expected five-year note auction.
The 30-year bond rose 10/32 , to a price of 9613/32 , for a yield of 7.81 percent, down from 7.84 percent.
Shorter bill rates were down as well, as demand eased toward the end of the quarter.


Officer Dismissed At Tracy-Locke
David Fowler, who had served as chief creative officer at the Tracy-Locke unit of the DDB Needham Worldwide Dallas group since November 1992, was unexpectedly dismissed yesterday, effective immediately.
"We're not where we want to get yet," said Michael S. Rawlings, president and chief executive, who dismissed Mr.
Fowler, "and to get there, I feel we need new leadership." Mr.
Fowler "did a good job reaching this plateau," he added, "but someone needs to help us reach the next level."


Wounded Youth's Pistol Looked Real, Police Say
A 16-year-old who, the police said, pulled a toy 9-millimeter handgun from his belt after being chased by three plainclothes officers, was shot and critically wounded Tuesday night in a driveway behind his Bedford-Stuyvesant apartment building.
The police released a Polaroid snapshot of the toy gun yesterday, saying they wanted to show how authentic it looked.


Liqueurs Account To Publicis/Bloom
Bacardi Imports Inc. said yesterday that it had named Publicis/ Bloom in New York to handle advertising for its Benedictine and B&amp;B liqueur brands, as well as new products.
The account, with billings estimated at $3 million to $5 million, had been inactive since December.
Publicis/Bloom has been handling the account on a trial basis since March and was formally awarded it yesterday.
The assignment reunites Benedictine and B&amp;B with many people who previously worked on the brands' account.
When the brands were distributed by Hiram Walker &amp; Sons, the account was handled by Bloom FCA, which was merged with Publicis to form Publicis/Bloom.
The brands' distributor changed in November when Bacardi Imports bought their parent, Martini &amp; Rossi.


Durables Orders Post A 6% Rise
Orders for big-ticket factory goods in August made their largest gains since late 1992 as new-model cars and trucks dominated the Census Bureau's monthly tally, suggesting only a modest slowing of the economy.
Although last month's 6 percent jump followed a 4 percent decline in July, analysts said the economy was proving remarkably resilient in the face of efforts by the Federal Reserve to restrain its growth.


Earlier Ages Believed in Shallow Graves
To the Editor:
The City of London's proposal (news article, Sept. 20) to bury the dead two to the plot to accommodate its overcrowded cemeteries may shock modern sensibilities, but reusable graves were commonplace in Europe from the high Middle Ages until at least the 17th century for those who could not afford a more permanent resting place in the floor of a church.


G.I.'s Take Joy and Relief on the Road
The rivets that held the cast-iron Jesus on His concrete cross rusted through months ago, and the Savior tumbled to the ground.
Instead of putting Him back on the cross, residents of this poor, sun-bleached seaside city just propped Him up at the base.
The people of Gonaives are impatiently waiting for a different kind of savior.


Second Trial Of Libel Case Is Under Way
Like two exhausted boxers who refuse to quit, Janet Malcolm and Jeffrey M. Masson were back in court today for a second trial in his libel case against her, a case that has come to define both their reputations as much as the sum of their lives' work.
After nine years of litigation that at one point reached the Supreme Court, a jury found in June 1993 that Ms.
Malcolm had defamed Mr.
Masson, a flamboyant psychoanalyst, by fabricating five eye-catching quotations in a 1983 profile in The New Yorker.


Campaign Trail; Cuomo the Ballplayer Helps Cuomo the Candidate
The next best thing to watching professional baseball is probably not listening to a politician wax rhapsodic about the virtues of the game.
Nonetheless, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo got a nice publicity boost -- at no charge -- by becoming a regular sage on "Baseball," Ken Burns's lyrical 18-hour film about the history of the game, broadcast this week and last on PBS.
Monday night's episode even featured a sepia-toned segment devoted to Mr.
Cuomo's brief foray into minor league ball, when the 19-year-old center fielder was signed by the Pittsburgh Pirates and sent to their Brunswick, Ga., farm team.
Mr.
Cuomo tells how he received a $2,000 signing bonus (not bad, considering that Mickey Mantle got $1,100 a year earlier) and used the money to buy his fiancee, Matilda, a ring.
The Governor gamely recalls his inability to hit a curve ball, his father's opposition to such a career and his permanent departure from the game after a beaning.


Resort for Travels Of Religious Spirit; A Sanctuary at Wisdom House
There are many roads to wisdom, Sister Rosemarie Greco likes to say.
The path she offers, which can be taken in stillness of mind and body, leads to Wisdom House, a religious retreat that she runs here for travelers on a journey of spiritual exploration.
Located on 58 wooded acres about 80 miles north of New York City, Wisdom House occupies what was originally the novitiate and college for the Daughters of Wisdom, a Roman Catholic religious order founded in 18th-century France to serve the poor and outcast.
During the 60's, as the nuns ventured forth into the world, they were gradually replaced at the novitiate by laypeople seeking a breather from the everyday.


A Man Trying to Live After Trying to Die
AFTER GREGORY  By Austin Wright  292 pages. Baskerville Publishers. $20.
"So here you are, writing at last," begins the narrator in Austin Wright's fifth and latest novel, "After Gregory." And here we are, reading avidly, eager to know what sort of balance Mr.
Wright will strike this time between the abstract and realistic.


Rose Is Expected to Sign With Nuggets
JALEN ROSE, the Denver Nuggets' first-round draft choice, was expected to sign with the team after undergoing a physical yesterday.
The team has scheduled a news conference with the former Michigan star for this morning.
Rose said he agreed in principle Tuesday to a six-year, $10.2 million contract.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
U.S. approval this year of the new world trade accord appeared imperiled after a key Senate Democrat, Ernest F. Hollings, threatened to block a vote on essential related legislation.
But President Clinton vowed to keep Congress in session as long as needed for approval it.  [ Page A1. ]  Mr.
Hollings, of South Carolina, has never liked free trade pacts.
Man in the News.  [ D7. ]
Orders for factory goods made their largest gains since 1992 last month, jumping 6 percent.
The advance suggests that the economy is slowing only modestly.  [ D1. ]


Ward Will Enter Camp With 5-Year Knick Deal
Charlie Ward, a rookie point guard whom the Knicks think has significant potential, signed a five-year, $4.6 million contract yesterday, allowing him to report to training camp next week.
Ward will earn $575,000 this season, the salary slot vacated by the former Knick Bo Kimble.
Ward was the Heisman Trophy winner as the quarterback for Florida State's football team last season, but he was also an outstanding basketball player for the Seminoles, averaging 10.5 points and 4.9 assists as a senior.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Fired Dick Bosman, pitching coach.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Signed Gene Lamont, manager, to a one-year contract.


Disgraced City College Stars Of '50 Are Honored in '94
They were the acclaimed stars of the greatest college basketball squad of their era, the only team to win both the National Invitation Tournament and National Collegiate Athletic Association titles in the same season.
But if Herb Cohen, Irwin Dambrot, Floyd Layne, Norman Mager, Alvin Roth, Ed Warner and Ed Roman, who were among the toasts of New York in 1950, are not household names today -- immediately recognizable to any beyond the oldest and most knowledgeable basketball fans -- there is a reason.


House Subcommittee Passes Altered Antitrust Bill
Efforts to end the labor dispute that has wiped out the World Series for the first time in 90 years moved further on Capitol Hill today than they have in months of negotiations between owners and players.
But a House of Representatives subcommittee that approved a bill dealing with baseball's antitrust exemption and its labor problems altered the bill just enough to raise questions about its effectiveness.
The subcommittee on economic and commercial law, in an overwhelming voice vote, sent to the House Judiciary Committee a bill that would make unilaterally imposed rules, such as the owners' salary cap proposal, subject to antitrust laws.
Baseball has been exempt from antitrust laws in all matters since a 1922 United States Supreme Court decision.
The partial removal of the exemption would enable the players to challenge a salary cap in court if the owners decided to impose it during the off season.


Hillhaven Corp.(HIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Food Maker Turns Down Dean Foods
Unable to resolve a dispute with its produce suppliers, Curtice-Burns Foods Inc., a canned food maker, ended a deal with the Dean Foods Company yesterday and accepted a lower bid from its own farm cooperative, one with an effective value of $433 million.
Under the new deal, Pro-Fac Cooperative Inc., based in Rochester, and its 700 member farmers would pay Curtice-Burns shareholders $19 a share, or $166 million, and assume $267 million in debt.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the sentencing of Salvatore Gravano, a mobster who testified against his former associates, reported a statement by the judge about the defendant incorrectly.
While the judge, I. Leo Glasser, praised Mr.
Gravano's cooperation with prosecutors as courageous, he was quoting another law-enforcement official when he referred to it as "the bravest thing I have ever seen"; that was not the judge's own description.
Judge Glasser's full comment was: "In that sense, the characterization of his decision to cooperate with the government by a very sophisticated and experienced law-enforcement officer as 'the bravest thing I have ever seen' is entirely understandable."


Grand Central May Be Getting East Staircase
Grand Central Terminal's paramount public space, the constellation-covered main concourse, would be significantly altered under an ambitious rehabilitation plan that is to be presented publicly today.
The $102 million plan calls for a monumental staircase at the east end of the concourse, to echo the existing west staircase, and restoration of the ceiling.


Fedders Corp.(FJQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Four Winners for Chavez  George Chavez rode his fourth winner of the day in seven mounts yesterday when he brought Personal Merit from far back in the field of eight to a three-length victory in the Grade III $112,100 Lawrence Realization at Belmont Park.
Kristen's Baby was runner-up, a head before Holy Mountain.
The victory was the first in six starts this year for Personal Merit, who carried 113 pounds and covered a mile and a half in 2:29:1 to earn $67,260 for Daffodil Hill Farm.
Personal Merit returned $17, $7.80 and $5 across the board. (AP) TENNIS  Pierce Gains Quarterfinals  Top-seeded Mary Pierce needed only 42 minutes yesterday to defeat Marianne Werdel of the United States, 6-0, 6-1, at the $400,000 Volkswagen Grand Prix tournament in Leipzig, Germany.
Second-seeded Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic joined Pierce in the quarterfinals by beating a Swedish qualifier, Asa Carlsson, 6-2, 7-5.
Pierce, who competes for France, stormed past Werdel with her powerful ground strokes and was never challenged.
Iva Majoli of Croatia, seeded fourth, beat Lisa Raymond of the United States, 6-0, 6-4, to reach the quarterfinals, and Sandra Cecchini of Italy and Brenda Schultz of the Netherlands also advanced. (AP)


Police, Youths And Toy Guns: 1 Hurt, 1 Dead
The rules of the game Tuesday night at the Gowanus Houses in Brooklyn were these: there would be two teams, one cops, the other robbers; each team member would have three lives; get shot by one of the plastic guns everybody had and you would lose a life.
Shortly after 7 P.M., Nicholas Heyward Jr. stood on the roof of 423 Baltic Street with three other team members, all 12 to 14 years old.
Several of the children had been called to their apartments by their mothers.
Darkness was descending.


Market Place; Two industry events strengthen the shares of Lin Broadcasting.
SIX months ago, the Lin Broadcasting Corporation, a cellular telephone operator, was trading at $102 a share.
Yesterday, it closed at $139.50, up 75 cents.
What's behind the impressive run?
Two planned deals in the industry, one successful and the other a failure, some analysts say.
The AT&amp;T-McCaw Cellular merger that closed earlier this month and the aborted effort by MCI Communications for an alliance with Nextel Communications combined to mean good news for Lin shareholders.


G.M. Impasse: Work Strain vs. Rising Car Sales
Last Monday, Barbara Griffith faced a dilemma as she worked on the assembly line here.
She ached to go to the bathroom, but knew that if she left six co-workers alone to apply paint sealant to the steady stream of Buicks and Oldsmobiles coming down the line the team was certain to fall behind.
Ms.
Griffith, who has been working six days a week and up to 11 1/2 hours a day for two years, did not dare stop the assembly line; that might have led to a reprimand.
So she did what she and her friends often do for one another: "I stopped the line and told everyone to go to the bathroom. They can reprimand me if I go on my own. They can't write all of us up."


Plenty of Good Will But No New Pact For Messier
Mark Messier called it "a venture into enemy territory." He was flashing his now-famous smile at the time, grinning widely at the sight of Neil Smith and Dave Checketts being surrounded by members of the Messier family and adoring Messier fans.
Still, it seemed a bit awkward, given the state of Messier's relationship with Ranger management.
In an unusual but much-appreciated gesture, representatives of the Rangers and Madison Square Garden -- including Smith, the Rangers' general manager, and Checketts, the president of the Garden -- attended a charity function at which Messier was the host last night at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan.


No C.I.A. Officers Will Be Dismissed Over Double Agent
The Director of Central Intelligence said today that no one would be dismissed or demoted for the "systemic failure" of the Central Intelligence Agency in the case of Aldrich H. Ames, the spy for Moscow who flourished inside the C.I.A. for nine years.
Instead, the Director, R. James Woolsey, said he was sending letters of reprimand to 11 former and present C.I.A. officials, including his director of clandestine operations, Ted Price.


CHRONICLE
Sir JOHN GIELGUD, 90, one of five recipients of the Praemium Imperiale, a $150,000 prize given by the Japan Art Association, will not be able to travel to Tokyo for the presentation ceremony next month.
So the award was given to him on Tuesday at the Japanese Embassy in London.
"I'm sorry that I felt the journey to Tokyo would be too arduous to contemplate," Sir John told the 100 guests.
The awards were established five years ago for accomplishment in the arts.


Julius Segal, 69, Psychologist And Expert on Prisoner Trauma
Dr.
Julius Segal, a psychologist and author who for 12 years was the director of the Office of Scientific Information at the National Institute of Mental Health, died on Monday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 69.
The cause was cancer, said Dr.
Robert Cohen, a family friend and the former director of clinical and behavioral research at the institute.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the acquisition of two financial companies by two large banks misstated the price of one purchase.
The BankAmerica Corporation will buy Arbor National Holdings Inc. in a stock deal valued at $117.9 million, not $177.9 million.


Crows of Harvard Yard
To the Editor:
More about the urban invasion of crows: It should perhaps not be surprising that large numbers of this most intelligent of birds are now to be found in Cambridge, Mass., and especially at Harvard University.


Amid a Debate on White House Women, Hillary Clinton Tries to Push On
Sometimes, as she watched Hillary Rodham Clinton trying to do it all today, Naina Yeltsin looked positively weary.
But Mrs.
Clinton, pert in a navy blue suit and a print scarf held with a gold frog pin, never looked weary for a moment.


Group Will Explore Options
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, yesterday named a nine-man operations committee to explore ways major league baseball can proceed through the uncertainties created by a players strike that today completes its seventh week.
"We are moving into uncharted waters," Selig said by telephone from Milwaukee.
"The purpose of the committee will be to explore all of our options."
Selig offered no specifics, but the options obviously include whether or not to open training camps in February if there is no agreement with the players and whether or not to try using replacement players.
The committee, Selig said, will not deal with the decision the clubs must make on declaring an impasse in negotiations and implementing their salary cap proposal.


Topics of The Times; Guilt-Free Leftovers
In some households, the refrigerator is a sort of purgatory where leftovers bide their time in the dark, until mold and fungus pull them under.
Icky, yes.
But thoroughly understandable, given that folks of a certain age were raised to believe that wasting even a mouthful was a sin -- somewhere people were starving.
Guilt is a powerful incentive.
Instead of disposing of that last bit of stroganoff, we mummify it in aluminum foil and let it sit until it gets old enough to be thrown away, guilt free.
Dianna Namisniak and her enterprising husband, Lee, have set out to foreclose this therapeutic out.
The Namisniaks have just been awarded a patent for an electronic "leftover monitor" that attaches to the refrigerator with magnets.
On its face are several rows for tags showing the name and life span of foods.
About 60 different magnetic tags come with the device.
The tag for ricotta cheese says it should last seven days.


U.N. General Opposes More Bosnia Force
Stung by criticism from the Clinton Administration, the commander of United Nations troops in Bosnia has said that the increased use of force advocated by the United States would only lead the West toward war and a disaster like the one in Somalia.
"Patience, persistence and pressure is how you conduct a peacekeeping mission," the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, said in an interview on Tuesday.
"Bombing is a last resort because then you cross the Mogadishu line." He referred to the Somalian capital where American peacekeeping troops became involved in a shooting war that led to their departure.


An Opera Star Only Rarely Seen On the Opera Stage
In a documentary that Cecilia Bartoli's record company, London/ Decca, produced three years ago to introduce its new discovery to opera lovers, the 25-year-old singer came across as an irrepressible, strikingly gifted coloratura mezzo for whom the future would unfurl its treasures.
Now that future is here.
Tonight, Ms.
Bartoli will open Carnegie Hall's season with a program of Rossini, Mozart, Bellini and Berlioz under the baton of Sir Neville Marriner.
Her recording of Mozart arias, released just two weeks ago to coincide with her New York appearance, has zoomed to the No. 4 spot on Billboard's classical sales charts, right alongside the Three Tenors recordings of 1990 and 1994.


Players Say No To Offer By N.H.L.
The National Hockey League Players Association formally rejected the league's latest contract proposal yesterday, and as of last night there were no further negotiations scheduled in their labor dispute as the deadline approached for reaching agreement and starting the season on time.
If there is no settlement by tomorrow morning, Commissioner Gary Bettman has said he will postpone the opening of the season, scheduled to begin with 12 games on Saturday night.
Coincidentally, this weekend was also supposed to mark the conclusion of baseball's regular season, which was curtailed by a players strike.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about an investment by the Coca-Cola Company in Russia misspelled the surname of a senior vice president of the company.
He is E. Neville Isdell.


Reds to Let Johnson Talk to Orioles
Manager DAVEY JOHNSON, who made the Cincinnati Reds a winner again but couldn't win favor with the owner, MARGE SCHOTT, has been given permission to speak with the Baltimore Orioles about their managing vacancy.
Johnson, in the final year of his contract, kept the Reds in first place in the National League Central virtually all season despite a lot of player injuries.
He was an infielder with the Orioles from 1966 to 1972.


'Heidi Chronicles' Heads for Cable TV
"The Heidi Chronicles," Wendy Wasserstein's Pulitzer Prize-winning Broadway play, is getting its first screen adaptation.
The playwright will provide the script for a version to star Jamie Lee Curtis and have its premiere next year on the Turner Network Television cable channel.


Events: Office Artifacts And Street-Tree Care
Design Exhibitions  Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
Design in the workplace, as it is embodied in products like calendars, personal computers, desks, fax machines and pens, will be examined in "Good Offices and Beyond: The Evolution of the Workplace," an exhibition that opens on Tuesday and continues through Feb. 26.
"A Laboratory of Seating," which will remain open through Feb. 19, will explore design through a dozen variations on the chair.


For Romance, There's No Sleep in Seattle
WE call it the Sleepless House.
It's the largest of the floating homes on our side of Lake Union, at the end of the pier next to ours.
It's the pier with the bench at the end of it where Tom Hanks sat and meditated on his loneliness in "Sleepless in Seattle," the romantic comedy hit of the summer of 1993.
The house played a starring role in the movie.
It's a beige, four-bedroom, 2,000-square-foot wooden house built on a 40-by-68-foot raft and floating on a double layer of red-cedar trunks.


Hurley Says Memory of Accident Is Foggy
BOBBY HURLEY testified yesterday that he remembers only "bits and pieces" of the collision that almost killed him last December, and he blamed the other motorist for the crash.
Hurley, the first-round draft choice of the Sacramento Kings last year, said he saw no traffic when he pulled onto a dark road near Arco Arena after a basketball game Dec. 12.


Haiti Parliament Meets, but Delays an Amnesty Vote
With heavily armed American troops, skeins of barbed wire and thousands of elated pro-democracy demonstrators ringing the Legislative Palace, Haiti's newly reconstituted National Assembly convened here today, but then adjourned before even considering the issue of an amnesty for Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and other military leaders.
The parliament's decision to postpone consideration of an amnesty until at least Thursday indicates how contentious the issue is for a country that has suffered greatly under three years of military rule.
Though legislators took no formal action on amnesty in their brief and largely ceremonial opening session, remarks they made off the chamber floor indicated that they are already split into hostile camps.


Rock's Man of Many Genres
With violin and cello on one side of the stage, and guitar, bass and drums on the other, Alejandro Escovedo diagrammed the two poles of his music on Monday night at the Mercury Lounge.
Sometimes he came to the brink of punk-rock, with the band pounding away at Iggy Pop's "I Wanna Be Your Dog"; at others, the violin and cello played stately, elegiac lines.
In between, Mr.
Escovedo was a storytelling songwriter upholding the verities of roots-rock: staunch guitar lines, terse lyrics and a sense of muscular sincerity.
Mr.
Escovedo has been performing since the mid-1970's, playing punk-rock in the Nuns, country-rock in Rank and File, hard-rock in the True Believers and, in the 1990's, his own music.
Many of his newer songs start quietly, kick into bluesy rock, then ease back into rumination.


Religion Is Latest Volatile Issue to Ignite Kennedy Contest
Their Massachusetts Senate race has become so tightly contested that Edward M. Kennedy, the six-term incumbent, and Mitt Romney, the 47-year-old newcomer, are now maneuvering for advantage over the volatile issues of race, sexual bias and -- perhaps most incendiary of all -- religion.
And thrust into the middle of the fight is a speech on religious tolerance given 34 years ago by Mr.
Kennedy's brother John, a speech that both sides are now invoking.


Figure Skating Is CBS Focus
CBS Sports continued to remake itself without pro football yesterday by adding two nights of prime-time figure skating, starring Nancy Kerrigan and Oksana Baiul.
The strategy is intended to build on the spectacular ratings the network received for figure skating during the last two Winter Olympics, specifically last February's ratings bonanza fueled by the Kerrigan-Tonya Harding scandal.


If Schools Fail, Don't Blame Disabled Students
To the Editor:
A Sept. 23 news article reports that the Committee for Economic Development, a leading business organization, has determined that public schools are failing to produce graduates who are ready for work in today's businesses.
The committee placed part of the blame for this on "inclusion," the practice of educating students with disabilities within regular classrooms.


New Plan for Grand Central


U.S. Planning to Hold a Lottery To Pick Some Cuban Immigrants
Having promised President Fidel Castro that it would grant entry rights to at least 20,000 Cubans a year, the Clinton Administration has decided to select about one-quarter of that total by a lottery of Cuban applicants.
Administration officials who are putting the finishing touches on the immigration plan said this lottery is intended to create opportunities for Cubans who have no hope of being admitted under American immigration law because they neither have close relatives in the United States nor qualify for refugee status.
The other 15,000 would be accepted largely by broadening the definition of refugees and close relatives.


Recycling May Itself Be Major Source of U.S. Dioxin Emissions
To the Editor:
I fail to see why Bela Liptak finds the Environmental Protection Agency's dioxin draft reassessment good news (letter, Sept. 21).
If he thinks it vindicates his position on recycling, then I have some bad news for him.


PRESIDENT VOWS VICTORY ON TRADE
President Clinton vowed today to keep Congress in session for as long as it takes to approve the global trade agreement after a key Senate Democrat, Ernest F. Hollings, threatened to block a vote on the pact.
Failure to approve the accord could imperil the President's economic diplomacy and would be another legislative defeat after health care's demise.
Moving quickly to prevent that, President Clinton used a news conference with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia to argue for quick passage of legislation carrying out the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and to make clear that he was ready to adopt extraordinary measures to insure that it happens this year.


Police Say Slain Woman Was Abused by Male Friends
Having finally identified the woman in a jogger's suit whose body was found eight days ago in a long-haul cargo trailer in the West Village, the police yesterday pressed their search for the killer, focusing on the men in her life.
One of those being questioned in the strangulation and possible rape of the New Jersey woman, Carol Ann Artutis, was a 30-year-old homeless man from Jersey City with a long history of drug arrests who referred to her in conversations with the police as "my lady."


Prodigy Developing a Service for Internet
Following the lead of its main rivals in the on-line information services industry, the Prodigy Services Company is developing a business information and product marketing service for the Internet global web of computer networks, company officials said yesterday.
Prodigy also plans to give its nearly two million subscribers access to the thousands of often raucous bulletin boards known as Usenet, and to create special services of interest to business executives.
These will be available beginning Oct. 10, a company spokesman said.


Miscellany
*
Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, agreed to a nonequity affiliation with Nucleo Publicidad, Montevideo, Uruguay. *
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/Technology Group, San Francisco, opened an integrated communications department.
Louise Guryan, vice president and media director, was named to head the unit as vice president and integrated communications director.
Kathryn Birer, vice president and group media director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, was named to succeed her.


Vote Certification Blocked
A State Supreme Court justice today blocked Nassau County officials from certifying the results of a Republican primary two weeks ago in which a Long Island Congressman was defeated by 54 votes.
Lawyers for Representative David A. Levy had asked Judge Francis X. Becker to block the certification, saying a new vote count was needed because of voting-machine errors and voting irregularities at the polls.
Judge Becker scheduled a hearing on the matter for Monday.


Starting to Search for Causes of the Sinking
Although an inspection on the day of its final voyage turned up potential safety problems on the ferry Estonia, authorities said it was too soon to say what caused the ship to go down early this morning .
The ferry, owned and operated by Estline, a Swedish-Estonian joint venture, sailed under the Estonian flag but was subject to international safety standards and to intermittent inspection by Swedish authorities, regulators and industry officials said today.
There was nothing in the ship's history to provide any clear suggestion of what led to its loss, they said.


Croat Presses U.N. to Act Against Serbs
After hearing pleas this week for the protection of Muslims in Bosnia, the President of Croatia told the United Nations today that Belgrade must also be forced to stop supporting Serbian forces occupying large areas of Croatia.
The Security Council voted last week to ease economic sanctions on Serbia in return for its help in controlling the Bosnian Serbs, but Croatia's problems were not dealt with.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.61
3.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.55
4.50
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.21
5.15
3.03
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.61
7.57
5.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.81
6.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.69
8.65
7.04
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.57
6.55
5.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Word for Word; A President's Ability to Declare War
As President Clinton was preparing to invade Haiti, legal scholars and lawmakers were debating whether he could constitutionally do so without the explicit approval of Congress.
Walter Dellinger, the Assistant Attorney General who heads the Office of Legal Counsel, wrote a letter this week to four Republican Senators -- Bob Dole of Kansas, William S. Cohen of Maine, Strom Thurmond of South Carolina and Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming -- saying that three factors provided legal justification for Mr.
Clinton to order an invasion of Haiti without approval.
Mr.
Dellinger said that Congress expected and indirectly approved an invasion of Haiti when it enacted the 1994 Defense Appropriations Act; that an invasion would not have violated the War Powers Resolution, enacted in 1973 by Congress to define the limits of a President's ability to send troops abroad, and that the invasion would not have been a war because United States forces would have been invited in by the legitimate government.
Excerpts from the letter follow.


Does She or Doesn't She?
Alex Canawati's campy melodrama, "Inevitable Grace," is a movie so caught up in flaunting its flagrant references to earlier films -- "Psycho," "Vertigo," "Sunset Boulevard," "Marnie" and "Suddenly Last Summer," to name only a few -- that it never bothers to make basic storytelling sense.
In the movie, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, Maxwell Caulfield plays Adam Cestare, a wealthy young eccentric who becomes obsessed with Lisa Kelner (Stephanie Knights), a psychiatrist tending his hysterical wife, Veronica (Jennifer Nicholson).
Adam lives in a creepy mansion filled with portraits of old movie stars, which is presided over by a gargoylish housekeeper (Andrea King) who has many shocking secrets.


A Towers Financial Official Pleads Guilty in Fraud Case
Charles Chugerman, a top official of Towers Financial Corporation, the New York bill collecting company, pleaded guilty to fraud charges Wednesday in Federal District Court in Manhattan in the same case that resulted in the criminal fraud indictment against the corporation's president, Steven Hoffenberg.
A third defendant, Marvin E. Basson, an accountant who audited the company's financial statements, was also charged with fraud yesterday in a criminal information filed by the United States Attorney in the same case.


Helping Nature Restore Life To a Shoreline Left for Dead
Refineries and chemical plants tower over the Arthur Kill, the waterway separating Staten Island and New Jersey, which carries more traffic than the Panama Canal.
The ground on the New York side is caked with a spongy black material, deposited by old and sometimes unrecorded oil spills.
Yet four workers on the banks of Staten Island's Sawmill Creek were staring last week at a tiny creature squirming in one worker's palm.
It was a young blue crab, a sign of new life on a dead shore.


Flanders Disqualified After Drug Test
Flanders, the undefeated 2-year-old filly trained by Wayne Lukas and a leading candidate for the Juvenile championship, was disqualified yesterday from her first-place finish in the Matron Stakes after she tested positive for a therapeutic drug.
The stewards at Belmont Park also notified Lukas that he would be called to a hearing that could result in a 45-day suspension.
But Lukas said that he had no knowledge or explanation of the incident, and said: "She doesn't get any medication. She doesn't need any."


Mayor Orders Jail Reopened In Brooklyn
Faced with overcrowding in the courts and jails caused by the collision of increased arrests and a shrinking budget, the Giuliani administration yesterday ordered the reopening of a jail that had just been closed to save money, saying it was now needed to deal with the flood of arrestees.
The action highlighted Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's struggle to reconcile two aims that were pillars of his campaign last year: slashing the city's budget while also improving the quality of life in the city by getting tough even with minor criminals, like so-called squeegee men and unlicensed peddlers.


Restaurants
Gauguin is the perfect restaurant for children on expense accounts.
Only a child could truly believe in this festive South Seas atmosphere, its fake palm trees ablaze with colorful lanterns and its murals working hard to conjure up an island image.
Children can appreciate the juice drinks strewn with paper umbrellas and plastic dolphins, even without the alcohol, and they are not embarrassed by the naked ladies on the glasses or the waitresses wrapped in sarongs.
Unfortunately, only a very rich child could afford this particular pleasure, and seen through adult eyes the restaurant that now occupies the room that once was Trader Vic's can be vaguely disquieting.
It is too easy to sense the smirk beneath the surface.


Economy Is Strong, Data Show
Fresh signs of persistent economic vigor emerged today as the Government published upbeat reports on housing and employment, while raising for a second time its estimate of total output during the spring.
Another official report showed stepped-up inflation for imported goods, reflecting, in part, the decline of the dollar.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the career of the mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli referred incorrectly to a television program to be broadcast at 9 P.M. on Wednesday.
The program, on the Bravo cable channel, will be a recital by Ms.
Bartoli taken from the videotape "Cecilia Bartoli: A Portrait." It will not include a documentary about the singer that is also part of the videotape.


Fire Shuts Down Subway Line


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about an independent commission that is to review the role of the Central Intelligence Agency misstated the year of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
It was 1961, not 1962.


U.S. Abandons Push to End Bosnian Weapons Embargo
The Clinton Administration has decided not to press for a binding Security Council resolution to lift the three-year-old arms embargo on the Bosnian Government, senior Administration officials said today.
As a practical matter, the decision means that President Clinton has backed off from a pledge made in a letter to Congress last month to find a way to arm the Bosnian Muslims so that they are no longer at a military disadvantage in their war against the Bosnian Serbs.


Recognizing People Who Have the Courage to Be Different
On her daughter's second birthday, Leonor (Luisina Brando) comes to terms with a fact central to the girl's life.
Her daughter is a dwarf, which causes Leonor to make a covert nighttime visit to her neighbor's garden.
There, she destroys ornamental statues with elfin shapes.
Back home, she burns copies of "Gulliver's Travels," "Thumbelina" and "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs."
But by then, even though she doesn't realize it, Leonor has begun to live out a dark fairy tale of her own.


Cajamarquilla Journal; A Question of Priority: Archeology vs. Refugees
Four years ago, 300 Indian families fleeing an insurrection in Peru's mountains arrived in this desolate spot 12 miles south of Lima with little more than the clothes on their backs and dreams of a better life.
They built new homes to replace the ones in their old village, called Iquida, where the Shining Path, a Maoist guerrilla group, had made life unbearable.


Allen's Ode to Theater and, as Always, New York
"THE point is, no great artist has ever been appreciated in his lifetime," opines one of the minor characters in Woody Allen's "Bullets Over Broadway," a playwright (Rob Reiner) who says his work is "written specifically to go unproduced." Mr.
Allen wrote that line about fame, but he has reason to know otherwise.
Having been appreciated ad nauseam, in every possible public light, he now considers the artist's sometimes-conflicting obligations to his work and to his conscience.
In the process, he successfully reinvents himself as comic philosopher, finding wicked humor in questions of artistic life or death.
One way or another, Mr.
Allen has been well served by recent experience.
"Bullets Over Broadway" is a bright, energetic, sometimes side-splitting comedy with vital matters on its mind, precisely the kind of sharp-edged farce he has always done best.


Hubbard Is Promoted by the Knicks
PHIL HUBBARD was promoted to scouting coordinator of the Knicks yesterday after serving two years with the team as a part-time scout.
In his new role, Hubbard will be heavily involved in the team's scouting in Europe, the Continental Basketball Association and in the United States Basketball League.
He will also do some collegiate scouting.
Hubbard, 38, played 10 years in the National Basketball Association with Detroit and Cleveland.


Market Place; Many environmental stocks have proved to be flops, but not all.
THE environmental business is changing, converting what were once seen as sure winners into clunkers.
Most cheerful predictions of the fortunes in cleaning up hazardous waste sites have run afoul of the grim reality of the Superfund law, which seems to reward lawyers rather than engineers.


Face-Off or Batter Up: 2 Sports With Similar Objectives in Mind
Hockey and baseball terminology don't mix.
In baseball, to cite a couple of examples, players use a ball and bat and score runs; in hockey, they use a puck and a stick and score goals.
But labor disputes have brought the lexicons of the two sports closer together.
Negotiations have created terminology common to both.
Try tax plans and disincentives, for example.
The National Hockey League is on the brink of joining major league baseball in its shutdown mode.
Unless a last-minute agreement alters the league's plans, Commissioner Gary Bettman plans to lock out the players by postponing tomorrow's scheduled start of the 1994-95 season.
Baseball players have been on strike for 50 days, matching the length of the 1981 strike, the longest work stoppage in professional sports history.


Hockey's Fate Is Under Dome
The Skydome home of the world champion Toronto Blue Jays, where almost a ghostly quiet has descended since the baseball strike began in midsummer -- was the site chosen by hockey players today to announce their 11th-hour offer to save the hockey season.
The slap shot in the face of fans that a hockey lockout would represent was apparently much in the minds of the players as they made their offer of a no-strike, no-lockout status quo that would allow the season to open Saturday.


Gas Prices Up 5 Cents, With More Increases Seen
Gasoline prices have jumped an average of 5 cents a gallon at most filling stations on Long Island and throughout the New York-New Jersey region this week.
They may increase again, perhaps by as much as 25 cents a gallon, in three months when gasoline that has been reformulated to meet new Federal air-quality standards will go on sale, retailers and consumer advocates said today.
Retailers in the region are required to switch by Saturday to oxygenated gasoline, which by Federal law must be sold from Oct. 1 through April 30 to help reduce fuel emissions during the cold winter months.


Agencies Admit Failure to Tell Senate Enough on Spy Building
The National Reconnaissance Office, the secretive Government agency that builds spy satellites, did not intentionally mislead Congress about the cost of its new headquarters, but failed to provide detailed and straightforward information about the building, the Pentagon and the Central Intelligence Agency said today.
The new headquarters, a complex of four buildings outside Washington, was to have cost up to $347 million, according to figures that the Reconnaissance Office provided after protests by the Senate Intelligence Committee this summer.
The committee this month ordered that no more than $310 million be spent.


William Gibberson; Actor, 74
William Gibberson, an actor and announcer, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's/Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 74.
The cause was a stroke, said Nancy Lynch, his companion.


Art in Review
Raghubir Singh 'Bombay and Ganges'
Burden Gallery of the Aperture Foundation  20 East 23d Street  Through Oct. 21
The recent spread of pneumonic plague to Bombay has given Raghubir Singh's photographs of that city a timely edge.
But as this valuable exhibition of images from Bombay and the Ganges River demonstrates, Mr.
Singh's pictures do not offer straightforward descriptions of Indian life, but instead depict it in richly allusive terms.


Yo-Ho-How Much? Treasure Is on Sale; Galleon's Booty Travels to Scarsdale
Meticulously scouring the ocean floor, James Sinclair and a band of divers found their fortune in a sunken Spanish galleon off the Florida Keys.
But nine years later, many of them are still trying to cash in on that historic find.
"The question is what do you do with the treasure once you've found it?" Mr.
Sinclair said.
"You can't put a down payment on a house or buy anything else with pieces of eight."


On Stage, and Off
New Women on Broadway
Broadway is in the middle of a number of important cast changes for women.
All three in "Angels in America" -- Ellen McLaughlin, who plays the angel; Kathleen Chalfant, who plays Hannah Pitt, a Mormon mother, and Cynthia Nixon, who plays Harper, the wife whom Joe Pitt, Hannah's son, abandons for a gay lover -- will be gone by Oct. 10.
They will be replaced by, respectively, Cherry Jones, who was nominated for a Tony for "Our Country's Good" in 1991; Laurie Kennedy, and Megan Gallagher, who opened "A Few Good Men" on Broadway in 1989.
"It's never been a star vehicle; we're just trying to find terrific actors," said Jack Viertel, creative director for Jujamcyn Theaters.
The job was easier, he said, because replacements had to commit to working only up to four months.


Sealed Birth Records?
To the Editor:
Samuel C. Totaro Jr. (letter, Sept. 22) claims the proposed model uniform adoption law is as open as anybody could want, but how many adopted individuals were asked?


C.I.A. Official Tells of Botching of Ames Case
Adding new details to the Central Intelligence Agency's self-portrait of ineffectiveness in the case of Aldrich H. Ames, the agency's inspector general testified today that Mr.
Ames's drunkenness, rule-flouting and laziness had not been "considered unusual" by his superiors.
The inspector general, Frederick P. Hitz, told a closed session of the Senate Intelligence Committee that for two years the agency all but gave up searching for the traitor it suspected was in its ranks and that it did not focus on Mr.
Ames for nearly seven years after he began his betrayals on behalf of Moscow in 1985.
Mr.
Hitz's remarks prepared for his testimony before the committee were made public today by the C.I.A.


That Scepter'd Isle Still Burns Books
To the Editor:
Apparently, freedom of speech is not alive and well in Britain.
I am a professional searcher for out-of-print books, and at the end of July I shipped a costly, hard-to-find book on human sexuality for children called "Show Me!", published by St.
Martin's Press in the 1970's, to a client in London who needed the book for a course he was taking.


6 Months After Gas Blast, Striking Tenants Have a Legacy of Bitterness
They survived a catastrophic explosion and fire and then endured days and sometimes weeks of dislocation.
Now, six months later, life has basically returned to normal at the Durham Woods apartment complex, but the aftershocks of the natural gas pipeline explosion here late one night last March still linger.
Many tenants in this 872-unit garden-apartment complex -- the exact number is in dispute -- have been on a rent strike for the last two months.
The striking tenants say that while reconstruction of damaged buildings has progressed since the fire, there has been an increase in crime at the apartment complex.


The Challenges Are Few For Sweetpea Whitaker
The interview is fading into one-liner oblivion when Pernell Whitaker hears a name from the past: Julio Cesar Chavez.
It is the name that preoccupies Whitaker, and so he sits up straight in his hotel room chair, puts on a solemn face and engages with a group of writers in his favorite pastime:
Matchmaking with Sweetpea.


Pistons Give Hill a $45 Million Contract
GRANT HILL, the all-America forward from Duke and No. 3 pick in the draft, signed an eight-year, $45 million contract yesterday with the Detroit Pistons.
Hill helped Duke win two National Collegiate Athletic Association championships and led the Blue Devils to a runner-up finish to Arkansas last spring.
Hill's father, CALVIN, was once a running back for the Dallas Cowboys.


Striving for Legislative Accomplishment, Congress Lands in a Struggle Against Itself
The House today barely passed a procedural motion on changing rules for lobbying, continuing the contentious politics that has nearly paralyzed the 103d Congress just as its members prepare to head home and ask voters for a return ticket to Washington next year.
Once the motion's approval sent the lobbying bill to the House floor, the legislation won easy passage.
But the procedural fight earlier was a reminder that reform is coming hard for the self-styled "reform" Congress of 1992, for which 124 newcomers -- 110 in the House and 14 in the Senate -- were elected.


CHRONICLE
DAVID BOWIE, the rock star, has taken center stage in a furor in London that has nothing to do with music.
At issue is a painting.
Mr.
Bowie, a collector of 20th-century art, has paid $:18,000, or about $28,000, for "Croatian and Muslim," a depiction of a rape, by Peter Howson, a British artist.
The painting, which had been on exhibit with other works by Mr.
Howson at the Imperial War Museum, drew Mr.
Bowie's interest when the museum rejected it for its permanent collection but instead chose six works depicting somewhat more peaceful scenes.


Adopting an Accent and a Son, Both Welsh
"Second Best" is all too fair a title for Chris Menges's new film, in which William Hurt plays a lonely postmaster who hopes to adopt a son.
Casting Mr.
Hurt in this role doesn't do much for the film or the leading man.
The story, set in a tiny Welsh village, calls for an actor whose Welsh qualities extend beyond a faltering accent.
And Mr.
Hurt, hidden beneath long reddish curls and thick black glasses, needn't have tried so hard to convince an audience that he isn't a handsome American movie star.
There are worse things, after all.


To Police, Play Guns Are Real Nightmares
In a cramped Bushwick apartment, with a domestic dispute unfolding, Housing Police Officer Hector Rivera heard the click behind his head and was sure a 9-millimeter gun had been cocked.
He spun, his right hand reaching for his holster.
What he saw was a child emerging from a bedroom with a toy gun.
"Toy guns can even sound like real guns," Officer Rivera said.


CUOMO CRITICIZES PATAKI TAX PLAN
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that State Senator George E. Pataki's plan to slash income taxes would inevitably force the state to cut aid to New York City and other local governments, in turn causing local officials to raise property taxes "through the roof" to pay for the lost assistance.
Mr.
Cuomo's comments seemed aimed partly at driving a wedge between Mr.
Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, and local political leaders, particularly New York City's Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican who has withheld any endorsement of Mr.
Pataki.


Zhang Yimou's Comic Ironies on Screen Resonate in Life
In the gambling house where Fugui (Ge You) spends his nights, letting his family fortune slip from his grasp, he is treated like a young prince.
The setting is China in the prerevolutionary 1940's, and after hours of gambling, Fugui is carried home at dawn through the streets of his small town on the back of a man who deposits him at his extravagant house.
Fugui's wife, Jiazhen (Gong Li), begs him to stop gambling, for the sake of their small daughter and the child she is carrying.
Of course, he doesn't, and soon loses the family home to a bounder called Long Er.
One of many great comic ironies in "To Live," Zhang Yimou's family melodrama that sweeps through 30 years of Chinese history, is that this misfortune turns out to be a major piece of luck.
When the revolution comes, the house is burned by the Communists and the landowning Long Er is executed.
There, but for the grace of his gambling, goes Fugui.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Big Push on Trade
Democratic senators plan to vote on a law carrying out the new world trade pact in a session after Thanksgiving.


5 HAITIANS KILLED AS EXPLOSION RIPS DEMOCRATIC RALLY
At least five people were killed and more than 60 wounded here today when an explosive device was tossed into the middle of a crowd of several thousand Haitians celebrating the return to office of the capital's democratically elected mayor.
American military authorities said they had no immediate evidence of who was responsible for the attack, which occurred early this afternoon at the edge of La Saline, a seaside slum that is a stronghold of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
But Haitians at the scene blamed the carnage on attaches -- paramilitary gunmen in the pay of the military government.


New Jets Expected to Get Team in Winning Mood
They have Super Bowl rings and long records of playoff appearances.
And they were supposed to help the Jets make the leap into a zone of respectability, where players wouldn't dwell on past failures.
But the Jets' foray into free agency doesn't appear -- so far -- to have brought the qualities that veterans like Ronnie Lott, Boomer Esiason, Art Monk and Tony Casillas were supposed to impart: stability, intelligence, winning.
For all the names, the Jets are 10-10, including last year's 8-8.


Signal Work At Station Will Disrupt Rail Service
Service on Amtrak, the Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit will be disrupted on Saturday and on Sunday while Pennsylvania Station in New York switches to a more modern control system.
Construction officials promise that the station will be back to normal by Monday morning.


Chrysler Chief's World View: Place to Sell, Not Build, Cars
In boom years for the automobile industry, the Chrysler Corporation has used its surplus cash to build more factories and invest in everything from aircraft companies to foreign competitors.
When hard times hit, it found itself closing factories, selling businesses and losing money.
Today Chrysler, the most profitable of the Big Three auto makers, outlined a cautious, go-it-alone strategy for international growth that it says will assure profit even when the domestic market turns sour.


A Blurry Picture at Sony's Studios
Peter Guber resigned today after a five-year tenure as head of Sony Pictures Entertainment that was marked by several film flops, internal turmoil and lavish buyouts of executives.
Mr.
Guber said he left because "it was time to follow my dreams." But his departure leaves many unanswered questions about Sony's huge investment in the American entertainment industry.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Signed Greg Foster and Jud Buechler, forwards, to one-year contracts.
DENVER NUGGETS -- Signed Jalen Rose, guard, to a multiyear contract.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Signed Grant Hill, forward, to a multiyear contract.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Signed Charles Shackleford, forward.
Hockey  National Hockey League
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Assigned Kevin Brown, right wing, and Eric Lavigne, defenseman, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Signed David Emma and Jim Dowd, centers, and Jaroslav Modry, Sheldon Souray, Chris McAlpine, and Brad Bombardier, defenseman.
Assigned Sergeil Brylin, center; Mike Dunham, goaltender; and Chris McAlpine and Cale Hulse, defensemen, to Albany of the American Hockey League.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Assigned Paul Dyck, Ian Moran, Pat Neaton, defensemen; Joe Dziedzic, forward; and Olle Sundstrom, goaltender, to Cleveland of the International Hockey League; Robert Melanson, defenseman, to Worcester of the American Hockey League; and Jamie Black and Leonid Toropchenko, forwards, to Muskegon of the Colonial Hockey League.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Assigned Ian Laperriere, center, and Dan Laperriere, defenseman, to Peoria of the International Hockey League.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Assigned Brent Gretzky and Jason Ruff, forwards, to Atlanta of the International Hockey League.
Loaned Wendell Young, goaltender, to Chicago of the International Hockey League.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Assigned Todd Warriner and Darby Hendrickson, forwards, and Matt Martin, defenseman, to St.
John's of the American Hockey League.


Hockey's Fate Is Under Dome
The Skydome home of the world champion Toronto Blue Jays, where almost a ghostly quiet has descended since the baseball strike began in midsummer -- was the site chosen by hockey players today to announce their 11th-hour offer to save the hockey season.
The slap shot in the face of fans that a hockey lockout would represent was apparently much in the minds of the players as they made their offer of a no-strike, no-lockout status quo that would allow the season to open Saturday.


Senators Plan Return for Vote On Trade Pact, After Elections
Democratic senators made plans today to vote on a global trade agreement in a lame-duck session the week after Thanksgiving.
Leaders from both parties said they were sure that when the measure was voted on, it would be approved.
But they cautioned that the rules of the Senate were arcane and the opportunities for delay so prevalent that no one could be certain an impasse had been averted.


For Children
'Bash the Trash'
Queens Museum of Art  Flushing Meadows Corona Park  (718) 592-9700  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Sunday
Making musical instruments from recycled materials relies a lot on basic scientific principles.
This workshop is to be led by John Bertles, a composer and teacher, and relates to the Queen Museum's exhibition "Louis Armstrong: A Cultural Legacy," on view through Jan. 8.


Rose Signs 6-Year Deal With Nuggets
The Denver Nuggets signed JALEN ROSE yesterday, meaning that for the third straight year they had their top draft choice under contract before the opening of training camp.
No one knew the importance more than Rose, who signed a contract reportedly worth $10.2 million over six years.


Wall Street Fears Spread To Bourses
The old adage that when America sneezes, the world catches a cold applied with special force in financial markets yesterday.
New data that the American economy was more vigorous than thought chilled the already depressed European stock and bond markets.
Like their counterparts in the United States, investors feared a new wave of global inflation, stoked by the powerful American economy.
Of course, there were local factors at work, too, in the overseas market declines.
But it was the United States, with word that housing sales were unexpectedly robust and that second-quarter growth was even stronger than first estimated, that added the extra push downward in Britain, France, Italy, and, most importantly, Germany, Europe's largest economy.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANKAMERICA CORP., San Francisco, said its Bank of America subsidiary would provide banking services in nearly 400 Lucky Stores Inc. outlets in California.
CONSECO INC., Carmel, Ind., said its Conseco Capital Partners II L.P. unit had completed the acquisition of Statesman Group Inc., Des Moines, in a transaction valued at about $350 million.


A TV Venture By Warnaco
Looking to open a new market in Asia for everything from bras to Bart Simpson T-shirts, the Warnaco Group and Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation announced a joint venture yesterday to market Warnaco products on the Star satellite television network.
Mr.
Murdoch, chairman of the News Corporation, said the joint venture would try various telemarketing techniques, including two-minute commercials and half-hour programs on several channels in Star's system.
Star reaches more than 55 million homes in Asia.


A Hijacked Raft Floats Not So Gently Down the Stream
The fact that Meryl Streep has a body may not be front-page news, but it's more surprising than you'd think.
First seen exercising strenuously in "The River Wild," she emphasizes that her past performances, however stunning, have rarely had much of a physical component.
So here she is, looking fit and ready to make up for lost time.
Only the insurance company covering "The River Wild" can have found Ms.
Streep's white-water stunt work more exciting than an audience will.
Proving herself more than equal to the semi-verbal demands of the action genre, Ms.
Streep seems smart and energetic whether clobbering a villain with an oar or giving her dialogue an acerbic edge.
"You know what hypothermia is?" she asks one of her captors, once this adventure story has taken its predictably Gothic turn.
"Probably not." This must be the first time Ms.
Streep has ever delivered such tough-guy phrases as "finish him off."


Health Care Battle In California Turns On State Insurance
The great health care battle of 1994 may have sputtered to a close in Washington.
But if some advocates of a health care restructuring have their way, the struggle will simply shift to the states, in the tradition of many long-haul social crusades, bubbling up in places as improbable as an art-filled, affluent home high in the hills over Hollywood.
There, on a balmy night last week, an earnest group of actors, doctors and assorted other professionals gathered to discuss the pros and cons of managed care and health maintenance organizations versus a state-run, Canadian-style system of taxpayer-financed health insurance.
The session had its Hollywood moments.
"Say we get an acting job in New York," one woman asked.
"How would we be covered?"


Corrections
A subheading on the Chronicle column on Wednesday referred inadvertently to a report that was omitted that day.
The report, about a prize given to Sir John Gielgud by the Japan Art Association, appeared in the column yesterday.


Murdoch Replaces Fox Programming Chief
In a shake-up that appears to signal a seismic shift in the programming strategy that has built the Fox television network, Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of Fox Inc., replaced the network's chief programmer yesterday with an executive recruited from CBS.
Sandy Grushow, who had spent his entire career with Fox, working his way up to the title of president of Fox Entertainment, will be replaced in that job by John Matoian, who joined Fox in March from CBS, where he had headed the network's movie division.


Town 'Devastated' by Loss of Project
When Mayor Jack R. Kapp reached City Hall this morning, he found the flag at half-staff for the first time since Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis died.
He knew many residents of his town were angered and disappointed that the Walt Disney Company had scrapped plans to build a theme park five miles away.
But lowering the flag, he decided, was an inappropriate response.
So he raised it.
Two hours later, he found it down again.


Inside Art
The Met at 125
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has always had grand visions, and the way it is heralding its 125th anniversary in April is no exception.
Next week, the museum is to announce a capital campaign to raise more than $270 million in its most ambitious fund-raising effort ever.
A bulletin titled "The Met and the New Millennium," written by the museum's director, Philippe de Montebello, outlines a few plans.
One is a major renovation of the Greek and Roman galleries, which involves moving the restaurant and cafeteria from a space that had been devoted to Roman art until 1949.
Instead of one large eating facility, the museum is planning two separate new dining areas, one on the deck surrounding the Robert Lehman Wing and the other near the Costume Institute.
That project alone is expected to cost $90 million and produce 60,000 square feet of new exhibition space.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  BLAST KILLS 5 IN PORT-AU-PRINCE  At least five people were killed in Port-au-Prince when an explosive device was tossed into a crowd of several thousand Haitians celebrating the return of the capital's democratically elected Mayor.
A1  Revolutionary fervor has swept through a mountainous region.
A6


A Daughter Revisits Her Mother's Oppression
In many ways "The Silences of the Palace" is an exotic foreign film.
Set mostly in Tunisia in the 1950's, during the reign of its last monarchs, it tells of life for a kitchen servant and her daughter.
Yet in other ways this is a universal coming-of-age story with a feminist twist, a tale that translates effortlessly.
The heroine, Alia, grows up in the palace at a time when the female servants are expected to be sexually available to the men they serve.
Years later, as a woman, she is still searching for independence from her lover.
This blend of the exotic and the common makes "The Silences of the Palace" a strong first film directed by Moufida Tlatli, who has spent many years as a movie editor.


First 'Boheme' of the Met Season
At this late date, criticism of Franco Zeffirelli's epic Metropolitan Opera production of "La Boheme" is entirely futile.
It has become, after 14 years, a monument in and to itself; everyone has seen it, and almost everyone has loved it, including Cher in "Moonstruck."
Nonetheless, it must be said that this "Boheme," which had its first performance of the season on Tuesday night, makes a mess of Puccini's sentimental tour-de-force.
I do not write as an inveterate Zeffirelli detractor; his "Tosca" is one of the Met's handsomest, most effective productions, and even the chaotic "Turandot" has a few points in its favor.
But this "Boheme" fails in elementary theatrical terms.
It hinders both the idea of the opera and its night-to-night execution.


USAir Delays Some Dividends
USAir Group said yesterday that it would defer quarterly dividend payments on its preferred stock, a move that many investors saw as another sign of mounting difficulties at the nation's sixth-largest airline.
The carrier was scheduled to pay an $8.3 million dividend today to affiliates of Berkshire Hathaway, the holding company controlled by the billionaire investor Warren E. Buffett.
The airline will also defer dividends this quarter on all its preferred stock, including $400 million of convertible preferred stock owned by British Airways, which holds a 25 percent stake in USAir.


MK Rail
Shares of the MK Rail Corporation, a maker and rebuilder of locomotives in Boise, Idaho, fell sharply yesterday after it said its earnings for both the third and fourth quarters were likely to fall below Wall Street analysts' estimates.


Giuliani Seeks Funds for New Buyout
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani indicated yesterday that he was looking for money to pay for a broad new severance program to cut the city work force, possibly by turning again to the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
Mr.
Giuliani said the idea emerged in a meeting earlier this week with Felix G. Rohatyn, the financier and former head of the assistance corporation.
During the meeting, Mr.
Rohatyn also pushed a much broader, multiyear scheme for the city to further pare its work force, shed some services and reduce taxes to stimulate the economy -- and in return to get an infusion of borrowed cash to help the city recuperate from the cuts.


Bridge
An ebullient American team, marked by destiny since a stunning escape from elimination a week earlier, captured the Rosenblum Open Team title here Wednesday night at the NEC World Championships.
Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., with Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif., Roger Bates of Las Vegas, Nev., and Gaylor Kasle of La Quinta, Calif., trailed a Polish team into the last quarter of the final by 8 imps, but then surged ahead to win by 24.


Disney Vows to Seek Another Park Site
After stunning state and local politicians on Wednesday with its decision to abandon plans for a $650-million theme park on historic land in rural Virginia, the Walt Disney Company today pledged to search for another site in the state and to work closely with the opposition.
"We are now in the site location business," said John F. Cooke, president of the Disney Channel, who was named on Wednesday to the additional role of chairman of Disney's America, the name of the theme park.
"We are starting afresh and are reaching out to historians who have opposed us to make sure our portrayal of the American experience is responsible."


Extra Innings for a Scout
For the first half-hour or so, "The Scout" appears to be a funny Albert Brooks movie.
He plays a New York Yankees scout named Al Percolo who has made some bad choices.
If his goofy orange straw hat is any indication, his judgment has hit bottom.
He goes to great and funny lengths to sign a young pitcher from a religious household.
Al wears a cross around his neck and with the satiric intensity Mr.
Brooks does better than anyone, he insists that Mickey Mantle's sister was a nun, Sister Micki Elizabeth.
He signs the pitcher, who becomes nauseous on the mound during his first game.
Before he knows it, Al is scouting in Mexico.
There he finds a natural baseball genius named Steve Nebraska (Brendan Fraser), who is a brilliant pitcher and a switch-hitter to boot.
He is also not quite in sync with society, and that's where "The Scout" starts to go wrong.
For a time it seems that Steve is some kind of feral child, or a relative of the unfrozen caveman Mr.
Fraser played in "Encino Man," someone who just never learned the rules of etiquette.
But by the time he and Al get to New York, Steve is being taken to a psychiatrist, played by Dianne Wiest in a role so inane you tend to agree with Al when he wants proof that she is actually licensed and went to Harvard.


A. C. Petromelis, 66, Democratic Leader
Angelo C. Petromelis, a member of the Civilian Complaint Review Board and a retired chairman of the State Crime Victims Board, died on Sunday at North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 66 and lived in College Point, Queens.
He had been suffering from a blood disorder and the cause was apparently kidney failure, said Tina Kaimos, the executive secretary of the Hellenic American Neighborhood Action Committee, of which he was a director at his death.


Congress Drops Effort to Curb Public-Land Mining
Congress today abandoned efforts to rewrite a mining law that dates from the 19th century, giving up in the face of resistance by the mining industry to paying taxes on metals it takes from public lands.
Negotiators from the House and Senate dropped the effort to revise the law after House members, who had agreed in recent weeks to some changes demanded by pro-mining senators, said they would compromise no further.


Home Video
With their grab-bag of titles, libraries make the most eclectic video outlets.
This week, for example, a group of 75 videos on a wide variety of Hispanic subjects is making inroads at libraries around the country.
Try finding titles like these in a video store: "Carmelita Tropicana, Your Kunst Is Your Waffen," a 30-minute parody of women's prison movies, used as a study of Latina stereotypes; "Chicana," a 23-minute feminist's-eye view of Mexican history and society, or "Ana Mendieta, Fuego de Tierra," a 52-minute portrait of this Cuban artist and Castro opponent.


Slaying of Politician in Mexico City Now Called a Conspiracy
Officials investigating the death of a leader of the governing party who was gunned down in Mexico City on Wednesday said today that three people were involved.
They also said that they misidentified a suspect who was detained at the scene of the killing, Mexico's second political assassination in six months.


Art in Review
Lari Pittman
Jay Gorney Gallery  100 Greene Street, near Prince Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 29
Lari Pittman's fin de siecle rococo paintings make him one of the distinctive voices in contemporary art.
A lot of the past is drawn on but changed: Pop is here (James Rosenquist's splicing of images come to mind) but with every drop of optimism drained away, and Pattern and Decorative work is a distant source, though its celebration of optical pleasure has turned razor-edged.
All-over ornament in Mr.
Pittman's work is an aggressive political tool.


Harry and Louise And a Guy Named Ben
To some liberals, Harry and Louise symbolize everything that went wrong with the great health care struggle of 1994: a powerful advertising campaign, financed by the insurance industry, that played on people's fears and helped derail the process.
That makes the Malibu office of the agency that created Harry and Louise all the more incongruous.
In the oceanfront aerie of Goddard-Claussen/First Tuesday, a campaign portrait of Robert F. Kennedy dominates the hallway, and the walls reflect past clients of a decidedly liberal bent, including the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, former Senator Gary Hart and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.


Art in Review
Joe Zucker
Nolan Eckman  560 Broadway, at Prince Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 22
For more than 20 years, Joe Zucker has been known for his wild and crazy narratives, which have ranged from the ersatz to the historic (from parrots to Eli Whitney and his cotton gin, for example), and his wilder and crazier painting techniques.
These have included surfaces made of cotton balls dipped in paint, gridded images made of nothing but plastic suspended on grids of clothesline and, more recently, paintings made by forcing paint through the holes in sheets of pegboard.


Held in Pellet-Gun Attack
After a monthlong wave of pellet-gun shootings, mostly in mid-Manhattan, four New Jersey men were arrested early yesterday when a homeless woman was wounded on West 53d Street, the police said.
The suspects were charged with assault, criminal possession of a weapon, menacing and possession of imitation pistols.


CHRONICLE
It was in "a little chicken joint" in Southern California that the actor BEAU BRIDGES learned about gun control.
"This guy came in and jammed a gun at my head while he robbed the place," Mr.
Bridges said Wednesday night in Washington.
"I've never forgotten it. Just a twitch of the finger separates my experience from Jim's."
Jim is James S. Brady, President Ronald Reagan's press secretary who was shot and disabled by John W. Hinckley Jr. during the assassination attempt on the President in 1981.
Mr.
Bridges was in the capital for the third annual dinner benefiting the Center to Prevent Handgun Violence, which is headed by Mr.
Brady's wife, Sarah.
The event raised $400,000.


U.S. Plans To Increase Force in Haiti
Worried about growing disorder and unrest in Haiti, the Pentagon said today that rather than withdrawing American forces there, it was increasing the number, which now stands at 19,600 troops and is likely to go higher.
The Pentagon had hoped to reduce the American military presence quickly after the initial troop deployments.
Earlier this week, Administration officials had set the number of forces in Haiti at 15,000.


On My Mind; 3 Months a Murder
Do justice but love mercy, said Thomas Paine.
If he were around this week he might add this: for Heaven's sake, don't make a mockery of either, or a fool of yourself.
In Washington, R. James Woolsey, Director of Central Intelligence, announced the punishment of 11 former C.I.A. officials involved in the supervision of the C.I.A. mole Aldrich H. Ames.


Plenty of Favors Made For Industry Backing
Senator Ernest F. Hollings insisted he was not just "shilling" for South Carolina's apparel industry when he vowed this week to block Congressional approval of the global trade pact.
That may be true.
But before Mr.
Hollings acted, he and other apparel-state lawmakers had already managed to add pretty much everything the industry wanted to the legislation, which underwent a last-minute flurry of political deal-making worth hundreds of millions of dollars to influential American companies.


Choosing a Favorite and Telling Why
"Talking Pictures," at the International Center of Photography's Midtown branch, is without question one of the year's most ambitious and unusual photography exhibitions.
With a semi-sociological premise, high-tech razzle-dazzle in its presentation and the glow of celebrity involvement, the exhibition offers a different, if not completely successful, way of presenting photographs.
The exhibition is based on a richly suggestive premise: Marvin Heiferman and Carole Kismaric, who organized the show and edited the book that accompanies it, asked various people to choose the one photograph most important to them, and to talk about it.
The show presents the selected photographs along with biographical information about the people who chose them, a tiny headshot of each participant, and his or her comments about the picture.


Yeltsin Visits Seattle, a Good Market
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia stopped off in Seattle today at the end of his American visit, playing up the one part of the country where trade between the United States and Russia has moved well beyond the talk-and-dream phase.
Washington, the state most dependent on trade and home of the Boeing Company, a leading exporter, has the largest concentration of companies doing business with Russia of any state, according to its trade officials.


Sports of The Times; How Could The Owners Refuse It?
THE hockey players made one of the better statesmanlike gestures in the history of sports labor yesterday by agreeing to play the entire 1994-95 season and the playoffs without striking, even if no agreement is reached with the owners.
For reasons I cannot fathom, the owners did not immediately accept.
They held a conference call last night, and said they would have an announcement today.
Their response should be that they accept the players' offer on good faith, but I kind of doubt it, don't you?


PBS Rejected Human Rights Program for Specific Reasons
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert (column, Sept. 25) curiously bases a sweeping accusation about the Public Broadcasting Service -- that we have adopted commercial television's values -- solely on two unrelated programming decisions, at least one regarding a program he hasn't even seen.


Margaret Klapthor, Curator in Capital, Dies at 72
Margaret Brown Klapthor, an expert on White House history and a former department chairman at the Smithsonian Institution, died on Monday at her home in Washington.
She was 72.
The cause was stomach cancer, said a son, Paul Edward Klapthor of Sumter, S.C.


Rangers Would Like Some Rest, Not a Lockout
The Rangers could reign as Stanley Cup champions indefinitely.
It was practice as usual today for the players, who after Friday's scheduled news conference by National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman will probably not have an opportunity to see their Stanley Cup banner raised to the rafters of Madison Square Garden for a while.


Art in Review
Jenny Watson
Annina Nosei Gallery  100 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 8
Faux-naive is a popular style these days, and it can pay dividends if purposefully handled.
Purpose, however, seems adrift in the recent work of the Australian artist Jenny Watson.
She offers two kinds of paintings: one of rudimentary female figures on velvet or damask and the other of words-of-one-syllable narrative texts.
Both have a diaristic flatness of tone and they often sit side by side as if in some way explaining each other.


Sigmund L. Miller, Lawyer, 82, Is Dead
Sigmund L. Miller, a prominent Connecticut lawyer, died on Tuesday in Bridgeport Hospital.
He was 82.
Mr.
Miller, who lived in Easton, Conn., died from injuries sustained in a head-on automobile collision in Fairfield, Conn., on Sept. 22, Harold Rosnick, Mr.
Miller's law partner for 23 years, said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Creative agencies that feel at home in the global village are writing their own tickets.
ONE need not ride through "It's a Small World" at Disneyland, Walt Disney World or even Euro Disney to recognize the growing globalization of communications.
That's true as well in sponsored communications -- i.e., advertising -- as shoppers from Maine to Malawi to Malaysia are increasingly bombarded by sales pitches using identical imagery, varying perhaps only in language and other localizing details.
As a result, marketers are more often deciding to hire agencies on criteria like creativity rather than geography.


Growth Alone Won't Assure Jobs, I.M.F. Tells Rich Lands
A sustained world economic recovery will not significantly lower high unemployment rates in the industrial nations unless their economies become more flexible and open to market forces, the top official of the International Monetary Fund said today.
Michel Camdessus, the fund's managing director, said at a news conference here that "inflation could still destroy the recovery" unless major countries devised an appropriate strategy for prolonging the current economic upswing.


The Aging Goats Are Sowing Oats
P.
J.
Barry's "Down by the Ocean" is a mildly distasteful comedy about four middle-aged brothers-in-law who gather once a year with their wives at a beach house on the Rhode Island shore.
While the wives cavort in the water or build sand castles, the husbands stay on the porch and ogle Isabelle, the nubile young Italian who lives next door.
Actually, they do more than ogle.
In the course of the play, which takes place over a 14-year period, each of them manages to have a fling with her.
Herein lies the problem: While it is easy enough to figure out why four aging goats would be attracted to the flirtatious woman, it is difficult to fathom why she would be remotely interested in them.
Dan (Dennis Parlato) is a blowhard.
David (Sam Groom) is a simp.
Peter (Ross Bickell) is a prig.
And Wally (John Newton), who seemingly has little more on his mind than the fate of the Boston Red Sox, turns out to be a sneak.


Eastern Europe, Post Communism: Five Years Later -- A special report; East Europe's Hard Path to New Day
The sleek new international air terminal here is filled each day with tourists and business investors flashing passports at border guards who sit behind high-tech glass booths, watching as the travelers breeze past customs with a wave.
Only an hour's flying time to the east, at the dilapidated Borispol Airport in Kiev, the scene could not be more different, as weary passengers line up to purchase a piece of paper entitling them to stand in another line to buy a visa.
Then they wait in still a third line to appear before cell-like booths containing immigration inspectors trained by the Soviet Union's K.G.B., who then turn them out to face a gamut of customs forms and suitcase searches.
The whole process routinely takes two hours, just like in the old Communist days.


Injuries to Best and Brightest Worry Giants
There is some concern within the Giant organization about the fitness of two of the team's most talented and respected players, the Pro Bowl running back Rodney Hampton and the Pro Bowl linebacker Michael Brooks.
And although the concerns don't involve season-ending injuries or anything too serious it seems that for at least the next several weeks -- maybe longer -- both players will have to play games in great discomfort and pain that could limit their effectiveness in the near future.


Another Day of Bloodshed in Haiti


Clinton Signs Bill on Interstate Banking


Starve Lobbyists, Not Congress
The Government is well on its way to a crisis of legitimacy.
A June Gallup poll indicated that only 17 percent of Americans trust the Government to do what is right most or all of the time.
What to do?
Congress is riding to the rescue with an answer: banning fruit baskets.
Too many members of Congress, goes the argument, accept too many trips, meals and freebies from lobbyists.
Yesterday the House passed a bill that would ban such gifts for members and staff, as well as requiring lobbyists to disclose who pays them, how much, and what for.


Singing and Dancing, Haitians Defy Military
In less than a week, a revolutionary fervor has swept through most of this rugged mountainous region as Haitians, emboldened by the presence of American troops, have begun disarming auxiliary Haitian soldiers and taking over abandoned army posts.
In almost every hamlet, town and city, Haitians are dancing, singing and swinging tree branches in celebration of what they hope will be an end to the most recent period of repression and tyranny.


Maybe California Has Answer on Health Care; We Surly Voters
To the Editor:
I was amused at your conclusion that a "surly electorate" was the reason health care reform would not be passed in this Congress (news analysis, Sept. 27).
You state the President's poll ratings are suffering because of the health bill's failure.
I thought President Clinton's popularity nose-dived, and voters became surly, when Hillary Rodham Clinton scared the country half to death with threats of huge tax increases, the elimination of patient choice and Government control of the health care system.


At the Bar; With an oppressive judicial system dismantled, a South African legal resources group shifts gears.
These are strange and heady days for the Legal Resources Center of South Africa, Johannesburg's cross between the American Civil Liberties Union and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
The center was founded 16 years ago by Arthur Chaskalson, a former barrister for Nelson Mandela.
Intent on following the legal strategy of Thurgood Marshall when he was a leader of the N.A.A.C.P., Mr.
Chaskalson used legal principles to attack the Government and strike at the injustices of apartheid.


Art in Review
John Szarkowski
Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Through Oct. 22
Before he became head of the photography department at the Museum of Modern Art in 1962, John Szarkowski was himself a photographer; among other accomplishments, he won two Guggenheim Fellowships for his work.
Mr.
Szarkowski retired from the Modern three years ago, having helped shape contemporary photography through his books and exhibitions.
This intriguing show offers a selection of his work before he became, as a photo magazine once described him, "the pope of photography."


Legislators Race to Push Through Bill
Congress continued its efforts today to restrict the baseball owners' antitrust exemption when the House Judiciary Committee approved a bill that would apply antitrust laws to any effort to unilaterally impose work rules, such as the owners' proposed salary cap.
The chances of the bill's moving through both chambers before the expected adjournment of Congress on Oct. 7 are still doubtful.
Still, Representative Mike Synar, a Democrat of Oklahoma and the bill's co-sponsor, remains hopeful that the bill could go before the full House during the current session.
And Senator Howard Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, still intends to try to attach an amendment similar to the Synar bill to Senate legislation in hopes of getting the language into law.


Mexican Election Was Clean, but Not Fair
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 27 news article on Mexico's election reports accurately on new evidence of vote-tampering but gets the big picture wrong in stating that election observers uniformly said the Aug. 21 elections were "generally fair and clean."
Credible national and foreign observers agree "uniformly" the elections were clean but not fair.
The distinction most are making is between a clean vote count on election day (which took place) and a free and fair electoral process (which did not).
The process was not fair because the playing field was slanted in favor of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, which has ruled Mexico uninterrupted for more than 65 years.
Pre-election reports by Civic Alliance, Mexico's most important monitoring group, and by the Carter Center's Council of Freely Elected Heads of Government, described widespread use of state resources to promote PRI candidates, large resource disparities between the PRI and other parties, and bias favoring the PRI in television coverage.
Two days after the election, a United States-financed, bipartisan delegation reported that election day irregularities did not affect the voting's outcome but, citing those same problems, declined to certify the election "free and fair."
Pro-democracy forces in Mexico want genuinely democratic elections, not just the absence of massive election day fraud.
Reporting that glosses over major problems will only reduce the pressure for reforms.
JARED KOTLER  Associate for Mexico Washington Office on Latin America Washington, Sept. 27, 1994


Strike Leaves More G.M. Operations Idle
As a United Automobile Workers strike entered a third day today, operations were scaled back at two critical General Motors Corporation factories that produce automatic transmissions, threatening to shut most of G.M.'s final assembly operations in North America within days.
About 1,000 workers at G.M. transmission plants in Ypsilanti and Warren, Mich., were told not to report to work on Friday.


As Casinos Profit, So Do Lawyers in a New Field
As much as green felt, dice, cards and slot machines, the gambling industry needs lawyers.
They are in demand not only to advise the booming industry on how to pass muster with regulators -- indeed, many come from the ranks of regulatory and enforcement agencies -- but also to help find start-up money or at least provide the sense of stability that gives lenders the confidence to invest.


Capriati's Comeback
To the Editor:
As a woman and an adolescent psychiatrist, I found your interview with Jennifer Capriati (Sports pages, Sept. 26) a relief and cause for apprehension.


Back to the Futuristic Martha Graham
A DANCE season that calls itself "Radical Graham" risks being an exercise in redundancy.
So much of what passes for novelty in the arts today, from nonlinear narrative in film to minimalist structures or rich imagistic theater, can be traced through the works that Martha Graham choreographed for herself and her magnificent dancers over the decades.
Nonetheless, whatever the label, it was a capital (and imaginative) idea of the Brooklyn Academy of Music to begin its annual Next Wave Festival on Wednesday night with a gala that opened the "Radical Graham" celebration.
The Martha Graham Dance Company will focus on Graham's works from 1929 through 1958 in five different programs through Oct. 9.


Tokyo Sanctions Likely; Officials Chat Up Dollar
With prospects of a trade agreement with Japan highly uncertain before Friday's midnight deadline, top American officials have been trying to persuade currency traders that if Washington imposes limited sanctions on Tokyo, it need not lead to a plunge in the dollar nor to instability in financial markets.
Such sanctions seemed increasingly likely in the wake of a meeting at the White House today between President Clinton and his senior trade and economic advisers.
The President made clear that he was ready for a "get tough" policy, if the Japanese did not agree to American demands to open key sectors of their markets before the deadline of midnight Friday, aides said.


Lemieux Suit Settled Out of Court
A lawsuit filed by a woman who was hit in the nose by a hockey puck was settled yesterday in Pittsburgh hours before MARIO LEMIEUX of the Penguins was expected to testify.
Terms of the settlement were not disclosed.
PATRICIA WARD, 33, sued Lemieux and the Penguins for unspecified damages, alleging that both were negligent when Lemieux hit a puck into the stands during a break in play in a game with the Rangers on Jan. 14, 1989. (AP)


No Hockey? How About Hot Rods and Horses?
At 2 P.M. yesterday, the big-screen TV in Lee Mazzilli's Manhattan sports bar filled with the face of Bob Goodenow, the head of the National Hockey League Players Association, as he offered a no-strike pledge through the playoffs in return for an end to Commissioner Gary Bettman's lockout starting tomorrow.
"You'd have to say the union is doing everything it can," said Mike Emrick, the Devils' SportsChannel announcer, as he watched the NewSport TV coverage.
"Goodenow seemed earnest and concerned. Everything would be back to where it was last year, only now the fan interest in hockey is higher."


New Delhi Closes Public Places As a Precaution Against Plague
Authorities in New Delhi closed schools, colleges and movie theaters here in response to concern about the possible outbreak of bubonic or pneumonic plague in the capital.
The Health Minister of the state of New Delhi, Harsh Vardhan, said that the closings were "precautionary" and that they would remain in effect at least until next week.


Favorites Emerge for Fifth Ave. Mile
As a five-time Fifth Avenue veteran with 68 sub-four-minute miles to his credit and two under 3:50, JIM SPIVEY is a favorite to win the 14th Fifth Avenue Mile on Sunday, but then so, too, are STEVE HOLMAN, the top American miler this year, and MATTHEW YATES, the laid-back British runner who won the Fifth Avenue race in 1991.


Players Unit Says Chelios Apologizes for Remarks
Bob Goodenow, executive director of the National Hockey League Players Association, said yesterday that Chris Chelios of the Chicago Blackhawks had apologized for threatening remarks he made about Commissioner Gary Bettman.
In a statement that was broadcast on radio and television outlets on Wednesday night, Chelios, an All-Star defenseman, seemed to imply that Bettman's safety was in jeopardy while questioning his right to bargain with the union.


Simpson Trial To Have 304 In Jury Pool
The pool of potential jurors for the double murder trial of O. J. Simpson was completed today, even as the former football star's defense team told Judge Lance A. Ito why the jurors ultimately selected should not be sequestered during the trial.
By all accounts, the pool of 304 jury candidates is nearly as diverse as Los Angeles itself.
But in a motion filed on Sept. 14 and made public today, Mr.
Simpson's lawyers argued that choosing a jury from among only those people willing to remove themselves from friends and family for as long as six months would skew that sample, depriving Mr.
Simpson of a fair cross-section of the community.


Abroad at Home; We Did It Right
When the United States carries out a military operation abroad effectively, safely and for a good end, why can't more Americans take pride in it?
The question is raised by some of the public response to the Haiti mission.
Many politicians and other critics condemned it at the start, and they are still bewailing it.
You might think that American soldiers were doing terrible things, and being killed in large numbers.


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column of The Living Section on Wednesday about Dutch Tavern, a restaurant opening in November at 393 Third Avenue (near 28th Street), misstated the role of Angelo Pietrunti.
He is the general manager; the owners are Peter Mendelsohn, Zohar Ben-Dov and Norman Buchbinder.


At 30th Precinct, 2 Supervisors' Rise and Fall
Sgt.
Kevin P. Nannery was known for his standoffish arrogance and flashy life style, Sgt.
Richard J. McGauley for his quick smile and love for barbecuing hot dogs with his precinct buddies.
They were both highly decorated police officers climbing the career ladder when they became the first supervisors to be implicated in the corruption scandal in the 30th Precinct in Harlem.
Sergeant Nannery was accused this week of having led a squad of eight rogue officers, known as Nannery's Raiders, as they tore down apartment doors and stole cash from drug dealers.
He largely kept to himself, preferring to spend his free hours waxing his new black Toyota pickup truck and taking care of the orange impatiens and rose bushes around his home in Newburgh, N.Y.


Ghostly Child, Troubled Marriage
Winner of an Oscar for "Howards End," and subsequently nominated for "The Remains of the Day" and "In the Name of the Father," Emma Thompson is the sort of gifted actress who could probably make a detergent commercial riveting.
But she cannot, alas, single-handedly salvage "The Blue Boy," an hourlong BBC/Scotland production opening the 24th season of "Masterpiece Theater" on Sunday.
The story, by Paul Murton, who is also the director, was filmed in Argyll, Scotland.
It is based on a local legend of a sleepwalking child who drowned in a lake 100 years ago.
When found, his body had turned blue from the cold.
His parents were staying at a nearby hotel, and ever since, some guests swear they still feel the boy's ghostly presence.
Enter Marie Bonnar (Ms. Thompson), pregnant again after a miscarriage and looking forward to a brief vacation at the hotel, accompanying her husband, Joe (Adrian Dunbar, of "The Crying Game" and "My Left Foot"), on a business trip.


Staff Shuffle at Conde Nast
Conde Nast Publications Inc. has named Jack Kliger an executive vice president, replacing John Brunelle, 69, who plans to retire at the end of the year.
In his new position, Mr.
Kliger, 47, will oversee a variety of projects on a regular basis.
For the last six months he has headed Conde Nast's corporate sales.
Previous to that, he was publisher of Glamour, from 1988 to 1994, and was publisher of Gentlemen's Quarterly from 1985 to 1988.


New Signs of Growth Fan Inflation Fears
The economy showed signs of persistent vigor in Government reports on housing and employment.
And the Commerce Department released a revised report on the gross domestic product, showing the economy expanding at an annual rate of 4.1 percent in the second quarter, up from an estimate of 3.8 percent.
Taken together, the reports fanned fears that overly rapid growth could revive inflation, and could lead the Federal Reserve to raise short-term interest rates again, perhaps after next week's monthly job report for September, to slow the economy down.


In Video Films, a More Intimate 'Reality'
Although the experimental film world has produced thousands of quirky personal statements, it is probably safe to say that nothing quite like Obitani Yuri's video movie "The Hair Opera" has been seen before.
The one-hour work, which is to have two showings next week as part of the Third New York Video Festival opening today at Lincoln Center, consists of this Japanese artist's filmed correspondence with a fellow artist, Yosufu Kosuzu, who incorporates the pubic hairs of men she has slept with into her work.
So love-smitten that he periodically breaks into soaring operatic arias, Mr.
Yuri woos Ms.
Kosuzu in a series of ardent 8-millimeter filmed declarations of his passion in which he confesses his obsession with her body hair.
He even provides her with her own 8-millimeter camera so she can respond to his messages.
After several replies from Ms.
Kosuzu, who dismisses him as a pervert, he breaks into her apartment while she is asleep, wakes her up and eventually wins her affection along with permission to shave parts of her body for the camera.


Devils' Sluggish Effort Leaves Lemaire Enraged
It was unnecessary for the Devils to voice their conviction that the opener of the National Hockey League season would be postponed.
Their actions on the ice in today's practice spoke louder than their words after it.
Coach Jacques Lemaire was so disgusted with the players' lackadaisical approach during an intrasquad scrimmage at Byrne Meadowlands Arena that he called the players off the ice.


INSIDE
New York Jail to Reopen
A Brooklyn prison, recently closed to save money, is to reopen to handle a flood of new prisoners from a crackdown on crime.
Page B1.
A Hollywood Departure
The head of Sony Pictures Entertainment resigned, raising questions about Sony's investment in the U.S. entertainment industry.
Page D1.
Disney Pledges Virginia Site
After dropping plans for a historical theme park, Disney pledged to seek another site in the state.
Page A12.


Diner's Journal
Carefully Considered Exotica
The first dish on the menu at Annabelle is calamari salad with watermelon and a cilantro emulsion.
It does not sound promising.
If you actually order the dish, you discover that it also includes avocado, which seems even dicier.
But it is so pretty, the slices of avocado fanned out beneath a small haystack of lettuces and surrounded by a bright liquid ribbon of green, that you can't resist taking a bite.
What a surprise to discover that it is delicious!
The salad is a complicated layering of flavors played out against the sweetness of the watermelon, the richness of the avocado and the sourness of the bits of lemon strewn through the leaves of herbs and lettuce.
It has been carefully thought out.
Clearly the restaurant's chef, Rocco DiSpirito, is someone to watch.


Lock Up the Zamboni, N.H.L. Season Is on Hold
The National Hockey League Players Association put pressure on team owners yesterday by offering to play the regular season and the playoffs without a new collective bargaining agreement.
But the effort appeared to be in vain.
Late last night, several N.H.L. front-office personnel with knowledge of the league's decision said that team owners had rejected the union's proposal and that Commissioner Gary Bettman is preparing to announce the postponement of the regular season -- which was scheduled to begin with games tomorrow night -- at a 1 P.M. news conference today at the Hilton Hotel in Manhattan.


California Quake Insurers' Losses Up
Losses to insurance companies are still rising from last January's earthquake near Los Angeles as repairs to damaged homes prove more costly than expected.
Allstate Insurance, the second-largest insurer of homes in the state, increased its loss estimate yesterday by $350 million, or 37 percent, to $1.3 billion.
Several other companies have increased their loss estimates in recent weeks, as damage once seen as superficial is proving on closer examination to be more extensive.
Insurance company losses that were estimated at $2.5 billion three weeks after the Jan. 17 earthquake climbed to $7.2 billion in early August and are expected to be increased again.


5 Gang Members Indicted in Brooklyn Drug Case
Two leaders and three members of a drug gang that authorities said terrorized a Brooklyn area for eight years, killing rivals, errant members and at least one bystander, have been indicted on murder and drug-racketeering charges.
The defendants were arrested over the summer on narrower charges, said Mark P. Ressler, an assistant United States attorney prosecuting the case.
The five, all from East New York, are William Mora, 26, accused of being the group's leader; his brother, David, 25, said to be his partner, and three men charged with being members: Walter Richburg, 25; Timothy Cyrus, 20, and Leo Contrera, 25.


6 Astronauts Set for Shuttle Launching Today
The space shuttle Endeavour is to be launched on Friday on a 10-day flight with an experimental imaging radar system that will scan Earth for seasonal environmental changes.
The mission of the Space Radar Laboratory-2, delayed after an aborted launching attempt six weeks ago, is to be almost identical to one flown in April so scientists can monitor seasonal changes in vegetation and water distribution.


Art in Review
Lyle Ashton Harris 'The Good Life'
Jack Tilton Gallery  41 Greene Street, near Grand Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 8
Lyle Ashton Harris's first New York solo show is in large part a collaborative effort.
The 29-year-artist intersperses his own photographs with those of his grandfather, Albert Sydney Johnson Jr., a nonprofessional photographer, and uses various members of his immediate family as models in emblematic tableaux and portraits.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Auburn Extends Winning Streak
Auburn made a successful return to national television, extending the nation's longest Division I-A winning streak to 16 games with a 41-14 victory over struggling Kentucky last night.
Terry Bowden still hasn't lost as coach of the Tigers, while Kentucky is heading in the opposite direction.
The Wildcats (1-4, 0-3 Southeastern Conference) have lost four in a row and Coach Bill Curry still hasn't figured out how to beat Auburn in 11 tries.


Three Who Advanced Medicine And Biology Win Top Award
Three scientists whose research changed the face of biology and medicine received Albert Lasker Medical Research Awards yesterday.
The awards, which each carry an honorarium of $25,000, were presented in a ceremony at the Pierre Hotel.
Several previous winners of the annual awards have gone on to win Nobel Prizes.


Art in Review
Peter Doig
Gavin Brown Enterprise  558 Broome Street  SoHo
Through Oct. 8
Like many artists since Gerhard Richter and Andy Warhol, the young Canadian painter Peter Doig, who is having his first solo show in New York, knows that there is more than one way to turn a photograph into a painting.
His particular process involves working not from the picture itself, but from a grainy photocopy many times removed from the original by repeated recopying.
Grainy is the operative word here: a quality that Mr.
Doig's realistic yet delicately splattered images seem to cultivate.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "LAUGHING MATTERS," Primary Stages, 354 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A one-man comedy written by and starring Nick Ullett; directed by Rick Podell.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets, $25.
Information: (212) 333-7471.
Closing Next Weekend  "RADICAL GRAHAM," Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
A retrospective of works by Martha Graham from the 1930's and 40's.
Through Oct. 9.
Performances: today, tomorrow and Tuesday through next Saturday at 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets, $15 to $40.
Information: (718) 636-4100.


Smoking Declines, Yet Cancers Multiply
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 21 news article on the fatal effects of smoking quotes the British statistician Richard Peto as saying that contrary to popular misconception, cancers from causes other than smoking are not rising.
The misconception is Dr.
Peto's.


U.N. Votes to Lift Sanctions on Haiti
The Security Council voted tonight to lift all international sanctions on Haiti as soon as the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, is restored to power.
The vote was 13 in favor, with two abstentions, Brazil and Russia.


Maybe California Has Answer on Health Care
To the Editor:
The demise of national health insurance legislation (front page, Sept. 27) may prove a blessing in disguise, and sooner than its supporters and detractors expect.
On Nov. 8, California voters will have the chance to adopt Proposition 186, a well-conceived, well-drafted 80-page (yes, only 80 pages!) single-payer health care system that may well serve as a model for the country.


Florida Abortion Doctor Is Linked to Complaints in 5 States
The doctor who is reported to be performing abortions at a clinic in Pensacola, Fla., where another abortion doctor was shot and killed in July, has in the last two years had his medical license suspended in New York and Georgia and restricted in New Jersey and California amid accusations of improper procedures.
And in Pennsylvania in 1992, the doctor, Steven Chase Brigham, retired from the practice of medicine therein an agreement worked out with state prosecutors.
He has been licensed to practice in Florida since 1988, according to the Florida Medical Board.


The C.I.A. Club Needs a Cleanup
Surely Congress has had enough of evasion and self-protection from the Central Intelligence Agency.
Yet there was the C.I.A.'s Director, James Woolsey, telling the House Intelligence Committee on Wednesday that he had let those responsible for one of the agency's worst security disasters off lightly because it was all the fault of some vague "systemic failure." Not one of those who allowed Aldrich Ames to hold a variety of sensitive posts while spying for Moscow was fired or demoted.
Mr.
Woolsey's failure to clean house underscores the need for an independent commission to examine the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies and to rethink their roles.
The C.I.A. itself is clearly incapable of the job.


A Painter and the Environment He Personified
The Italian artist Mario Cavaglieri is said to have painted in his dinner jacket.
His subjects were rich people, like him, and their fashionable world in the early years of this century.
You probably haven't heard of Cavaglieri (1887-1969) unless you remember him from "Gardens and Ghettos," an exhibition at the Jewish Museum several years ago.
Only a few of his paintings were in it, but their easy virtuosity and over-the-top opulence made enough of an impression that the museum decided he deserved a closer look.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO CRITICIZES PATAKI TAX PLAN
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said that State Senator George E. Pataki's plan to slash income taxes would force the state to cut aid to New York City and other local governments, in turn causing local officials to raise property taxes "through the roof" to make up the loss.
A1.
LEFT FOR DEAD, MARSH RETURNS TO LIFE
Life is returning to the Arthur Kill salt marsh, denuded by 567,000 gallons of heating oil spilled from a pipeline.
A new approach is helping to prove that ecosystems destroyed by oil spills can be healed with biological methods.
A1.


Executive Changes
ITT HARTFORD INSURANCE GROUP, Hartford, appointed David Klein senior vice president and director of international development, and Stephen Hasenmiller senior vice president and director of domestic personal lines operations.
KMART CORP., Troy, Mich., named Marvin P. Rich executive vice president of strategic planning, finance and administration.


Self-Analysis By Bourgeois In Two Shows
AFTER years of working in obscurity, Louise Bourgeois is on the verge of overexposure.
Granted it's gratifying to see an 83-year-old woman achieve art-star status and become as ubiquitous on the international scene as male artists (mostly European) slightly more than half her age.
Over the last 12 years, Ms.
Bourgeois has been featured and feted from Venice, where she represented the United States in the 1993 Biennale, to New York and beyond. (The Venice exhibition came to the Brooklyn Museum and is now at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington.)
But overexposure usually comes with unquestioning admiration, and the art-world-doyenne slot into which older women can fall -- Georgia O'Keeffe and Louise Nevelson being earlier occupants -- encourages a particular lack of skepticism.
The weaknesses of Ms.
Bourgeois's work are rarely discussed, and only reverence seems to greet her rather skillful, self-mythologizing intertwining of her art and life.


Insurance Executive Is Accused Of Plot to Slay His Son-in-Law
Twenty years ago, Rohee Sibadan came to New York City from Guyana to make a new life.
Ambitious for his three children, he sent one of his two daughters to St.
John's University in the hope that she would become a physician.
But his 21-year-old daughter rebelled, withdrew from St.
John's and three weeks ago eloped with a livery-cab driver from Queens.


Government Securities Prices Fall
Prices of Government securities were pulled down yesterday by economic data that hinted strongly at future inflation pressures, raising the specter of an interest rate rise that could come sooner than the next Federal Open Market Committee meeting in November.
Despite the day's first dose of data -- the final revision to the second- quarter gross domestic product figures -- bond prices held up well.
But the steadiness was short-lived as prices for bonds immediately fell under the weight of the August new- home sales, which were much stronger than expected.
Those statistics were considered by some as confirmation that the economy is not weakening, and inflation pressures are a threat down the road.


Buildings Dept. Says Fordham's Radio Tower Is Too Tall
With its new radio tower two-fifths completed -- and already a spidery presence on the Bronx skyline -- Fordham University has been ordered by New York City not to complete the structure as planned because it would be too tall.
Reversing an earlier permit, the city's Buildings Commissioner, Joel A. Miele Sr., told Fordham officials on Tuesday that the agency's "final determination is that the structure constitutes an unpermitted obstruction."


Bantam Doubleday Dell Names Head of New Unit
William M. Shinker, who left his job as head of HarperCollins early this year, has been hired to run a new, still-unnamed adult publishing division at Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, the company said yesterday.
Financial and logistical details of the new division, which will have the same corporate status as Doubleday, Bantam and Dell, the other publishing divisions within the group, have yet to be worked out.
But Jack Hoeft, the chief executive of Bantam Doubleday, said that when Mr.
Shinker arrived at his new job next March, he would be given free rein to hire a staff and begin developing a list of books.


No Progress In Messier Deal
The Rangers and Mark Messier made no significant progress in their contract dispute yesterday, and despite the likelihood that the season will be postponed today, both sides insist that reaching an agreement is a high priority and they will continue to hold bargaining sessions.
Doug Messier, Mark's father and agent, said last night that he and his family had spent most of the day golfing, and no meetings have been scheduled with General Manager Neil Smith and Dave Checketts, president of Madison Square Garden.
The two sides did talk on the phone.


Why Bartoli Causes A Stir
To fully understand what all the fuss was about in Carnegie Hall last night -- the television cameras taping for an Oct. 10 broadcast, the formally dressed patrons crowding the aisles, the atmosphere of anticipation in the hall -- one had to wait until the middle of the concert's second half.
The attraction was not the gala opening of the Carnegie Hall season, nor was it the presence of Sir Neville Marriner conducting the Academy of St.-Martin-in-the-Fields.
Despite the orchestra's 1,000 or so recordings and widely respected achievements, the focus of attention was on Cecilia Bartoli, who is arguably the only classically trained singer under the age of 45 who is a box-office and recording star.
Toward the concert's end, one heard why.
In a selection from Bellini's "Sonnambula," Ms.
Bartoli's voice became an expression of pure delight: sensuous, exuberant and overflowing.
Amina's rapturous series of declarations, extending from "Care compagne, e voi, teneri amici" to "Sovra il sen la man mi posa," is a celebration of unqualified, innocent love.
Ms.
Bartoli gave it precisely that character.
The florid ornaments were never matters of display; they never proclaimed: "Look what my voice can do. Don't you like it?" Instead, the turns and roulades seemed to be emotion transmuted into sound, eruptions of feeling that could not be constrained by a simple melodic line.


Shift on Trenton Tax Cut
Governor Whitman, who promised to cut income taxes by nearly a third over three years, now says she may need more time.
Page B6.





No Headline
"When I heard the explosion, I was very confused. Then I heard yelling, and then, you know, I saw a bunch of bodies, and people were running and screaming." KANSKY ROSAMOND, an Aristide supporter, describing the bombing in Haiti.  [ A1:6. ]


Decision on Gooden's Penalty Postponed
The baseball commissioner's office announced yesterday that it has decided to postpone indefinitely a decision regarding disciplinary action against Dwight Gooden, who is eventually expected to be suspended for having violated the National League's drug policy for a third time.
In a statement released late yesterday, the commissioner's office called Gooden's assessment and treatment process as "ongoing" and stated that the Mets' pitcher was continuing to be "closely monitored" by his physician and by medical advisers to baseball and the players association.


A Visit to the Biohazard Battleground
THE HOT ZONE
By Richard Preston
300 pages. Random House. $21.


Whitman Says Tax Cuts May Require Four Years
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who has gained national prominence for her firm tax-cutting stand, today took a big step away from her often-repeated promise to cut state income taxes by nearly a third over her first three years in office, saying the cuts may take four years to complete.
The statement, made first in a radio call-in show and later repeated to reporters, quickly drew hoots of derision from New Jersey's Democrats.
A good deal of Mrs.
Whitman's appeal in the governor's race last year came from her dramatic pledge to roll back the state's income taxes within a strict timetable.
Mrs.
Whitman did not back off the goal of a 30 percent cut in income tax, only on its timing.


Disney Retreats at Bull Run
Historians, writers and ordinary citizens won a victory for the national heritage on Wednesday.
The Walt Disney Company abandoned the most irresponsible idea ever hatched in the Magic Kingdom and decided not to build a theme park near the Manassas Battlefield in Prince William County, Virginia.
More than the fate of the battlefields of Manassas, or Bull Run, was involved.
"Disney's America" would have flooded one of America's most historic and scenic regions, including the nearby Shenandoah National Park, with traffic and tacky development.
In response to the threat to these national treasures, a large, articulate coalition defeated one of the country's richest corporations and its boosters in Virginia's Statehouse and Legislature.


Blockbuster Shareholders Back Merger
Shareholders of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation approved a $7.6 billion stock merger with Viacom Inc. yesterday, creating what Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, called a "global media colossus."
At a separate meeting in New York, 95 percent of Viacom shareholders cast votes in favor of the deal.
Mr.
Redstone controls 85 percent of Viacom's stock.


Economy Is Strong, Data Show
Fresh signs of persistent economic vigor emerged today as the Government published upbeat reports on housing and employment, while raising for a second time its estimate of total output during the spring.
Another official report showed stepped-up inflation for imported goods, reflecting, in part, the decline of the dollar.


An Embarrassment of Britches
How do you send up something that's already in the ether?
In tackling "A Midsummer Night's Dream" as its first Shakespearean venture, the legendary Ridiculous Theatrical Company confronts a whole new set of problems.
The play, on its own terms, eagerly embraces the ridiculous, and it is innately subversive about the fool-making nature of love and theater, subjects that have always been dear to the troupe.
And at this point, what can you possibly do to "A Midsummer Night's Dream" that hasn't been done before?


Ferry Owners Say Flooding of Hold Caused Sinking
The owners of a ferry that went down in a storm in the Baltic Sea, with the loss of more than 800 people, said today that they believed the sinking resulted from water rushing into the ship's hold, but that it remained unclear how and where on the vessel the breach occurred.
As Sweden, Estonia and Finland absorbed the shock of one of Europe's worst maritime disasters, the authorities gave up hope of finding anyone else alive in the 50-degree waters where the ferry Estonia capsized and sank in a harrowing half hour early on Wednesday.


High Noon for Campaign Reform
House and Senate Democrats have now agreed on a bill to overhaul Federal campaign financing.
The negotiations were not pretty and, worse, they were not punctual.
House Speaker Thomas Foley and his colleagues haggled for more than a year over proposed limits to their precious, career-sustaining contributions from political action committees.
The compromise they reached could have been struck at the very beginning.
The chances of overcoming an expected Republican filibuster have been much diminished.
The measure, which Democratic leaders melded from separate campaign financing bills passed by each chamber, would refresh the American political process in several important ways.
Foremost, it would create a new system for House races that would offer candidates vouchers to be used to buy media and mail -- at once weakening the hold of special-interest money on lawmakers and giving challengers a realistic chance to compete.


U.S. and North Korea Announce Pause in Talks, but No Progress
Announcing a brief suspension of its high-level talks with North Korea after a week of hard bargaining, the United States said tonight that the two sides had made no progress toward carrying out last month's agreement to settle their nuclear dispute.
But the chief American delegate, Robert L. Gallucci, refused to describe the negotiations as deadlocked.
He said he would fly to Washington on Friday for consultations and return to Geneva next Wednesday to resume his meetings with North Korea's Deputy Foreign Minister, Kang Sok Ju.


Browns Players Get Suspended Sentences
Cleveland Browns running back ERIC METCALF and wide receiver ERIC TURNER were fined and given suspended jail sentences yesterday in Independence, Ohio, after being convicted of reckless driving.
Metcalf was also convicted of improper handling of a firearm in a motor vehicle.
The two players were arrested on Sept. 13 after a motorist complained that they appeared to be drag racing on Interstate 480. (AP)


Islanders and Lindros Skate Against Another Deadline
The condemned men had a hearty practice and then, uncertain when or whether they would be locked out of their locker room with a ruined season ahead, the Islanders packed up their favorite sticks and skates and began their vigil.
Some went home to the Long Island suburbs; some went to the nearby hotel that has been their home, at their own expense, since training camp began.
Some, like the incoming Islanders Brett Lindros and Zigmund Palffy, weren't sure where to go.
Without a signed contract, Lindros knew he would be doing remedial duty back in juniors, and without a National Hockey League season to count on, Palffy wondered if he would rather be back in Slovakia than the minors.


Campaign Trail; For Cuomo, an Additional Opponent: An Eccentric Millionaire
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is about to learn that it is never wise to make enemies in politics, especially when they have deep pockets.
Abraham Hirschfeld, the eccentric real-estate developer who ran for lieutenant governor in 1986 only to be knocked off the ballot by Mr.
Cuomo, is seeking revenge with what he says will be a $1 million advertising campaign against the Governor.


